
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5018. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of estrogen receptor in breast cancer cell gene expression.

Zheng Y(1), Shao X(1), Huang Y(1), Shi L(1), Chen B(2), Wang X(1), Yang H(3),
Chen Z(1), Zhang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology (Breast), Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Cancer
Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China. (3)Department of Breast Surgery,
Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to establish the underlying regulatory mechanism
of estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer cell gene expression. A gene
expression profile (accession no. GSE11324) was downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from an 
estrogen treatment group and a control group were identified. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing data (series GSE25710) was
obtained from the GEO for the ER binding sites, and binding and expression target
analysis was performed. A total of 3,122 DEGs were obtained and ER was
demonstrated to exhibit inhibition and activation roles during the regulation of 
its target gene expression. Motif analysis revealed that the upregulated target
genes that demonstrated interactions with ER were meis homeobox 1 (MEIS1) and
forkhead box P3 (FOXP3). The downregulated target genes, which demonstrated
interactions with ER, were thyroid hormone receptor, ß (THRB) and
grainyhead-like 1 (GRHL1). Thus, it was observed that ER stimulated gene
expression by interacting with MEIS1 and FOXP3, and ER inhibited gene expression 
by interacting with THRB and GRHL1. However, additional experiments are required 
to provide further confirmation of these findings.

PMID: 27035558  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2016 Jan;25(1):19-22. doi: 10.1297/cpe.25.19. Epub 2016 
Jan 30.

A novel mutation of the THRB gene in a Japanese family with resistance to thyroid
hormone.

Ito J(1), Narumi S(2), Nishizawa K(1), Kamimaki T(3), Hori N(4), Hasegawa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Shizuoka Hospital, Shizuoka,
Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Pediatrics, Ota Memorial Hospital, Gunma, Japan.

PMCID: PMC4738189
PMID: 26865751  [PubMed]


3. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Apr 15;425:103-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.023. Epub
2016 Jan 26.

3,5-Diiodothyronine-mediated transrepression of the thyroid hormone receptor beta
gene in tilapia. Insights on cross-talk between the thyroid hormone and cortisol 
signaling pathways.

Hernández-Puga G(1), Navarrete-Ramírez P(1), Mendoza A(1), Olvera A(1),
Villalobos P(1), Orozco A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM),
Boulevard Juriquilla 3001, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico. (2)Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Boulevard
Juriquilla 3001, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico. Electronic address:
aureao@unam.mx.

T3 and cortisol activate or repress gene expression in virtually every vertebrate
cell mainly by interacting with their nuclear hormone receptors. In contrast to
the mechanisms for hormone gene activation, the mechanisms involved in gene
repression remain elusive. In teleosts, the thyroid hormone receptor beta gene or
thrb produces two isoforms of TRß1 that differ by nine amino acids in the
ligand-binding domain of the long-TRß1, whereas the short-TRß1 lacks the insert. 
Previous reports have shown that the genomic effects exerted by 3,5-T2, a product
of T3 outer-ring deiodination, are mediated by the long-TRß1. Furthermore, 3,5-T2
and T3 down-regulate the expression of long-TRß1 and short-TRß1, respectively. In
contrast, cortisol has been shown to up-regulate the expression of thrb. To
understand the molecular mechanisms for thrb modulation by thyroid hormones and
cortisol, we used an in silico approach to identify thyroid- and
cortisol-response elements within the proximal promoter of thrb from tilapia. We 
then characterized the identified response elements by EMSA and correlated our
observations with the effects of THs and cortisol upon expression of thrb in
tilapia. Our data show that 3,5-T2 represses thrb expression and impairs its
up-regulation by cortisol possibly through a transrepression mechanism. We
propose that for thrb down-regulation, ligands other than T3 are required to
orchestrate the pleiotropic effects of thyroid hormones in vertebrates.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820127  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 15;424:102-17. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.020. Epub
2016 Jan 21.

Patterns of thyroid hormone receptor expression in zebrafish and generation of a 
novel model of resistance to thyroid hormone action.

Marelli F(1), Carra S(2), Agostini M(3), Cotelli F(2), Peeters R(4), Chatterjee
K(3), Persani L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Sperimentale di Ricerche Endocrino-Metaboliche, Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, 20149 Milan, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze,
Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy. (3)Wellcome Trust-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Erasmus University, Rotterdam, NL, Netherlands. (5)Laboratorio Sperimentale di
Ricerche Endocrino-Metaboliche, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 20149 Milan, Italy;
Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università degli Studi di Milano,
20122 Milan, Italy. Electronic address: luca.persani@unimi.it.

Resistance to thyroid hormone can be due to heterozygous, dominant negative (DN) 
THRA (RTHa) or THRB (RTHß) mutations, but the underlying mechanisms are
incompletely understood. Here, we delineate the spatiotemporal expression of TH
receptors (TRs) in zebrafish and generated morphants expressing equivalent
amounts of wild-type and DN TRas (thraa_MOs) and TRßs (thrb_MOs) in vivo. Both
morphants show severe developmental abnormalities. The phenotype of thraa_MOs
includes brain and cardiac defects, but normal thyroid volume and tshba
expression. A combined modification of dio2 and dio3 expression can explain the
high T3/T4 ratio seen in thraa_MOs, as in RTHa. Thrb_MOs show abnormal eyes and
otoliths, with a typical RTHß pattern of thyroid axis. The coexpression of
wild-type, but not mutant, human TRs can rescue the phenotype in both morphants. 
High T3 doses can partially revert the dominant negative action of mutant TRs in 
morphant fish. Therefore, our morphants recapitulate the RTHa and RTHß key
manifestations representing new models in which the functional consequences of
human TR mutations can be rapidly and faithfully evaluated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26802880  [PubMed - in process]


5. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2016 Mar;17:58-65. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 Jan 7.

Identification of organ-autonomous constituents of the molecular memory conferred
by thyroid hormone exposure in cold temperature-arrested metamorphosing Rana
(Lithobates) catesbeiana tadpoles.

Austin Hammond S(1), Jackman KW(1), Partovi SH(1), Veldhoen N(1), Helbing CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 
1700, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W 2Y2, Canada. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 1700, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W
2Y2, Canada. Electronic address: chelbing@uvic.ca.

Environmental temperature modulates thyroid hormone (TH)-dependent metamorphosis 
in some amphibian species. The North American bullfrog - Rana (Lithobates)
catesbeiana - tadpole is naturally adapted to a wide range of temperatures over
multiple seasons. Cold temperatures delay while warmer temperatures accelerate
metamorphosis. Exogenous TH exposure of premetamorphic tadpoles results in a
rapid precocious induction of metamorphosis at warm temperatures (20-25°C). The
same exposure at cold temperatures (4-5°C) does not elicit an overt metamorphic
response. However, a molecular memory of TH exposure is established such that
cold, TH-exposed tadpoles returned to permissive warm temperatures will rapidly
execute TH-induced genetic programs. Previous mRNA profiling has identified
TH-regulated transcription factors encoded by thra, thrb, thibz, klf9, and cebp1 
as components of the molecular memory after one week post-exposure. However, a
further hierarchy may exist within the initiation phase since many gene
transcripts demonstrated tissue-specific patterns. Whether the molecular memory
is organ autonomous or requires additional modulating factors is unknown. Herein 
we examine tail fin and back skin and determine that thibz is the only transcript
that is TH-responsive after 2 days post-exposure at low temperature in both
tissues in the intact animal. In back skin, cebp1 is also TH-responsive under
these conditions. Serum-free tail fin organ culture (C-Fin) reveals that the
thibz response is organ autonomous whereas cultured back skin (C-Skin) results
suggest that thibz and cebp1 require an additional factor for induction from
elsewhere within the intact animal. Subsequent investigations are now possible to
identify endogenous factors that modulate the molecular memory in intact animals.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26795672  [PubMed - in process]


6. Enzyme Microb Technol. 2016 Feb;83:14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2015.11.001.
Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC13032 to produce
S-adenosyl-l-methionine.

Han G(1), Hu X(2), Qin T(1), Li Y(1), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi
214122, China; Key laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology of Ministry of
Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Avenue, Wuxi
214122, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi 214122, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and
Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China; Key laboratory of Industrial
Biotechnology of Ministry of Education, School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan
University, 1800 Lihu Avenue, Wuxi 214122, China; Synergetic Innovation Center of
Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China. Electronic
address: xiaoyuanwang@hotmail.com.

As an important biological methyl group donor, S-adenosyl-l-methionine is used as
nutritional supplement or drug for various diseases, but bacterial strains that
can efficiently produce S-adenosyl-l-methionine are not available. In this study,
Corynebacterium glutamicum strain HW104 which can accumulate
S-adenosyl-l-methionine was constructed from C. glutamicum ATCC13032 by deleting 
four genes thrB, metB, mcbR and Ncgl2640, and six genes metK, vgb, lysC(m),
hom(m), metX and metY were overexpressed in HW104 in different combinations,
forming strains HW104/pJYW-4-metK-vgb, HW104/pJYW-4-SAM2C-vgb,
HW104/pJYW-4-metK-vgb-metYX, and HW104/pJYW-4-metK-vgb-metYX-hom(m)-lysC(m).
Fermentation experiments showed that HW104/pJYW-4-metK-vgb produced more
S-adenosyl-l-methionine than other strains, and the yield achieved 196.7mg/L
(12.15mg/g DCW) after 48h. The results demonstrate the potential application of
C. glutamicum for production of S-adenosyl-l-methionine without addition of
l-methionine.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26777246  [PubMed - in process]


7. BMC Endocr Disord. 2016 Jan 12;16(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s12902-015-0081-7.

Successful every-other-day liothyronine therapy for severe resistance to thyroid 
hormone beta with a novel THRB mutation; case report.

Maruo Y(1), Mori A(2), Morioka Y(3), Sawai C(4), Mimura Y(5), Matui K(6),
Takeuchi Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Tsukinowa,
Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan. maruo@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Shiga University of Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192,
Japan. asamim@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan.
yori708@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan.
csawai@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan.
osawa@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan.
matsui@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Shiga University of
Medical Science, Tsukinowa, Seta, Otsu, 520-2192, Japan.
takeuchi@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone beta (RTHß) is a rare and usually
dominantly inherited syndrome caused by mutations of the thyroid hormone receptor
ß gene (THRB). In severe cases, it is rarely challenging to control
manifestations using daily therapeutic replacement of thyroid hormone.
CASE PRESENTATION: The present case study concerns an 8-year-old Japanese girl
with a severe phenotype of RTH (TSH, fT3, and fT4 were 34.0 mU/L, >25.0 pg/mL
and, >8.0 ng/dL, respectively), caused by a novel heterozygous frameshift
mutation in exon 10 of the thyroid hormone receptor beta gene (THRB), c.1347-1357
del actcttccccc : p.E449DfsX11. RTH was detected at the neonatal screening
program. At 4 years of age, the patient continued to suffer from mental
retardation, hyperactivity, insomnia, and reduced resting energy expenditure
(REE), despite daily thyroxine (L-T4) therapy. Every-other-day high-dose
liothyronine (L-T3) therapy improved her symptoms and increased her REE, without 
thyrotoxicosis.
CONCLUSION: In a case of severe RTH, every-other-day L-T3 administration enhanced
REE and psychomotor development, without promoting symptoms of thyrotoxicosis.
Every-other-day L-T3 administration may be an effective strategy for the
treatment of severe RTH.

PMCID: PMC4709977
PMID: 26754848  [PubMed - in process]


8. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2016 Mar;109(3):405-14. doi: 10.1007/s10482-016-0645-1. 
Epub 2016 Jan 9.

Contribution of the thermotolerance genomic island to increased thermal tolerance
in Cronobacter strains.

Orieskova M(1), Kajsik M(1), Szemes T(1), Holy O(2), Forsythe S(3), Turna J(1),
Drahovska H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Ilkovicova 6, 842 15, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (2)Department of
Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký University,
Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. (3)Pathogen Research Group, School of Science
and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Clifton Lane, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, 
UK. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius
University, Ilkovicova 6, 842 15, Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
drahovska@fns.uniba.sk.

Cronobacter spp. are opportunistic pathogens associated with serious infections
in neonates. Increased stress tolerance, including the thermotolerance of some
Cronobacter strains, can promote their survival in production facilities and thus
raise the possibility of contamination of dried infant formula which has been
identified as a potential source of infection. Some Cronobacter strains contain
a genomic island, which might be responsible for increased thermotolerance. By
analysis of Cronobacter sequenced genomes this determinant was found to be
present in only 49/73 Cronobacter sakazakii strains and in 9/14 Cronobacter
malonaticus strains. The island was also found in 16/17 clinical isolates
originating from two hospitals. Two configurations of the locus were detected;
the first one with the size of 18 kbp containing the thrB-Q genes and a shorter
version (6 kbp) harbouring only the thrBCD and thrOP genes. Strains containing
the thermotolerance island survived significantly better at 58 °C comparing to a 
C. sakazakii isogenic mutant lacking the island and strains with the longer
version of the island were 2-10 times more tolerant than those with the shortened
sequence. The function of the genomic island was further confirmed by its cloning
into a low-copy vector and transforming it into the isogenic mutant. Different
levels of rpoS, encoding for stress-response sigma factor, expression were also
associated with variability in strain thermotolerance.

PMID: 26748923  [PubMed - in process]


9. Animal. 2016 Apr;10(4):598-606. doi: 10.1017/S1751731115002505. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

Iodine supplementation of the pregnant dam alters intestinal gene expression and 
immunoglobulin uptake in the newborn lamb.

McGovern FM(1), Magee DA(2), Browne JA(2), MacHugh DE(2), Boland TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1UCD,School of Agriculture and Food Science,University College
Dublin,Belfield,Dublin 4,Ireland. (2)2Animal Genomics Laboratory,UCD School of
Agriculture and Food Science,University College Dublin,Belfield,Dublin 4,Ireland.

Excess iodine intake by the pregnant dam reduces lamb serum antibody
concentration, specifically immunoglobulin G (IgG). An experiment was conducted
to investigate the mechanisms under pinning the reduced serum IgG concentration
at 24 h postpartum in the progeny of iodine supplemented dams. Forty-five mature 
twin bearing ewes (n=15/treatment) were allocated to one of three dietary
treatments as follows: basal diet (Control); basal diet plus 26.6 mg of iodine
per ewe per day as calcium iodate (CaIO3); or potassium iodide (KI). Ewes were
individually housed and fed from d 119 of gestation until parturition. All lambs 
received colostrum at 1, 10 and 18 h postpartum via stomach tube. At 1 h
postpartum lambs from the control and an iodine supplemented treatment (n=10 per 
treatment from control and CaIO3) were euthanised before colostrum consumption
and ileal segments isolated to determine the gene expression profile of a panel
of genes identified as having a role in antibody transfer. Preceding euthanasia, 
lambs were blood sampled for determination of serum IgG, total thyroxine and free
tri-iodothyronine concentrations. Progeny of CaIO3 supplemented dams had lower
tri-iodothyronine concentrations (P<0.01) at 1 h postpartum and lower serum IgG
concentrations (P<0.001) at 24 h postpartum when compared with the progeny of
control dams. Iodine (CaIO3) supplementation of the dam increased the relative
expression (P<0.05) of the B2M, PIGR and MYC genes in the ileum of the lamb,
before colostrum consumption; while the expression of THRB declined when compared
with the progeny of C dams (P<0.01). In conclusion, the results of this study
show that it is the actual inclusion of excess iodine in the diet of the ewe,
regardless of the carrier element, that negatively affects passive transfer in
the newborn lamb. This study presents novel data describing the relationship
between maternal iodine nutrition and its effect on the thyroid hormone status
and subsequent gene expression in the newborn lamb; which results in a failure of
passive transfer and a decline in serum IgG concentration.

PMID: 26585074  [PubMed - in process]


10. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2016 Jan;23(1):53-63. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0417. Epub 2015
Nov 9.

Inhibition of STAT3 activity delays obesity-induced thyroid carcinogenesis in a
mouse model.

Park JW(1), Han CR(1), Zhao L(1), Willingham MC(1), Cheng SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular BiologyCenter for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, 37 Convent Dr, Room 5128, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-6264, USA. (2)Laboratory of Molecular BiologyCenter for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 37 Convent
Dr, Room 5128, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-6264, USA chengs@mail.nih.gov.

Compelling epidemiologic studies indicate that obesity is a risk factor for many 
human cancers, including thyroid cancer. In recent decades, the incidence of
thyroid cancer has dramatically increased along with a marked rise in obesity
prevalence. We previously demonstrated that a high fat diet (HFD) effectively
induced the obese phenotype in a mouse model of thyroid cancer
(Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice). Moreover, HFD activates the STAT3 signal pathway to 
promote more aggressive tumor phenotypes. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate the effect of S3I-201, a specific inhibitor of STAT3 activity, on
HFD-induced aggressive cancer progression in the mouse model of thyroid cancer.
WT and Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice were treated with HFD together with S3I-201 or
vehicle-only as controls. We assessed the effects of S3I-201 on HFD-induced
thyroid cancer progression, the leptin-JAK2-STAT3 signaling pathway, and key
regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). S3I-201 effectively
inhibited HFD-induced aberrant activation of STAT3 and its downstream targets to 
markedly inhibit thyroid tumor growth and to prolong survival. Decreased protein 
levels of cyclins D1 and B1, cyclin dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), CDK6, and
phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein led to the inhibition of tumor cell
proliferation in S3I-201-treated Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice. Reduced occurrence of
vascular invasion and blocking of anaplasia and lung metastasis in thyroid tumors
of S3I-201-treated Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice were mediated via decreased
expression of vimentin and matrix metalloproteinases, two key effectors of EMT.
The present findings suggest that inhibition of the STAT3 activity would be a
novel treatment strategy for obesity-induced thyroid cancer.

© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4671368
PMID: 26552408  [PubMed - in process]


11. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015 Dec;195:31-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

The expression of thyroid hormone receptors (THR) is regulated by the
progesterone receptor system in first trimester placental tissue and in BeWo
cells in vitro.

Vattai A(1), Ziegelmüller B(2), Kost B(1), Kuhn C(1), Hofmann S(1), Bayer B(3),
Anslinger K(3), Jeschke U(4), Ditsch N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Munich, Germany. (2)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Munich, Germany;
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Urology, Munich, Germany. 
(3)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Legal Medicine, Munich,
Germany. (4)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
udo.jeschke@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormones are essential for the maintenance of pregnancy and a
deficiency in maternal thyroid hormones has been associated with early pregnancy 
losses. The aim of this study was a systematic investigation of the influence of 
mifepristone (RU 486) on the expression of the thyroid hormone receptor (THR)
isoforms THRa1, THRa2, THRß1 and THRß2 on protein and mRNA-level.
METHODS: Samples of placental tissue were obtained from patients with
mifepristone induced termination of pregnancy (n=13) or mechanical induced
termination of normal pregnancy (n=20), each from the 4th to 13th week of
pregnancy. Expression of THRa1, THRa2, THRß1 and THRß2 was analysed on protein
level by immunohistochemistry and on mRNA level by real time RT-PCR (TaqMan). The
influence of progesterone on THR gene expression was analysed in the trophoblast 
tumour cell line BeWo by real time RT-PCR (TaqMan).
RESULTS: Nuclear expression of THRa1, THRa2 and THRß1 is downregulated on protein
level in mifepristone (RU 486) treated villous trophoblast tissue. In decidual
tissue, we found a significant downregulation only for THRa1 in mifepristone
treated tissue. On mRNA level, we also found a significantly reduced expression
of THRA but no significant downregulation for THRB in placental tissue. The gene 
THRA encodes the isoform THRa and the gene THRB encodes the isoform THRß. The
majority of cells expressing the thyroid hormone receptors in the decidua are
decidual stromal cells. In addition, in vitro experiments with trophoblast tumour
cells showed that progesterone significantly induced THRA but not THRB
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Termination of pregnancy with mifepristone (RU 486) leads to a
downregulation of THRa1, THRa2 and THRß1 in villous trophoblasts and in addition 
to a decreased expression of THRA in placental tissue. Decreased expression of
THRa1 induced by RU486 could also be found in the decidua. Therefore inhibition
of the progesterone receptor may be responsible for this downregulation. This
assumption is supported by the finding, that stimulation of the progesterone
receptor by progesterone itself up-regulated THRA in trophoblast cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26476797  [PubMed - in process]


12. Endokrynol Pol. 2015;66(5):444-59. doi: 10.5603/EP.2015.0055.

Thyroid hormones in the central nervous system (CNS) and their effect on neoplasm
formation, particularly on the development and course of glioblastoma multiforme 
- research hypothesis.

Nauman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw,
Poland. pnauman@ipin.edu.pl.

The present study is aimed to present the potential role of thyroid hormones (TH)
in the pathogenesis of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). In first part of this
presentation the effect of general homeostasis of TH on GBM formation and course 
was shown. Then the evidence concerning present state of the knowledge about
active transport of TH to the brain, the role of iodothyronine deiodinase type 2 
and 3 in the setting concentration of T3 in the brain and GBM cells, and finally 
knowledge about the role of genomic (TH nuclear receptors THRA and THRB) and
non-genomic modes (membrane integrin receptor avß3) of action of TH and its
importance for GBM was outlined. The last part of this presentation was devoted
to generally approved signalling pathways leading to the formation and the
clinical course of GBM, showing at the same time evidence that each of the
pathways is affected by particular TH actions. In conclusion it is suggested that
TH is one of the pathogenetic factors for GBM and as such can have practical
implications for the formation and course and treatment of this tumour.

PMID: 26457500  [PubMed - in process]


13. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 6;467(1):33-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.09.132. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Exposure to 3,3',5-triiodothyronine affects histone and RNA polymerase II
modifications, but not DNA methylation status, in the regulatory region of the
Xenopus laevis thyroid hormone receptor ß<U+0391> gene.

Kasai K(1), Nishiyama N(2), Izumi Y(1), Otsuka S(1), Ishihara A(3), Yamauchi
K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka
University, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan. (2)Department of Natural Sciences
(Biology), School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima 960-1295, 
Japan. (3)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka 
University, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan; Green Biology Research Division, Research
Institute of Green Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka
422-8529, Japan. (4)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science,
Shizuoka University, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan; Green Biology Research Division,
Research Institute of Green Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, Shizuoka
422-8529, Japan. Electronic address: yamauchi.kiyoshi@shizuoka.ac.jp.

Thyroid hormones (THs) play a critical role in amphibian metamorphosis, during
which the TH receptor (TR) gene, thrb, is upregulated in a tissue-specific
manner. The Xenopus laevis thrb gene has 3 TH response elements (TREs) in the 5' 
flanking regulatory region and 1 TRE in the exon b region, around which CpG sites
are highly distributed. To clarify whether exposure to 3,3',5-triiodothyronine
(T3) affects histone and RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) modifications and the level
of DNA methylation in the 5' regulatory region, we conducted reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction, bisulfite sequencing and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay using X. laevis cultured cells and
premetamorphic tadpoles treated with or without 2 nM T3. Exposure to T3 increased
the amount of the thrb transcript, in parallel with enhanced histone H4
acetylation and RNAPII recruitment, and probably phosphorylation of RNAPII at
serine 5, in the 5' regulatory and exon b regions. However, the 5' regulatory
region remained hypermethylated even with exposure to T3, and there was no
significant difference in the methylation status between DNAs from T3-untreated
and -treated cultured cells or tadpole tissues. Our results demonstrate that
exposure to T3 induced euchromatin-associated epigenetic marks by enhancing
histone acetylation and RNAPII recruitment, but not by decreasing the level of
DNA methylation, in the 5' regulatory region of the X. laevis thrb gene.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26417689  [PubMed - in process]


14. Tumori. 2015 Sep-Oct;101(5):572-7. doi: 10.5301/tj.5000272. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Loss of heterozygosity in thyroid hormone receptor beta in invasive breast
cancer.

Ling Y(1), Li Q(1), Yang H(2), Wang Y(3), Tang F(4), Kang H(5), Wang Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou - PR China. (2)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Second People's Hospital of Lanzhou City, Lanzhou - PR China. (3)First Medical
Department, Qingshui County People's Hospital, Qingshui County, Tianshui City -
PR China. (4)Department of Pathology, First Hospital of Lanzhou University,
Lanzhou - PR China. (5)Institute of Pathogenic Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou - PR China. (6)Lanzhou General Hospital of 
Lanzhou Military Command, Lanzhou, Gansu - PR China.

BACKGROUND: Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome arm 3p, where the gene of 
thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) is located, has been reported in breast
cancer. Although some studies performed in vitro have suggested that THRB could
act as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer development, there is still no
unequivocal evidence to support this.
METHODS: To determine the role of LOH in breast tumor development, the LOH of
THRB and its proximal microsatellite markers D3S1293, D3S3659, D3S3700, D3S2307
and D3S2336 was investigated in a genomic region spanning ~3.3 Mb in tumor
specimens and in corresponding normal tissues of 74 invasive breast cancer
patients. The association was analyzed between LOH in microsatellite markers and 
clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: LOH was detected in D3S1293 (36.7%), THRB (59.4%), D3S3659 (37.5%) and
D3S3700 (55.2%) among the informative cases, while LOH was not detected in
D3S2307 and D3S2336. Cases exhibited LOH of 52.8%-71.4% if any 2 markers were
combined and analyzed out of the first 4 microsatellite markers. LOH in THRB was 
associated with negative estrogen receptor (ER), negative progesterone receptor
(PR), both negative estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor (HR) and human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) and lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0001, 
p = 0.005, p = 0.001 and p = 0.018). The association with negative PR in LOH in
THRB and/or D3S1293 was pronounced (p&lt;0.0001). LOH in D3S3700 showed an
association with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.014). This association was enhanced
if D3S3700 was combined with THRB or D3S3659 (p = 0.0004, p = 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: LOH in THRB and its proximal microsatellite markers may play a role 
in tumorigenesis and development in invasive breast cancer.

PMID: 26350179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(2):477-90. doi: 10.1159/000430370. Epub 2015 Aug
28.

The Impact of a Non-Functional Thyroid Receptor Beta upon Triiodotironine-Induced
Cardiac Hypertrophy in Mice.

do Império GE(1), Ramos IP, Santiago LA, Pereira GF, dos Santos Almeida NA,
Fuziwara CS, Pazos-Moura CC, Kimura ET, Olivares EL, Ortiga-Carvalho TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratx00F3;rio de Endocrinologia Translacional, IBCCF, UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro,
Brasil.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Thyroid hormone (TH) signalling is critical for heart function. 
The heart expresses thyroid hormone receptors (THRs); THRa1 and THRß1. We aimed
to investigate the regulation mechanisms of the THRß isoform, its association
with gene expression changes and implications for cardiac function.
METHODS: The experiments were performed using adult male mice expressing
TRß<U+0394>337T, which contains the <U+0394>337T mutation of the human THRB gene and impairs
ligand binding. Cardiac function and RNA expression were studied after hypo-or
hyperthyroidism inductions. T3-induced cardiac hypertrophy was not observed in
TRß<U+0394>337T mice, showing the fundamental role of THRß in cardiac hypertrophy.
RESULTS: We identified a group of independently regulated THRß genes, which
includes Adrb2, Myh7 and Hcn2 that were normally regulated by T3 in the TRß<U+0394>337T 
group. However, Adrb1, Myh6 and Atp2a2 were regulated via THRß. The TRß<U+0394>337T mice
exhibited a contractile deficit, decreased ejection fraction and stroke volume,
as assessed by echocardiography. In our model, miR-208a and miR-199a may
contribute to THRß-mediated cardiac hypertrophy, as indicated by the absence of
T3-regulated ventricular expression in TRß<U+0394>337T mice.
CONCLUSION: THRß has important role in the regulation of specific mRNA and miRNA 
in T3-induced cardiac hypertrophic growth and in the alteration of heart
functions.

© 2015 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26315584  [PubMed - in process]


16. Endocrinology. 2015 Oct;156(10):3853-65. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1468. Epub 2015 Aug
4.

Age-Related Hearing Loss and Degeneration of Cochlear Hair Cells in Mice Lacking 
Thyroid Hormone Receptor ß1.

Ng L(1), Cordas E(1), Wu X(1), Vella KR(1), Hollenberg AN(1), Forrest D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology (L.N., E.C., X.W., D.F.),
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; and Division of Endocrinology,
Diabetes and Metabolism (K.R.V., A.N.H.), Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

A key function of the thyroid hormone receptor ß (Thrb) gene is in the
development of auditory function. However, the roles of the 2 receptor isoforms, 
TRß1 and TRß2, expressed by the Thrb gene are unclear, and it is unknown whether 
these isoforms promote the maintenance as well as development of hearing. We
investigated the function of TRß1 in mice with a Thrb(b1) reporter allele that
expresses ß-galactosidase instead of TRß1. In the immature cochlea,
ß-galactosidase was detected in the greater epithelial ridge, sensory hair cells,
spiral ligament, and spiral ganglion and in adulthood, at low levels in the hair 
cells, support cells and root cells of the outer sulcus. Although deletion of all
TRß isoforms causes severe, early-onset deafness, deletion of TRß1 or TRß2
individually caused no obvious hearing loss in juvenile mice. However, over
subsequent months, TRß1 deficiency resulted in progressive loss of hearing and
loss of hair cells. TRß1-deficient mice had minimal changes in serum thyroid
hormone and thyrotropin levels, indicating that hormonal imbalances were unlikely
to cause hearing loss. The results suggest mutually shared roles for TRß1 and
TRß2 in cochlear development and an unexpected requirement for TRß1 in the
maintenance of hearing in adulthood.

PMCID: PMC4588828 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26241124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Thyroid Res. 2015 Apr 11;8:5. doi: 10.1186/s13044-015-0017-3. eCollection 2015.

Rare thyroid non-neoplastic diseases.

Lacka K(1), Maciejewski A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Rare diseases are usually defined as entities affecting less than 1 person per
2,000. About 7,000 different rare entities are distinguished and, among them,
rare diseases of the thyroid gland. Although not frequent, they can be found in
the everyday practice of endocrinologists and should be considered in
differential diagnosis. Rare non-neoplastic thyroid diseases will be discussed.
Congenital hypothyroidism's frequency is relatively high and its early treatment 
is of vital importance for neonatal psychomotor development; CH is caused
primarily by thyroid dysgenesis (85%) or dyshormonogenesis (10-15%), although
secondary defects - hypothalamic and pituitary - can also be found; up to 40% of 
cases diagnosed on neonatal screening are transient. Inherited abnormalities of
thyroid hormone binding proteins (TBG, TBP and albumin) include alterations in
their concentration or affinity for iodothyronines, this leads to laboratory test
abnormalities, although usually with normal free hormones and clinical
euthyroidism. Thyroid hormone resistance is most commonly found in THRB gene
mutations and more rarely in THRA mutations; in some cases both genes are
unchanged (non-TR RTH). Recently the term 'reduced sensitivity to thyroid
hormones' was introduced, which encompass not only iodothyronine receptor defects
but also their defective transmembrane transport or metabolism. Rare causes of
hyperthyroidism are: activating mutations in TSHR or GNAS genes, pituitary
adenomas, differentiated thyroid cancer or gestational trophoblastic disease;
congenital hyperthyroidism cases are also seen, although less frequently than CH.
Like other organs and tissues, the thyroid can be affected by different
inflammatory and infectious processes, including tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. In
most of the rare thyroid diseases genetic factors play a key role, many of them
can be classified as monogenic disorders. Although there are still some
limitations, progress has been made in our understanding of rare thyroid diseases
etiopathogenesis, and, thanks to these studies, also in our understanding of how 
normal thyroid gland functions.

PMCID: PMC4407423
PMID: 25908941  [PubMed]


18. Impaired Sensitivity to Thyroid Hormone: Defects of Transport, Metabolism and
Action.

Dumitrescu AM, Refetoff S.
In: De Groot LJ, Beck-Peccoz P, Chrousos G, Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman JM,
Koch C, McLachlan R, New M, Rebar R, Singer F, Vinik A, Weickert MO, editors.
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.
2015 Aug 20.

Defects along the pathways leading to TH action can manifest as impaired
sensitivity to TH. Six steps are presumed to be required for the circulating
thyroid hormone (TH) to exert its action on target tissues. For three of these
steps four distinct phenotypes have been identified in humans. The clinical,
laboratory, genetic and molecular characteristics of these defects are the
subject of this chapter. The first defect, recognized almost 50 years ago,
produces reduced sensitivity to TH and was given the acronym RTH, for resistance 
to thyroid hormone. Its major cause, found in more than 3,000 individuals, is
mutations in the TH receptor ß(THRB) gene. More recently mutations in the THRA
gene were found to produce a different phenotype owing to the distinct tissue
distribution of this TH receptor. Two other gene mutations, affecting TH action, 
but acting at different sites were identified in the last 10 years. One of them, 
caused by mutations in the TH cell-membrane transporter MCT8, produces severe
psychomotor defects. It has been identified in more than 320 males. A defect of
the intracellular metabolism of TH, identified in 11 members from 9 families, is 
caused by mutations in the SECISBP2 gene required for the synthesis of
selenoproteins, including TH deiodinases. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
involved in mediation of TH action allows the recognition of the phenotypes
caused by genetic defects in the involved pathways. While these defects have
opened the avenue for novel insights into thyroid physiology, they continue to
pose therapeutic challenges. For complete coverage of this and related areas in
Endocrinology, visit the free online web-textbook, www.endotext.org. Resistance
to thyroid hormone (RTH), a syndrome of reduced responsiveness of target tissues 
to thyroid hormone (TH) was identified in 1967 (1). An early report proposed
various mechanisms including defects in TH transport, metabolism and action (2). 
However, with the identification of TH receptor beta (THRB) gene mutations 22
years later (3,4), the term RTH become synonymous with defects of this gene (5). 
Subsequent discoveries of genetic defects that reduce the effectiveness of TH
through altered cell membrane transport (6,7) and metabolism (8) have broadened
the definition of TH hyposensitivity to encompass all defects that could
interfere with the biological activity of a chemically intact hormone secreted in
normal or even excess amounts. In this revised chapter, we cover all syndromes
resulting from impaired sensitivity to TH, using the recently proposed
nomenclature (9) (see Table 1).

PMID: 25905294  [PubMed]


19. Endocrinology. 2015 Jun;156(6):2338-48. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1118. Epub 2015 Mar 
16.

A Novel Population of Inner Cortical Cells in the Adrenal Gland That Displays
Sexually Dimorphic Expression of Thyroid Hormone Receptor-ß1.

Huang CC(1), Kraft C, Moy N, Ng L, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2015 Jun;156(6):1939-40.

The development of the adrenal cortex involves the formation and then subsequent 
regression of immature or fetal inner cell layers as the mature steroidogenic
outer layers expand. However, controls over this remodeling, especially in the
immature inner layer, are incompletely understood. Here we identify an inner
cortical cell population that expresses thyroid hormone receptor-ß1 (TRß1), one
of two receptor isoforms encoded by the Thrb gene. Using mice with a Thrb(b1)
reporter allele that expresses lacZ instead of TRß1, ß-galactosidase was detected
in the inner cortex from early stages. Expression peaked at juvenile ages in an
inner zone that included cells expressing 20-a-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, a
marker of the transient, so-called X-zone in mice. The ß-galactosidase-positive
zone displayed sexually dimorphic regression in males after approximately 4 weeks
of age but persisted in females into adulthood in either nulliparous or parous
states. T3 treatment promoted hypertrophy of inner cortical cells, induced some
markers of mature cortical cells, and, in males, delayed the regression of the
TRß1-positive zone, suggesting that TRß1 could partly divert the differentiation 
fate and counteract male-specific regression of inner zone cells. TRß1-deficient 
mice were resistant to these actions of T3, supporting a functional role for TRß1
in the inner cortex.

PMCID: PMC4430604 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25774556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Horm Metab Res. 2015 Nov;47(12):889-94. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1545305. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

Two Novel Mutations in the Thyroid Hormone Receptor ß in Patients with Resistance
to Thyroid Hormone (RTH ß): Clinical, Biochemical, and Molecular Data.

Esquiaveto-Aun AM(1), Zantut-Wittmann DE(2), Petroli RJ(3), Nakano BS(2),
Guerra-Júnior G(1), de Lemos-Marini SH(1), de Mello MP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences (FCM), University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil. (2)Division of Endocrinology, Department of
Clinical Medicine, FCM, UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. (3)Center of Molecular Biology
and Genetic Engineering (CBMEG), UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.

The syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH ß) is an inherited disorder
characterized by variable tissue hyposensitivity to 3,5,30-L-triiodothyronine
(T(3)), with persistent elevation of free-circulating T(3) (FT(3)) and free
thyroxine (FT(4)) levels in association with nonsuppressed serum thyrotropin
(TSH). Clinical presentation is variable and the molecular analysis of THRB gene 
provides a short cut diagnosis. Here, we describe 2 cases in which RTH ß was
suspected on the basis of laboratory findings. The diagnosis was confirmed by
direct THRB sequencing that revealed 2 novel mutations: the heterozygous
p.Ala317Ser in subject 1 and the heterozygous p.Arg438Pro in subject 2. Both
mutations were shown to be deleterious by SIFT, PolyPhen, and Align GV-GD
predictive methods.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25738994  [PubMed - in process]


21. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Jun;99(11):4795-805. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-6458-8. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Overexpression of ribosome elongation factor G and recycling factor increases
L-isoleucine production in Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Zhao J(1), Hu X, Li Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, 214122, China.

Ribosome elongation factor G encoded by fusA promotes the translocation step of
protein synthesis in bacteria; ribosome recycling factor encoded by frr, together
with the elongation factor G, dissociates ribosomes from messenger RNA after the 
termination of translation. Both factors play important roles during protein
synthesis in bacteria. In this study, we found that overexpression of fusA and/or
frr led to the increase of L-isoleucine production in Corynebacterium glutamicum 
IWJ001, an L-isoleucine production strain generated by random mutagenesis.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis showed that
transcriptional levels of genes lysC, hom, thrB, ilvA, ilvBN, and ilvE encoding
the key enzymes in the biosynthetic pathway of L-isoleucine increased in C.
glutamicum IWJ001 when fusA and/or frr were overexpressed. Co-overexpression of
fusA and frr, together with genes ilvA, ilvB, ilvN, and ppnk in C. glutamicum
IWJ001, led to 76.5 % increase of L-isoleucine production in flask cultivation
and produced 28.5 g/L L-isoleucine in 72-h fed-batch fermentation. The results
demonstrate that overexpressing ribosome elongation factor G and ribosome
recycling factor is an efficient approach to enhance L-isoleucine production in
C. glutamicum.

PMID: 25707863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Med Genet. 2015 May;52(5):312-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102936. Epub 2015 
Feb 10.

Thyroid hormone resistance syndrome due to mutations in the thyroid hormone
receptor a gene (THRA).

Tylki-Szymanska A(1), Acuna-Hidalgo R(2), Krajewska-Walasek M(3), Lecka-Ambroziak
A(4), Steehouwer M(2), Gilissen C(2), Brunner HG(2), Jurecka A(1),
Rózdzynska-Swiatkowska A(5), Hoischen A(2), Chrzanowska KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Anthropology Laboratory, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone is characterised by a lack of response 
of peripheral tissues to the active form of thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine,
T3). In about 85% of cases, a mutation in THRB, the gene coding for thyroid
receptor ß (TRß), is the cause of this disorder. Recently, individual reports
described the first patients with thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) defects.
METHODS: We used longitudinal clinical assessments over a period of 18 years at
one hospital setting combined with biochemical and molecular studies to
characterise a novel thyroid hormone resistance syndrome in a cohort of six
patients from five families.
FINDINGS: Using whole exome sequencing and subsequent Sanger sequencing, we
identified truncating and missense mutations in the THRA gene in five of six
individuals and describe a distinct and consistent phenotype of mild
hypothyroidism (growth retardation, relatively high birth length and weight,
mild-to-moderate mental retardation, mild skeletal dysplasia and constipation),
specific facial features (round, somewhat coarse and flat face) and macrocephaly.
Laboratory investigations revealed anaemia and slightly elevated cholesterol,
while the thyroid profile showed low free thyroxine (fT4) levels coupled with
high free T3 (fT3), leading to an altered T4 : T3 ratio, along with normal
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels. We observed a genotype-phenotype correlation,
with milder outcomes for missense mutations and more severe phenotypical effects 
for truncating mutations.
INTERPRETATION: THRA mutations may be more common than expected. In patients with
clinical symptoms of mild hypothyreosis without confirmation in endocrine
studies, a molecular study of THRA defects is strongly recommended.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25670821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2014 Dec;58(9):962-6. doi:
10.1590/0004-2730000003297.

A case of thyroid hormone resistance: a rare mutation.

Gonçalves AP(1), Aragüés JM(1), Nobre E(1), Barbosa AP(1), Mascarenhas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Portugal.

Reduced sensitivity to thyroid hormones (RSTH) is a rare disease that affects
about 3,000 individuals, belonging to about 1,000 families. It results from
reduced intracellular action of thyroid hormones (TH) genetically determined and 
manifests as persistent hyperthyroxinemia with non-suppressed thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH). We describe a 67-years old, Caucasian woman, with past history of 
subtotal thyroidectomy due to diffuse goiter, who presents with a recurrence of
goiter. Although she is clinically euthyroid, laboratory evaluation shows
persistent hyperthyroxinemia with non-suppressed TSH. Response to thyrotropin
releasing hormone (TRH) test was normal and TSH concentrations were not
suppressed during oral administration of suprafisiologic doses of levothyroxine
(L-T4). Peripheral blood DNA was extracted from the patient and a mutation was
found localized in cluster one, at codon 346 of the ligand binding domain of the 
THRB gene. The patient's son underwent thyroid function testing (TFT) and genetic
study, both negative, suggesting a sporadic mutation. RSTH should be considered
in all hyperthyroxinemic patients who are clinically euthyroid. Mutations
interfering with three major steps required for TH action on target tissues have 
been, so far, identified (TR-ß, TR-a, MCT8, SPB2). Each mutation is associated
with a distinctive syndrome. Goal of management is to maintain a normal serum TSH
level and a eumetabolic state and offer appropriate genetic counselling and
prenatal diagnosis. Inappropriate treatment of eumetabolic patients results in
hypothyroidism and need for TH replacement.

PMID: 25627054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Transl Med. 2015 Jan 27;13:31. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0395-2.

Obesity is associated with a decrease in expression but not with the
hypermethylation of thermogenesis-related genes in adipose tissues.

Kurylowicz A(1), Jonas M(2), Lisik W(3), Jonas M(4), Wicik ZA(5), Wierzbicki
Z(6), Chmura A(7), Puzianowska-Kuznicka M(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish
Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland.
akurylowicz@imdik.pan.pl. (2)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical
Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106,
Warsaw, Poland. martajonas@imdik.pan.pl. (3)Department of General and
Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka Street,
02-005, Warsaw, Poland. wojciech.lisik@wum.edu.pl. (4)Department of General and
Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka Street,
02-005, Warsaw, Poland. morjon@poczta.onet.pl. (5)Department of Human
Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5
Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. zwicik@imdik.pan.pl. (6)Department of
General and Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka
Street, 02-005, Warsaw, Poland. zbigniew-wierzbicki@wp.pl. (7)Department of
General and Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka
Street, 02-005, Warsaw, Poland. andrzejchmura@geil.pl. (8)Department of Human
Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5
Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl.
(9)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Medical Centre of Postgraduate
Education, 99 Marymoncka Street, 01-813, Warsaw, Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: Impaired thermogenesis can promote obesity. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to investigate whether the expression of thermogenesis-related
genes is altered in adipose tissues of obese individuals and whether excessive
methylation of their promoters is involved in this phenomenon.
METHODS: The expression of genes encoding ß adrenergic receptors (ADRBs), thyroid
hormone receptors (THRs), 5'-iodothyronine deiodinases (DIOs), and uncoupling
proteins (UCPs) was measured by real-time PCR in visceral and in subcutaneous
adipose tissues of 58 obese (BMI >40 kg/m(2)) and 50 slim (BMI 20-24.9 kg/m(2))
individuals. The methylation status of these genes was studied by the
methylation-sensitive digestion/real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: The expression of ADRB2, ADRB3, THRA, THRB, DIO2, UCP2 was significantly
lower in the adipose tissues of obese patients than in tissues of normal-weight
individuals (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.00001). In the obese, the expression of ADRB2, ADRB3, DIO2 was
lower in visceral adipose tissue than in subcutaneous adipose tissue (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008, 
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, respectively). However, the mean methylation of CpG islands
of these genes was similar in tissues with their high and low expression, and
there was no correlation between the level of expression and the level of
methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased expression of thermogenesis-related genes in adipose
tissues of obese patients might result in the reduced reactivity to both hormonal
and adrenergic stimuli and therefore in a lower potential to activate
thermogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4314800
PMID: 25622596  [PubMed - in process]


25. Oncol Lett. 2015 Feb;9(2):614-618. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

A novel mutation of thyroid hormone receptor ß in exon 10 in a case of thyroid
hormone-resistant non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid.

Chen K(1), Xie Y(1), Zhao L(1), Zhao S(1), He H(1), Mo Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

Only a few previous studies have demonstrated an association between resistance
to thyroid hormone (RTH) and thyroid cancer. The current study presents the case 
of a 67-year-old female who was referred to the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central
South University with an enlargement of the neck that had grown gradually over
two years and subsequently, rapidly enlarged over the two months prior to
admission, alongside a slight sensation of shortness of breath. Laboratory data
revealed a significantly increased level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH),
total triiodothyronine, total thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, free thyroxine,
thyroprotein and thyroglobulin antibody; however, the levels of thyroperoxidase
and TSH receptor antibody were within the normal ranges. A thyroid hormone
suppression test revealed a TSH reduction of 32%, Magnetic resonance imaging of
the pituitary gland was negative for abnormalities. The patient's thyroid
pathology revealed a non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid. CHOP + nimustine
chemotherapy significantly reduced the clinical symptoms. The genetic analysis
revealed a novel point mutation of the thyroid hormone receptor ß (THRB) gene in 
exon 10 (g1680 G to A) in the 3'-untranslated region of the patient. To the best 
of our knowledge, this is the first case report of RTH with thyroid non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, which involved a mutation (g1680 G to A) in exon 10 of THRB.

PMCID: PMC4301484
PMID: 25621029  [PubMed]


26. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e116346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116346.
eCollection 2014.

Placental genome and maternal-placental genetic interactions: a genome-wide and
candidate gene association study of placental abruption.

Denis M(1), Enquobahrie DA(2), Tadesse MG(3), Gelaye B(4), Sanchez SE(5), Salazar
M(6), Ananth CV(7), Williams MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; UMR AGAP (Amélioration Génétique et
Adaptation des Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales), CIRAD, Montpellier,
France. (2)Center for Perinatal Studies, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America; Department of Epidemiology, School of
Public Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America. (3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgetown University,
Washington, D.C., United States of America. (4)Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Sección de Post Grado, Facultad de Medicina Humana, Universidad San Martín de 
Porres, Lima, Peru; A.C. PROESA, Lima, Peru. (6)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, San Marcos University, Lima, Peru. (7)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Epidemiology,
Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York, United 
States of America.

While available evidence supports the role of genetics in the pathogenesis of
placental abruption (PA), PA-related placental genome variations and
maternal-placental genetic interactions have not been investigated. Maternal
blood and placental samples collected from participants in the Peruvian Abruptio 
Placentae Epidemiology study were genotyped using Illumina's Cardio-Metabochip
platform. We examined 118,782 genome-wide SNPs and 333 SNPs in 32 candidate genes
from mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways in placental
DNA from 280 PA cases and 244 controls. We assessed maternal-placental
interactions in the candidate gene SNPS and two imprinted regions (IGF2/H19 and
C19MC). Univariate and penalized logistic regression models were fit to estimate 
odds ratios. We examined the combined effect of multiple SNPs on PA risk using
weighted genetic risk scores (WGRS) with repeated ten-fold cross-validations. A
multinomial model was used to investigate maternal-placental genetic
interactions. In placental genome-wide and candidate gene analyses, no SNP was
significant after false discovery rate correction. The top genome-wide
association study (GWAS) hits were rs544201, rs1484464 (CTNNA2), rs4149570
(TNFRSF1A) and rs13055470 (ZNRF3) (p-values: 1.11e-05 to 3.54e-05). The top 200
SNPs of the GWAS overrepresented genes involved in cell cycle, growth and
proliferation. The top candidate gene hits were rs16949118 (COX10) and rs7609948 
(THRB) (p-values: 6.00e-03 and 8.19e-03). Participants in the highest quartile of
WGRS based on cross-validations using SNPs selected from the GWAS and candidate
gene analyses had a 8.40-fold (95% CI: 5.8-12.56) and a 4.46-fold (95% CI:
2.94-6.72) higher odds of PA compared to participants in the lowest quartile. We 
found maternal-placental genetic interactions on PA risk for two SNPs in PPARG
(chr3:12313450 and chr3:12412978) and maternal imprinting effects for multiple
SNPs in the C19MC and IGF2/H19 regions. Variations in the placental genome and
interactions between maternal-placental genetic variations may contribute to PA
risk. Larger studies may help advance our understanding of PA pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4280220
PMID: 25549360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2496-508.

Clinically relevant genes and regulatory pathways associated with NRASQ61
mutations in melanoma through an integrative genomics approach.

Jiang W(1), Jia P(1,)(2), Hutchinson KE(3), Johnson DB(4,)(5), Sosman JA(4,)(5), 
Zhao Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (2)Center for Quantitative Sciences,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (4)Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA. (5)Department of
Medicine/Division of Hematology-Oncology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Therapies such as BRAF inhibitors have become standard treatment for melanoma
patients whose tumors harbor activating BRAFV600 mutations. However, analogous
therapies for inhibiting NRAS mutant signaling have not yet been well
established. In this study, we performed an integrative analysis of DNA
methylation, gene expression, and microRNA expression data to identify potential 
regulatory pathways associated with the most common driver mutations in NRAS
(Q61K/L/R) through comparison of NRASQ61-mutated melanomas with pan-negative
melanomas. Surprisingly, we found dominant hypomethylation (98.03%) in
NRASQ61-mutated melanomas. We identified 1,150 and 49 differentially expressed
genes and microRNAs, respectively. Integrated functional analyses of alterations 
in all three data types revealed important signaling pathways associated with
NRASQ61 mutations, such as the MAPK pathway, as well as other novel cellular
processes, such as axon guidance. Further analysis of the relationship between
DNA methylation and gene expression changes revealed 9 hypermethylated and
down-regulated genes and 112 hypomethylated and up-regulated genes in NRASQ61
melanomas. Finally, we identified 52 downstream regulatory cascades of three
hypomethylated and up-regulated genes (PDGFD, ZEB1, and THRB). Collectively, our 
observation of predominant gene hypomethylation in NRASQ61 melanomas and the
identification of NRASQ61-linked pathways will be useful for the development of
targeted therapies against melanomas harboring NRASQ61 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4385866
PMID: 25537510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 19;4(6):776-88. eCollection 2014.

Activation of integrin-ERBB2 signaling in undifferentiated thyroid cancer.

Zhu X(1), Zhu YJ(2), Kim DW(1), Meltzer P(2), Cheng SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD 20892. (2)Laboratory
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD 20892.

Undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers.
Although genetic changes underlying this aggressive cancer remain to be
elucidated, RAS mutations have been frequently identified in it. Mice harboring a
mutant thyroid hormone receptor Thrb(PV) (Thrb(PV/PV) ) spontaneously develop
differentiated follicular thyroid carcinoma similar to human thyroid cancer. We
recently demonstrated that targeting a RAS mutation (Kras(G12D) ) to the thyroid 
of Thrb(PV/PV) mice (Thrb(PV/PV) Kras(G12D) mice) promotes initiation and
progression of undifferentiated thyroid cancer. To uncover genes destined to
drive the aggressive cancer phenotype, we used cDNA microarrays to compare the
gene expression profiles of thyroid cells of Kras(G12D) mice and thyroid tumor
lesions of Thrb(PV/PV) and Thrb(PV/PV) Kras(G12D) mice. Analyses of microarray
data identified 14 upstream regulators that were significantly altered in thyroid
tumors of Thrb(PV/PV) and Thrb(PV/PV) Kras(G12D) mice. Most of these genes with
altered expression function as key regulators in growth factor-induced signaling.
Further analysis identified gene expression profiles of markedly elevated
integrin levels, acting as upstream activators to stimulate ERBB2-mediated
downstream signaling in thyroid tumors of Thrb(PV/PV) Kras(G12D) mice. The
present studies uncovered integrin-activated ERBB2 signaling as one of the
mechanisms in synergy between TRßPV and KRASG12D signaling to promote aggressive 
tumor growth in undifferentiated thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4266711
PMID: 25520867  [PubMed]


29. Int J Oncol. 2015 Mar;46(3):1192-204. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2792. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

5-azacytidine enhances efficacy of multiple chemotherapy drugs in AML and lung
cancer with modulation of CpG methylation.

Füller M(1), Klein M(1), Schmidt E(1), Rohde C(2), Göllner S(2), Schulze I(2),
Qianli J(1), Berdel WE(1), Edemir B(2), Müller-Tidow C(2), Tschanter P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology and Oncology, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany. (2)Department of Medicine IV, Hematology and Oncology,
University of Halle, Halle, Germany.

The DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitory drugs such as 5-azacytidine induce
DNA hypomethylation by inhibiting DNA methyltransferases. While clinically
effective, DNMT inhibitors are not curative. A combination with cytotoxic drugs
might be beneficial, but this is largely unexplored. In the present study, we
analyzed potential synergisms between cytotoxic drugs and 5-azacytidine in acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. Lung cancer 
and leukemia cell lines were exposed to low doses of 5-azacytidine with varying
doses of cytarabine or etoposide for AML cells (U937 and HL60) as well as
cisplatin or gemcitabine for NSCLC cells (A549 and HTB56) for 48 h. Drug
interaction and potential synergism was analyzed according to the Chou-Talalay
algorithm. Further analyses were based on soft agar colony formation assays,
active caspase-3 staining and BrdU incorporation flow cytometry. To identify
effects on DNA methylation patterns, we performed genome wide DNA methylation
analysis using 450K bead arrays. Azacytidine at low doses was synergistic with
cytotoxic drugs in NSCLC and in AML cell lines. Simultaneous exposure to
5-azacytidine with cytotoxic drugs showed strong synergistic activity. In colony 
formation assays these synergisms were repeatedly verified for 5-azacytidine (25 
nM) with low doses of anticancer agents. 5-azacytidine neither affected the cell 
cycle nor increased apoptosis. 450K methylation bead arrays revealed 1,046 CpG
sites in AML and 1,778 CpG sites in NSCLC cells with significant DNA
hypomethylation (24-h exposure) to 5-azacytidine combined with the cytotoxic
drugs. These CpG-sites were observed in the candidate tumor-suppressor genes MGMT
and THRB. Additional incubation time after 24-h treatment led to a 4.1-fold
increase of significant hypomethylated CpG-sites in NSCLC cells. These results
suggest that the addition of DNA demethylating agents to cytotoxic anticancer
drugs exhibits synergistic activity in AML and NSCLC. Dysregulation of an
equilibrium of DNA methylation in cancer cells might increase the susceptibility 
for cytotoxic drugs.

PMID: 25501798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Regul Pept. 2014 Nov;194-195:30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2014.10.002. Epub 2014
Oct 24.

Hypothalamic-pituitary thyroid axis alterations in female mice with deletion of
the neuromedin B receptor gene.

Oliveira KJ(1), Paula GS(2), Império GE(2), Bressane NO(2), Magalhães CM(2),
Miranda-Alves L(3), Ortiga-Carvalho TM(2), Pazos-Moura CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics Carlos Chagas Filho, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 24210-130, Brazil; Biomedical Institute, Federal
Fluminense University, Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, 24210-130, Brazil. (2)Institute
of Biophysics Carlos Chagas Filho, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, 24210-130, Brazil. (3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal
University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 24210-130, Brazil. (4)Institute of 
Biophysics Carlos Chagas Filho, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de
Janeiro, 24210-130, Brazil. Electronic address: cpazosm@biof.ufrj.br.

Neuromedin B, a peptide highly expressed at the pituitary, has been shown to act 
as autocrine/paracrine inhibitor of thyrotropin (TSH) release. Here we studied
the thyroid axis of adult female mice lacking neuromedin B receptor (NBR-KO),
compared to wild type (WT) littermates. They exhibited slight increase in serum
TSH (18%), with normal pituitary expression of mRNA coding for a-glycoprotein
subunit (Cga), but reduced TSH ß-subunit mRNA (Tshb, 41%), lower intra-pituitary 
TSH content (24%) and increased thyroid hormone transporter MCT-8 (Slc16a2, 44%) 
and thyroid hormone receptor ß mRNA expression (Thrb, 39%). NBR-KO mice exhibited
normal thyroxine (T4) and reduced triiodothyronine (T3) (30%), with no
alterations in the intra-thyroidal content of T4 and T3 or thyroid morphological 
changes. Hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) mRNA (Trh) was
increased (68%), concomitant with a reduction in type 2 deiodinase mRNA (Dio2,
30%) and no changes in MCT-8 and thyroid hormone receptor mRNA expression. NBR-KO
mice exhibited a 56% higher increase in serum TSH in response to an acute single 
intraperitoneal injection of TRH concomitant with a non-significant increase in
pituitary TRH receptor (Trhr) mRNA at basal state. The phenotype of female NBR-KO
mice at the hypothalamus-pituitary axis revealed alterations in pituitary and
hypothalamic gene expression, associated with reduced serum T3, and higher TSH
response to TRH, with apparently normal thyroid morphology and hormonal
production. Thus, results confirm that neuromedin B pathways are importantly
involved in secretory pathways of TSH and revealed its participation in the in
vivo regulation of gene expression of TSH ß-subunit and pituitary MCT8 and Thrb
and hypothalamic TRH and type 2 deiodinase.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25454367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Dec;41(2):493-500. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.09.037.
Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Embryonic exposure to carbendazim induces the transcription of genes related to
apoptosis, immunotoxicity and endocrine disruption in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Jiang J(1), Wu S(2), Wu C(2), An X(2), Cai L(2), Zhao X(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang Sustainable Pest and Disease
Control, Institute of Quality and Standard for Agro-products, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, Zhejiang, China; Key Laboratory for
Pesticide Residue Detection of Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Quality and 
Standard for Agro-products, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou
310021, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: jinhuajjh@sina.com. (2)State Key
Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang Sustainable Pest and Disease Control,
Institute of Quality and Standard for Agro-products, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, Zhejiang, China; Key Laboratory for
Pesticide Residue Detection of Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Quality and 
Standard for Agro-products, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou
310021, Zhejiang, China. (3)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base for Zhejiang
Sustainable Pest and Disease Control, Institute of Quality and Standard for
Agro-products, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021,
Zhejiang, China; Key Laboratory for Pesticide Residue Detection of Ministry of
Agriculture, Institute of Quality and Standard for Agro-products, Zhejiang
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou 310021, Zhejiang, China. Electronic
address: zhaoxueping@tom.com.

Carbendazim is one of the most widespread environmental contaminant that can
cause major concern to human and animal reproductive system. To date, very few
studies have been conducted on the toxic effect of carbendazim in the non-target 
organism zebrafish (Danio rerio). The study presented here aimed to assess how
carbendazim triggers apoptosis, immunotoxicity and endocrine disruption pathways 
in zebrafish during its embryo development. Our results demonstrated that the
expression patterns of many key genes involved in cell apoptosis pathway (e.g.
P53, Mdm2, Bbc3 and Cas8) were significantly up-regulated upon the exposure to
carbendazim at the concentration of 500 µg/L, while the Bcl2 and Cas3 were
down-regulated at the same concentration, interestingly, the expression level of 
Ogg1 decreased at all the exposure concentrations. It was also observed that the 
mRNA levels of CXCL-C1C, CCL1, IL-1b and TNFa which were closely related to the
innate immune system, were affected in newly hatched zebrafish after exposed to
different concentrations of carbendazim. Moreover, the expression of genes that
are involved in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal/thyroid (HPG/HPT) axis
including VTG, ERa, ERß2, Dio1, Dio2, Thraa and Thrb were all down-regulated
significantly after the exposure to carbendazim. The expression levels of two
cytochrome P450 aromatases CYP19a and CYP19b were increased significantly after
20 and 100 µg/L carbendazim exposure, respectively. Taken together, our results
indicated that carbendazim had the potential to induce cell apoptosis and cause
immune toxicity as well as endocrine disruption in zebrafish during the embryo
developmental stage. The information presented here also help to elucidate the
environmental risks caused by the carbendazim-induced toxicity in aquatic
organisms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25304545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;167:101-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2014.09.007. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Progesterone and norgestrel alter transcriptional expression of genes along the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in zebrafish embryos-larvae.

Liang YQ(1), Huang GY(1), Ying GG(2), Liu SS(1), Jiang YX(1), Liu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. (2)State Key 
Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. Electronic address:
guangguo.ying@gmail.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry,
Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510640, China; Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-Resources Sustainable Utilization,
South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510301, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of progestins on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis in the early stage of zebrafish.
Zebrafish embryos were exposed to progesterone (P4) or norgestrel (NGT) at 5, 50 
and 100 ng L(-1) for 144 h post fertilization (hpf), and the transcriptional
levels of target genes along the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis were
determined daily. The results showed that P4 had only minor effects on the mRNA
expression of thyroglobulin (Tg), iodothyronine deiodinase type <U+0399> (Dio1) and
thyroid hormone receptor ß (Thrb) genes. Similarly, the effects of NGT on
transcripts of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (Trh), Dio1, iodothyronine
deiodinase type II (Dio2) and thyroid hormone receptor a (Thra) genes were
generally low. In addition, NGT resulted in some alterations of Tg and Thrb
transcripts at different time points. However, a strong induction of Nis mRNA by 
P4 and NGT was observed in zebrafish embryos-larvae. The overall results showed
that besides Nis no effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis are 
observed following exposure to P4 and NGT, which imply that both P4 and NGT have 
potential effects on the thyroid endocrine system by inducing transcript of Nis
gene during the early stage of zebrafish.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Neoplasia. 2014 Sep;16(9):757-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.08.003.

Synergistic signaling of KRAS and thyroid hormone receptor ß mutants promotes
undifferentiated thyroid cancer through MYC up-regulation.

Zhu X(1), Zhao L(1), Park JW(1), Willingham MC(1), Cheng SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, US. (2)Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, US. Electronic address:
chengs@mail.nih.gov.

Undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers
with frequent RAS mutations. How mutations of the RAS gene contribute to
undifferentiated thyroid cancer remains largely unknown. Mice harboring a potent 
dominant negative mutant thyroid hormone receptor ß, TRßPV (Thrb(PV/PV)),
spontaneously develop well-differentiated follicular thyroid cancer similar to
human cancer. We genetically targeted the Kras(G12D) mutation to thyroid
epithelial cells of Thrb(PV/PV) mice to understand how Kras(G12D) mutation could 
induce undifferentiated thyroid cancer in Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice.
Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice exhibited poorer survival due to more aggressive
thyroid tumors with capsular invasion, vascular invasion, and distant metastases 
to the lung occurring at an earlier age and at a higher frequency than
Thrb(PV/PV) mice did. Importantly, Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice developed frequent 
anaplastic foci with complete loss of normal thyroid follicular morphology.
Within the anaplastic foci, the thyroid-specific transcription factor paired box 
gene 8 (PAX8) expression was virtually lost and the loss of PAX8 expression was
inversely correlated with elevated MYC expression. Consistently, co-expression of
KRAS(G12D) with TRßPV upregulated MYC levels in rat thyroid pccl3 cells, and MYC 
acted to enhance the TRßPV-mediated repression of the Pax8 promoter activity of a
distant upstream enhancer, critical for thyroid-specific Pax8 expression. Our
findings indicated that synergistic signaling of KRAS(G12D) and TRßPV led to
increased MYC expression. Upregulated MYC contributes to the initiation of
undifferentiated thyroid cancer, in part, through enhancing TRßPV-mediated
repression of the Pax8 expression. Thus, MYC might serve as a potential target
for therapeutic intervention.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4234871
PMID: 25246276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Endocr Dev. 2014;26:118-29. doi: 10.1159/000363159. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Resistance to thyroid hormone.

Onigata K(1), Szinnai G.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Clinical Practice Center and Department of Pediatrics, Shimane
Faculty of Medicine, Izumo, Japan.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) or thyroid hormone action defect (THAD) is
the most frequent form of syndromes of reduced sensitivity to thyroid hormone. It
is characterized by variable tissue hyposensitivity to thyroid hormone. RTHß
(formerly only RTH) is caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor ß gene
(THRB). The clinical phenotype reflects the dysbalance between resistance of
tissues predominantly expressing the thyroid hormone receptor ß-isoforms 1 and 2 
and the overstimulation of tissues mainly expressing the thyroid hormone receptor
a-isoform to thyroid hormones. The hallmark of RTHß is goiter, sinus tachycardia,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in the context of increased levels of
triiodothyronine/free thyroxine and nonsuppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Only recently have mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) been
identified causing a new form of RTH, RTHa. The few patients described so far
suffered from mental retardation of variable degree, short stature with decreased
subischial leg length, chronic constipation and bradycardia. This review provides
an overview of clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of RTHa and RTHß
relevant for diagnosis, treatment and counseling of affected patients and
families.

PMID: 25231448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2015 Jul-Aug;62(4):563-73. doi: 10.1002/bab.1290. Epub
2014 Dec 24.

Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum strain ATCC13032 to produce
L-methionine.

Qin T(1,)(2), Hu X(1), Hu J(2), Wang X(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, People's Republic of China. (2)School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China. (3)Synergetic Innovation Center of 
Food Safety and Nutrition, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China.

L-Methionine-producing strain QW102/pJYW-4-hom(m) -lysC(m) -brnFE was developed
from Corynebacterium glutamicum strain ATCC13032, using metabolic engineering
strategies. These strategies involved (i) deletion of the gene thrB encoding
homoserine kinase to increase the precursor supply, (ii) deletion of the gene
mcbR encoding the regulator McbR to release the transcriptional repression to
various genes in the l-methionine biosynthetic pathway, (iii) overexpression of
the gene lysC(m) encoding feedback-resistant aspartate kinase and the gene hom(m)
encoding feedback-resistant homoserine dehydrogenase to further increase the
precursor supply, and (iv) overexpression of the gene cluster brnF and brnE
encoding the export protein complex BrnFE to increase extracellular l-methionine 
concentration. QW102/pJYW-4-hom(m) -lysC(m) -brnFE produced 42.2 mM (6.3 g/L)
l-methionine after 64-H fed-batch fermentation. These results suggest that
l-methionine-producing strains can be developed from wild-type C. glutamicum
strains by rationally metabolic engineering.

© 2014 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 25196586  [PubMed - in process]


36. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;10(10):582-91. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.143. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Thyroid hormone receptors and resistance to thyroid hormone disorders.

Ortiga-Carvalho TM(1), Sidhaye AR(2), Wondisford FE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, S/N, Cidade Universitária, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Departments of Paediatrics and Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 600 N. Wolfe Street, CMSC 10-113, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

Thyroid hormone action is predominantly mediated by thyroid hormone receptors
(THRs), which are encoded by the thyroid hormone receptor a (THRA) and thyroid
hormone receptor ß (THRB) genes. Patients with mutations in THRB present with
resistance to thyroid hormone ß (RTHß), which is a disorder characterized by
elevated levels of thyroid hormone, normal or elevated levels of TSH and goitre. 
Mechanistic insights about the contributions of THRß to various processes,
including colour vision, development of the cochlea and the cerebellum, and
normal functioning of the adult liver and heart, have been obtained by either
introducing human THRB mutations into mice or by deletion of the mouse Thrb gene.
The introduction of the same mutations that mimic human THRß alterations into the
mouse Thra and Thrb genes resulted in distinct phenotypes, which suggests that
THRA and THRB might have non-overlapping functions in human physiology. These
studies also suggested that THRA mutations might not be lethal. Seven patients
with mutations in THRa have since been described. These patients have RTHa and
presented with major abnormalities in growth and gastrointestinal function. The
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in these individuals is minimally affected,
which suggests that the central T3 feedback loop is not impaired in patients with
RTHa, in stark contrast to patients with RTHß.

PMCID: PMC4578869
PMID: 25135573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Thyroid. 2014 Nov;24(11):1656-61. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0625. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Conservative management of pregnancy in patients with resistance to thyroid
hormone associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis.

Jonas C(1), Daumerie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Université catholique de Louvain, Cliniques
Universitaires Saint-Luc , Brussels, Belgium .

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is a rare thyroid disorder
characterized by elevated free thyroid hormones with non-suppressed thyrotropin
(TSH). Guidelines for the management of pregnancy in patients with RTH are not
well defined. Chorionic villus biopsy is sometimes proposed to manage treatment
based on the genotype of the fetus.
PATIENT FINDINGS: A woman with RTH (c1243C>T, pR320C mutation in the thyroid
hormone receptor ß (THRB gene)) associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) had 
three successful pregnancies. During the pregnancies, the mother was treated with
levothyroxine (LT4). She never underwent chorionic villus sampling. The babies
had normal birth weights. The first child harbored the THRB mutation.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS: The management of pregnancies in patients with RTH and
the indication for chorionic villus sampling are discussed in these cases. In RTH
patients, pregnancies must be planned and closely followed. There is no need for 
prenatal diagnosis of RTH if the patient, due to limited thyroidal reserve,
cannot produce excess of thyroid hormones to harm a normal fetus. The more common
challenge in RTH remains how to best manage high maternal thyroid hormone levels,
and whether or not to lower thyroid hormone levels based on the genotype of the
fetus.

PMID: 25099553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Bone. 2014 Oct;67:222-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.07.017. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Resistance to thyroid hormone due to mutations in the THRB gene impairs bone mass
and affects calcium and phosphorus homeostasis.

Cardoso LF(1), de Paula FJ(1), Maciel LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Electronic address: lmzmacie@fmrp.usp.br.

CONTEXT: Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is an inherited syndrome of reduced 
tissue responsiveness to thyroid hormone, which is usually due to mutations in
the thyroid hormone receptor ß gene (THRB). Few studies have been conducted to
investigate bone and mineral metabolism in RTH.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to evaluate the clinical and
biochemical parameters related to bone and mineral metabolism in RTH due to
mutations in the THRB gene (RTHß).
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a cross-sectional study on 14 patients with
RTHß (RTHG), eight adults and six children, and 24 control subjects (CG).
OUTCOMES: Serum measures included total calcium (TCa), inorganic phosphate (iP), 
alkaline phosphatase (AP), parathyroid hormone (PTH), 25-hydroxyvitamin D
(25OHD), osteocalcin (OC), carboxyterminal telopeptide (CTX), and fibroblast
growth factor 23 (FGF-23). We estimated the renal threshold phosphate
concentration (TmPO4/GFR) and assessed bone mass using dual X-ray absorptiometry.
RESULTS: Adults and children with RTH showed higher serum levels of TCa than
controls (P=.029 and, P=.018 respectively). However, only children with RTH
exhibited lower serum levels of iP than controls (P=.048). FGF-23 was higher in
RTHß children (P=.04). RTHß adults had lower whole-body (P=.01) and lumbar spine 
(P=.01) bone mineral density than control subjects. The same pattern was observed
when the results were expressed as Z-scores between groups, with a lower value in
RTHG than in CG for the lumbar spine of adults (P=.03). No difference was
observed between groups in PTH, 25OHD, AP, OC, and CTX.
CONCLUSION: Biochemical abnormalities are seen in children with RTH (Low iP, high
FGF23), while high calcium (with normal UCa) is seen in RTH subjects of all ages,
and later on, in adult life, low BMD is seen. Considering that the TRa1 isoform
is the predominant TR in the skeleton, we hypothesize that probably these
patients may exhibit enhanced calcium flux from bone to circulation. Our data
represent a challenge for new studies to unveil the control of calcium and
phosphorus homeostasis and fracture risk in these patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3713-24. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2058. Epub 2014 Jun 
16.

A rapid cytoplasmic mechanism for PI3 kinase regulation by the nuclear thyroid
hormone receptor, TRß, and genetic evidence for its role in the maturation of
mouse hippocampal synapses in vivo.

Martin NP(1), Marron Fernandez de Velasco E, Mizuno F, Scappini EL, Gloss B,
Erxleben C, Williams JG, Stapleton HM, Gentile S, Armstrong DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology (N.P.M., E.M.F.d.V., F.M., E.L.S., B.G., C.E.,
S.G., D.L.A.) and Laboratory of Structural Biology (J.G.W.), National Institute
of Environmental Health and Sciences, National Institutes of Health/Department of
Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709; Nicholas
School of the Environment (H.M.S.), Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
27708; and Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics (S.G.), Loyola
University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois 60153.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3206-9.

Several rapid physiological effects of thyroid hormone on mammalian cells in
vitro have been shown to be mediated by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K),
but the molecular mechanism of PI3K regulation by nuclear zinc finger receptor
proteins for thyroid hormone and its relevance to brain development in vivo have 
not been elucidated. Here we show that, in the absence of hormone, the thyroid
hormone receptor TRß forms a cytoplasmic complex with the p85 subunit of PI3K and
the Src family tyrosine kinase, Lyn, which depends on two canonical
phosphotyrosine motifs in the second zinc finger of TRß that are not conserved in
TRa. When hormone is added, TRß dissociates and moves to the nucleus, and
phosphatidylinositol (3, 4, 5)-trisphosphate production goes up rapidly. Mutating
either tyrosine to a phenylalanine prevents rapid signaling through PI3K but does
not prevent the hormone-dependent transcription of genes with a thyroid hormone
response element. When the rapid signaling mechanism was blocked chronically
throughout development in mice by a targeted point mutation in both alleles of
Thrb, circulating hormone levels, TRß expression, and direct gene regulation by
TRß in the pituitary and liver were all unaffected. However, the mutation
significantly impaired maturation and plasticity of the Schaffer collateral
synapses on CA1 pyramidal neurons in the postnatal hippocampus. Thus,
phosphotyrosine-dependent association of TRß with PI3K provides a potential
mechanism for integrating regulation of development and metabolism by thyroid
hormone and receptor tyrosine kinases.

PMCID: PMC4138568
PMID: 24932806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Thyroid. 2014 Sep;24(9):1430-1. doi: 10.1089/thy.2014.0086. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Computer modeling of a newly identified THRB gene mutation (S350L) associated
with resistance to thyroid hormone in three unrelated patients.

Nagavalli S(1), Fletterick RJ, Ford G, Boston BA, Gianoukakis AG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Divisions of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center ,
Torrance, California.

PMCID: PMC4361411
PMID: 24906004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e97624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097624. eCollection
2014.

Epigenetic regulation of thyroid hormone receptor beta in renal cancer.

Wojcicka A(1), Piekielko-Witkowska A(2), Kedzierska H(2), Rybicka B(2), Poplawski
P(2), Boguslawska J(2), Master A(2), Nauman A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centre of Postgraduate
Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland; Genomic Medicine, Department of General,
Transplant and Liver Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centre of Postgraduate
Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) gene is commonly deregulated in cancers and,
as strengthened by animal models, postulated to play a tumor-suppressive role.
Our previous studies revealed downregulation of THRB in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma (ccRCC), but the culpable mechanisms have not been fully elucidated.
Since epigenetic regulation is a common mechanism influencing the expression of
tumor suppressors, we hypothesized that downregulation of THRB in renal cancer
results from epigenetic aberrances, including CpG methylation and
microRNA-dependent silencing. Our study revealed that ccRCC tumors exhibited a
56% decrease in THRB and a 37% increase in DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)
expression when compared with paired non-neoplastic control samples. However,
THRB CpG methylation analysis performed using BSP, SNaPshot and MSP-PCR
consistently revealed no changes in methylation patterns between matched tumor
and control samples. In silico analysis resulted in identification of four
microRNAs (miR-155, miR-425, miR-592, and miR-599) as potentially targeting THRB 
transcript. Luciferase assay showed direct binding of miR-155 and miR-425 to
3'UTR of THRB, and subsequent in vivo analyses revealed that transfection of
UOK171 cell line with synthetic miR-155 or miR-425 resulted in decreased
expression of endogenous TRHB by 22% and 64%, respectively. Finally, real-time
PCR analysis showed significant upregulation of miR-155 (354%) and miR-425 (162%)
in ccRCC when compared with matched controls. Moreover, microRNA levels were
negatively correlated with the amount of THRB transcript in tissue samples. We
conclude that CpG methylation is not the major mechanism contributing to
decreased THRB expression in ccRCC. In contrast, THRB is targeted by microRNAs
miR-155 and miR-425, whose increased expression may be responsible for
downregulation of THRB in ccRCC tumors.

PMCID: PMC4029725
PMID: 24849932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):E1617-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3799. Epub
2014 May 21.

Identification of targets of Twist1 transcription factor in thyroid cancer cells.

Di Maro G(1), Orlandella FM, Bencivenga TC, Salerno P, Ugolini C, Basolo F,
Maestro R, Salvatore G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (G.D.M., F.M.O.,
T.C.B., P.S.), Università di Napoli "Federico II," Italy 80131; Dipartimento di
Area Medica (C.U.), Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy 56126; 
Dipartimento di Patologia Chirugica, Medica (F.B.), Molecolare e dell'Area
Critica dell' Università di Pisa, Italy 56124; Experimental Oncology 1 (R.M.),
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Aviano, Italy 33081; and Dipartimento di
Scienze Motorie e del Benessere (G.S.), Universita' "Parthenope," 80133 Napoli,
Italy 80133.

CONTEXT: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive human
tumors. Twist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved in
cancer development and progression. We showed that Twist1 affects thyroid cancer 
cell survival and motility.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify Twist1 targets in thyroid cancer cells.
DESIGN: Transcriptional targets of Twist1 were identified by gene expression
profiling the TPC-Twist1 cells in comparison with control cells. Functional
studies were performed by silencing in TPC-Twist1 and in CAL62 cells the top 10
upregulated genes and by evaluating cell proliferation, survival, migration, and 
invasion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed to verify direct binding of
Twist1 to target genes. Quantitative RT-PCR was applied to study the expression
level of Twist1 target genes in human thyroid carcinoma samples.
RESULTS: According to the gene expression profile, the top functions enriched in 
TPC-Twist1 cells were cellular movement, cellular growth and proliferation, and
cell death and survival. Silencing of the top 10 upregulated genes reduced
viability of TPC-Twist1 and of CAL62 cells. Silencing of COL1A1, KRT7, and PDZK1 
also induced cell death. Silencing of HS6ST2, THRB, ID4, RHOB, and PDZK1IP also
impaired migration and invasion of TPC-Twist1 and of CAL62 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that Twist1 directly binds the promoter of the top 10 
upregulated genes. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that HS6ST2, COL1A1, F2RL1,
LEPREL1, PDZK1, and PDZK1IP1 are overexpressed in thyroid carcinoma samples
compared with normal thyroids.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a set of genes that mediates Twist1 biological effects
in thyroid cancer cells.

PMID: 24848707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Eur Thyroid J. 2014 Mar;3(1):17-24. doi: 10.1159/000360637. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Clinical Consequences of Mutations in Thyroid Hormone Receptor-a1.

van Mullem AA(1), Visser TJ(1), Peeters RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Thyroid hormone (TH) exerts its biological activity via the TH receptors TRa1 and
TRß1/2, which are encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. The first patients with
mutations in THRB were identified decades ago. These patients had a clinical
syndrome of resistance to TH associated with high serum TH and nonsuppressed
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels. Until recently, no patients with mutations in
THRA had been identified. In an attempt to predict the clinical phenotype of such
patients, different TRa1 mutant mouse models have been generated. These mice have
a variable phenotype depending on the location and severity of the mutation.
Recently, the first humans with mutations in THRA were identified. Their
phenotype consists of relatively low serum T4 and high serum T3 levels (and thus 
an elevated T3/T4 ratio), growth retardation, delayed mental and bone
development, and constipation. While, in retrospect, certain features present in 
humans can also be found in mouse models, the first humans carrying a defect in
TRa1 were not suspected of having a THRA gene mutation initially. The current
review focuses on the clinical consequences of TRa1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4005264
PMID: 24847461  [PubMed]


44. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Mar-Apr;194(1-2):64-8. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.04.009. Epub 2014 May 4.

Identification of thyroid hormone receptor homologs in the fluke Opisthorchis
felineus (Platyhelminthes).

Pakharukova MY(1), Ershov NI(2), Vorontsova EV(2), Shilov AG(2), Merkulova TI(3),
Mordvinov VA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia; Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russia. Electronic address: pmaria@yandex.ru.
(2)Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia. (3)Institute
of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia; Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russia.

The liver fluke, Opisthorchis felineus of the Opisthorchiidae family, is a
well-known causative agent of opisthorchiasis in Russia and Europe. The aim of
this work was to identify genes encoding thyroid hormone receptors in O.
felineus, and to analyze the expression of possible target genes in response to
treatment with exogenous thyroid hormones. We identified two genes encoding
thyroid hormone receptors in the O. felineus genome, THRA and THRB. The genes
were differentially expressed through the life cycle. The maximal level of mRNA
expression of THRA1 and THRB was observed in adult worms. Treatment of the worms 
with triiodothyronine and thyroxine resulted in an increase in glucose
6-phosphatase mRNA expression and a decrease in malate dehydrogenase mRNA
expression, potential gene targets of thyroid hormones. These data indicate that 
thyroid hormone receptors may perform essential roles in physiological processes 
in adult O. felineus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24798031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 May;38(1):166-74. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.03.016.
Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Thyroid signaling in immune organs and cells of the teleost fish rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss).

Quesada-García A(1), Valdehita A(1), Kropf C(2), Casanova-Nakayama A(2), Segner
H(2), Navas JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA),
Madrid, Spain. (2)Centre for Fish and Wildlife Health, University of Bern,
Switzerland. (3)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y
Alimentaria (INIA), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jmnavas@inia.es.

Thyroid hormones are involved in modulating the immune system in mammals. In
contrast, there is no information on the role played by these hormones in the
immune system of teleost fish. Here we provide initial evidence for the presence 
of active thyroid signaling in immune organs and cells of teleosts. We
demonstrate that immune organs (head kidney and spleen) and isolated leukocytes
(from head kidney and peripheral blood) of the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) express both thyroid receptor a (THRA) and ß (THRB). Absolute mRNA levels
of THRA were significantly higher than those of THRB. THRA showed higher
expression in immune organs and isolated immune cells compared to the reference
organ, liver, while THRB showed the opposite. In vivo exposure of trout to
triiodothryronine (T3) or the anti-thyroid agent propylthiouracil (PTU) altered
THR expression in immune organs and cells. Effect of T3 and PTU over the relative
expression of selected marker genes of immune cell subpopulations was also
studied. Treatments changed the relative expression of markers of cytotoxic,
helper and total T cells (cd4, cd8a, trb), B lymphocytes (mIgM) and macrophages
(csf1r). These findings suggest that the immune system of rainbow trout is
responsive to thyroid hormones.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 Mar;148:162-73. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.01.008. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Enabling comparative gene expression studies of thyroid hormone action through
the development of a flexible real-time quantitative PCR assay for use across
multiple anuran indicator and sentinel species.

Veldhoen N(1), Propper CR(2), Helbing CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 2Y2. (2)Department of Biological
Sciences, Northern Arizona University, S. Beaver St., Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 2Y2. Electronic address:
chelbing@uvic.ca.

Studies performed across diverse frog species have made substantial contributions
to our understanding of basic vertebrate development and the natural or
anthropogenic environmental factors impacting sensitive life stages. Because,
anurans are developmental models, provide ecosystems services, and act as
sentinels for the identification of environmental chemical contaminants that
interfere with thyroid hormone (TH) action during postembryonic development,
there is demand for flexible assessment techniques that can be applied to
multiple species. As part of the "thyroid assays across indicator and sentinel
species" (TAXISS) initiative, we have designed and validated a series of
cross-species real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) primer sets that provide
information on transcriptome components in evolutionarily distant anurans.
Validation for fifteen gene transcripts involved a rigorous three-tiered quality 
control within tissue/development-specific contexts. Assay performance was
confirmed on multiple tissues (tail fin, liver, brain, and intestine) of Rana
catesbeiana and Xenopus laevis tadpoles enabling comparisons between tissues and 
generation of response profiles to exogenous TH. This revealed notable
differences in TH-responsive gene transcripts including thra, thrb, thibz, klf9, 
col1a2, fn1, plp1, mmp2, timm50, otc, and dio2, suggesting differential
regulation and susceptibility to contaminant effects. Evidence for the
applicability of the TAXISS anuran qPCR assay across seven other species is also 
provided with five frog families represented and its utility in defining genome
structure was demonstrated. This novel validated approach will enable meaningful 
comparative studies between frog species and aid in extending knowledge of
developmental regulatory pathways and the impact of environmental factors on TH
signaling in frog species for which little or no genetic information is currently
available.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24503578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Apr;138(2):290-9. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu012. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Ioxynil and tetrabromobisphenol A suppress thyroid-hormone-induced activation of 
transcriptional elongation mediated by histone modifications and RNA polymerase
II phosphorylation.

Otsuka S(1), Ishihara A, Yamauchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka
University, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

To elucidate molecular mechanisms by which the phenolic herbicide ioxynil (IOX)
and the brominated flame retardant tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) exert thyroid
hormone (TH) disrupting activity, we investigated the effects of the chemicals on
the histone and RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) modifications in Xenopus laevis
XL58-TRE-Luc cells in direct TH-response genes encoding TH receptor ß (Thrb) and 
TH-induced basic leucine zipper protein (Thibz) using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. For both the thrb and thibz genes,
3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T3) enhanced the amounts of gene transcripts and
increased the amounts of acetylated histone H4 (H4Ac), trimethylated histone H3
lysine 4 (H3K4me3) and phosphorylated RNAPII serine 5 (RNAPIIS5P), epigenetic
markers of gene activation at 5' regulatory regions, and the amounts of
trimethylated histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36me3) and phosphorylated RNAPII serine 2 
(RNAPIIS2P), epigenetic markers of activation of transcriptional elongation at
protein coding regions. Treatment with IOX and TBBPA reduced the amounts of the
thrb transcript and suppressed the T3-induced modifications of H3K4me3,
RNAPIIS5P, H3K36me3, and RNAPIIS2P. In the thibz gene, IOX and TBBPA did not
suppress the T3-induced histone and RNAPII modifications except for H3K36me3 in
the TBBPA treatment, despite both chemicals decreasing the T3-induced
transcription. Our results demonstrate that IOX and TBBPA affect TH-induced
histone and RNAPII modifications, which are involved in early and progressive
stages of RNAPII transcriptional elongation, in direct TH-response genes, in
somewhat target gene-dependent and chemical-specific manners. Both IOX and TBBPA 
are likely to influence epigenetically a cascade of TH receptor-mediated gene
regulation.

PMID: 24449421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Cell Biol. 2014 Jan 6;204(1):129-46. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201305084.

The thyroid hormone receptor ß induces DNA damage and premature senescence.

Zambrano A(1), García-Carpizo V, Gallardo ME, Villamuera R, Gómez-Ferrería MA,
Pascual A, Buisine N, Sachs LM, Garesse R, Aranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28029 Madrid,
Spain.

There is increasing evidence that the thyroid hormone (TH) receptors (THRs) can
play a role in aging, cancer and degenerative diseases. In this paper, we
demonstrate that binding of TH T3 (triiodothyronine) to THRB induces senescence
and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage in cultured cells and in tissues of young 
hyperthyroid mice. T3 induces a rapid activation of ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
mutated)/PRKAA (adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase) signal
transduction and recruitment of the NRF1 (nuclear respiratory factor 1) and THRB 
to the promoters of genes with a key role on mitochondrial respiration. Increased
respiration leads to production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, which
in turn causes oxidative stress and DNA double-strand breaks and triggers a DNA
damage response that ultimately leads to premature senescence of susceptible
cells. Our findings provide a mechanism for integrating metabolic effects of THs 
with the tumor suppressor activity of THRB, the effect of thyroidal status on
longevity, and the occurrence of tissue damage in hyperthyroidism.

PMCID: PMC3882795
PMID: 24395638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Front Mol Biosci. 2014 Sep 2;1:10. doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2014.00010. eCollection
2014.

Differentiated thyroid cancer in patients with resistance to thyroid hormone
syndrome. A novel case and a review of the literature.

Vinagre J(1), Borges F(2), Costa A(3), Alvelos MI(4), Mazeto G(5),
Sobrinho-Simões M(6), Soares P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto
Porto, Portugal ; Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS) Porto,
Portugal. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro
Hospitalar do Porto Porto, Portugal. (3)Department of Surgery 2, Centro
Hospitalar do Porto Porto, Portugal. (4)Institute of Molecular Pathology and
Immunology of the University of Porto Porto, Portugal. (5)Hospital das Clínicas
de Botucatu São Paulo, Brazil. (6)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology
of the University of Porto Porto, Portugal ; Medical Faculty of the University of
Porto Porto, Portugal ; Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar São João
Porto, Portugal. (7)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the
University of Porto Porto, Portugal ; Medical Faculty of the University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) represents a syndrome in which patients
present elevated circulating thyroid hormones in the presence of non-suppressed
TSH. We report a novel case where a patient with RTH presented a differentiated
thyroid cancer. A19 year-old female had been referred due to thyroid disease that
disclosed features characteristic of a RTH. During the follow up it was detected 
a follicular tumor that led to the recommendation for thyroid surgical ablation, 
where an incidental papillary thyroid microcarcinoma (mPTC) was found. The
increase of thyroglobulin (TG) levels following thyroid removal referred the
patient for radioiodine treatment. Post-treatment, it was detected jugular
adenopathies and the patient was subjected to cervical lymph node drainage where 
metastases of the mPTC were found. RTH syndrome was confirmed by the detection of
a THRB germline mutation. A BRAF mutation was also found in the mPTC but not
detected in the follicular adenoma or normal adjacent tissue. The young age of
the patient, the rarity of BRAF mutations in childhood and the high dissemination
of the malignancy, lead us to the speculation that increased TSH stimulation in a
RTH background and oncogenic activation of BRAF could have served as (co) drivers
and might have triggered an advanced stage of the neoplastic disease. These
findings together with a review of published cases add novel information to the
management of RTH patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4429638
PMID: 25988151  [PubMed]


50. Front Genet. 2013 Nov 21;4:251. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00251. eCollection 2013.

Evaluation of the effects of titanium dioxide nanoparticles on cultured Rana
catesbeiana tailfin tissue.

Hammond SA(1), Carew AC, Helbing CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria Victoria, 
BC, Canada.

Nanoparticles (NPs), materials that have one dimension less than 100 nm, are used
in manufacturing, health, and food products, and consumer products including
cosmetics, clothing, and household appliances. Their utility to industry is
derived from their high surface-area-to-volume ratios and physico-chemical
properties distinct from their bulk counterparts, but the near-certainty that NPs
will be released into the environment raises the possibility that they could
present health risks to humans and wildlife. The thyroid hormones (THs),
thyroxine, and 3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T3), are involved in development and
metabolism in vertebrates including humans and frogs. Many of the processes of
anuran metamorphosis are analogous to human post-embryonic development and
disruption of TH action can have drastic effects. These shared features make the 
metamorphosis of anurans an excellent model for screening for endocrine
disrupting chemicals (EDCs). We used the cultured tailfin (C-fin) assay to
examine the exposure effects of 0.1-10 nM (~8-800 ng/L) of three types of ~20 nm 
TiO2 NPs (P25, M212, M262) and micron-sized TiO2 (µ TiO2) ±10 nM T3. The actual
Ti levels were 40.9-64.7% of the nominal value. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (QPCR) was used to measure the relative amounts of mRNA
transcripts encoding TH-responsive THs receptors (thra and thrb) and Rana larval 
keratin type I (rlk1), as well as the cellular stress-responsive heat shock
protein 30 kDa (hsp30), superoxide dismutase (sod), and catalase (cat). The
levels of the TH-responsive transcripts were largely unaffected by any form of
TiO2. Some significant effects on stress-related transcripts were observed upon
exposure to micron-sized TiO2, P25, and M212 while no effect was observed with
M262 exposure. Therefore, the risk of adversely affecting amphibian tissue by
disrupting TH-signaling or inducing cellular stress is low for these compounds
relative to other previously-tested NPs.

PMCID: PMC3836013
PMID: 24312126  [PubMed]


51. Turk J Pediatr. 2013 May-Jun;55(3):322-7.

Thyroid hormone resistance: a novel mutation in thyroid hormone receptor beta
(THRB) gene - case report.

Isik E(1), Beck Peccoz P, Campi I, Özön A, Alikasifoglu A, Gönç N, Kandemir N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe
University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. dremregul@gmail.com.

Thyroid hormone resistance (THR) is a dominantly inherited syndrome characterized
by reduced sensitivity to thyroid hormones. It is usually caused by mutations in 
the thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) gene. In the present report, we describe
the clinical and laboratory characteristics and genetic analysis of patients with
a novel THRB gene mutation. The index patient had been misdiagnosed as
hyperthyroidism and treated with antithyroid drugs since eight days of age.
Thyroid hormone results showed that thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone,
TSH) was never suppressed despite elevated thyroid hormone levels, and there was 
no symptom suggesting hyperthyroidism. A heterozygous mutation at codon 350
located in exon 9 of the THRB gene was detected in all the affected members of
the family. It is important to consider thyroid hormone levels in association
with TSH levels to prevent inappropriate treatment and the potential
complications, such as clinical hypothyroidism or an increase in goiter size.

PMID: 24217081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Dec 3;47(23):13840-7. doi: 10.1021/es403767y. Epub 2013
Nov 15.

Impact of wastewater treatment configuration and seasonal conditions on thyroid
hormone disruption and stress effects in Rana catesbeiana tailfin.

Wojnarowicz P(1), Ogunlaja OO, Xia C, Parker WJ, Helbing CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Microbiology, University of Victoria , P.O. Box
3055, Victoria, British Columbia, V8W 2Y2, Canada.

Improved endocrine disrupting compound (EDC) removal is desirable in municipal
wastewater treatment plants (MWWTPs) although increased removal does not always
translate into reduced biological activity. Suitable methods for determining
reduction in biological activity of effluents are needed. In order to determine
which MWWTPs are the most effective at removing EDC activities, we operated three
configurations of pilot sized biological reactors (conventional activated sludge,
CAS; nitrifying activated sludge, NAS; and biological nutrient removal, BNR)
receiving the same influent under simulated winter and summer conditions. As
frogs are model organisms for the study of thyroid hormone (TH) action, we used
the North American species Rana catesbeiana in a cultured tadpole tailfin (C-fin)
assay to compare the effluents. TH-responsive (thyroid hormone receptors alpha
(thra) and beta (thrb)) and stress-responsive (superoxide dismutase, catalase,
and heat shock protein 30) mRNA transcript levels were examined. Effluents
infrequently perturbed stress-responsive transcript abundance but thra/thrb
levels were significantly altered. In winter conditions, CAS caused frequent TH
perturbations while BNR caused none. In summer conditions, however, BNR caused
substantial TH perturbations while CAS caused few. Our findings contrast other
studies of seasonal variations of EDC removal and accentuate the importance of
utilizing appropriate biological readouts for assessing EDC activities.

PMID: 24180706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 19;8(9):e76034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076034. eCollection
2013.

A TNF variant that associates with susceptibility to musculoskeletal disease
modulates thyroid hormone receptor binding to control promoter activation.

Kiss-Toth E(1), Harlock E, Lath D, Quertermous T, Wilkinson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a powerful pro-inflammatory cytokine and
immuno-regulatory molecule, and modulates susceptibility to musculoskeletal
diseases. Several meta-analyses and replicated association studies have
implicated the minor 'A' variant within the TNF promoter single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) rs361525 (-238A/G) as a risk allele in joint related
disorders, including psoriatic and juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and osteolysis 
after joint arthroplasty. Here we characterized the effect of this variant on TNF
promoter function. A transcriptional reporter, encoding the -238A variant of the 
TNF promoter, resulted in 2.2 to 2.8 times greater transcriptional activation
versus the 'G' variant in murine macrophages when stimulated with
pro-inflammatory stimuli. Bioinformatic analysis predicted a putative binding
site for thyroid hormone receptor (TR) for the -238A but not the -238G allele.
Overexpression of TR-a induced promoter expression 1.8-fold in the presence of
the 'A' allele only. TR-a expression both potentiated and sensitized the -238A
response to LPS or a titanium particulate stimulus, whilst siRNA knockdown of
either THRA or THRB impaired transcriptional activation for the -238A variant
only. This effect was independent of receptor-ligand binding of triiodothyronine.
Immunohistochemical analysis of osteolysis interface membranes from patients
undergoing revision surgery confirmed expression of TR-a within osteoclast nuclei
at the resorption surface. The 'A' allele at rs361525 confers increased
transcriptional activation of the TNF promoter and influences susceptibility to
several arthritic conditions. This effect is modulated, at least in part, by
binding of TR, which both sensitizes and potentiates transcriptional activation
of the 'A' variant independent of its endogenous ligand.

PMCID: PMC3777919
PMID: 24069456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2013 Sep 12;4(3):128-39. eCollection 2013.

Genome-wide and candidate gene association studies of placental abruption.

Workalemahu T(1), Enquobahrie DA, Moore A, Sanchez SE, Ananth CV, Pacora PN,
Liang L, Salazar M, Williams MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Harvard
University Boston, Massachusetts.

Placental abruption (PA), a pregnancy-related vascular disorder, is a leading
cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. The success of
identifying genetic susceptibility loci for PA, a multi-factorial heritable
disorder, has been limited. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS)
and candidate gene association study using 470 PA cases and 473 controls from
Lima, Peru. Genotyping for common genetic variations (single nucleotide
polymorphisms, SNPs) was conducted using the Illumina Cardio-Metabo Chip
platform. Common variations in 35 genes that participate in mitochondrial
biogenesis (MB) and oxidative phosphorylation (OS) were selected for the
candidate gene study. Regression models were fit to examine associations of each 
SNP with risk of PA. In pathway analyses, we examined functions and functional
relationships of genes represented by the top GWAS hits. Genetic risk scores
(GRS), based on top hits of the GWAS and candidate gene analyses, respectively,
were computed using the risk allele counting method. The top hit in the GWAS
analyses was rs1238566 (empirical P-value=1.04e-4 and FDR-adjusted
P-value=5.65E-04) in FLI-1 gene, a megakaryocyte-specific transcription factor.
Networks of genes involved in lipid metabolism and cell signaling were
significantly enriched by the 51 genes whose SNPs were among the top 200 GWAS
hits (P-value <2.1e-3). SNPs known to regulate MB (e.g. CAMK2B, NR1H3, PPARG,
PRKCA, and THRB) and OP (e.g., COX5A, and NDUF family of genes) were associated
with PA risk (P-value <0.05). GRS was significantly associated with PA risk
(trend P-value <0.001 and 0.01 for GWAS and candidate gene based GRS,
respectively). Our study suggests that integrating multiple analytical strategies
in genetic association studies can provide opportunities for identifying genetic 
risk factors and novel molecular mechanisms that underlie PA.

PMCID: PMC3773564
PMID: 24046805  [PubMed]


55. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 1;52(1):1-9. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0145. Print 2014 Feb.

3,5-di-iodothyronine stimulates tilapia growth through an alternate isoform of
thyroid hormone receptor ß1.

Navarrete-Ramírez P(1), Luna M, Valverde-R C, Orozco A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM),
Boulevard Juriquilla 3001, Queretaro 76230, Mexico.

Recent studies in our laboratory have shown that in some teleosts,
3,5-di-iodothyronine (T2 or 3,5-T2) is as bioactive as 3,5,3'-tri-iodothyronine
(T3) and that its effects are in part mediated by a TRß1 (THRB) isoform that
contains a 9-amino acid insert in its ligand-binding domain (long TRß1 (L-TRß1)),
whereas T3 binds preferentially to a short TRß1 (S-TRß1) isoform that lacks this 
insert. To further understand the functional relevance of T2 bioactivity and its 
mechanism of action, we used in vivo and ex vivo (organotypic liver cultures)
approaches and analyzed whether T3 and T2 differentially regulate the S-TRß1 and 
L-TRß1s during a physiological demand such as growth. In vivo, T3 and T2
treatment induced body weight gain in tilapia. The expression of L-TRß1 and
S-TRß1 was specifically regulated by T2 and T3 respectively both in vivo and ex
vivo. The TR antagonist 1-850 effectively blocked thyroid hormone-dependent gene 
expression; however, T3 or T2 reversed 1-850 effects only on S-TRß1 or L-TRß1
expression, respectively. Together, our results support the notion that both T3
and T2 participate in the growth process; however, their effects are mediated by 
different, specific TRß1 isoforms.

PMID: 24031088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 9;219(1):69-78. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0127. Print 2013 Oct.

Triiodothyronine induces lipid oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis in rat
Harderian gland.

Santillo A(1), Burrone L, Falvo S, Senese R, Lanni A, Chieffi Baccari G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali, Biologiche e Farmaceutiche,
Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, via Vivaldi, 43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

The rat Harderian gland (HG) is an orbital gland producing a copious lipid
secretion. Recent studies indicate that its secretory activity is regulated by
thyroid hormones. In this study, we found that both isoforms of the thyroid
hormone receptor (Tra (Thra) and Trß (Thrb)) are expressed in rat HGs. Although
Thra is expressed at a higher level, only Thrb is regulated by triiodothyronine
(T3). Because T3 induces an increase in lipid metabolism in rat HGs, we
investigated the effects of an animal's thyroid state on the expression levels of
carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A (Cpt1a) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1B
(Cpt1b) and acyl-CoA oxidase (Acox1) (rate-limiting enzymes in mitochondrial and 
peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation respectively), as well as on the mitochondrial
compartment, thereby correlating mitochondrial activity and biogenesis with
morphological analysis. We found that hypothyroidism decreased the expression of 
Cpt1b and Acox1 mRNA, whereas the administration of T3 to hypothyroid rats
increased transcript levels. Respiratory parameters and catalase protein levels
provided further evidence that T3 modulates mitochondrial and peroxisomal
activities. Furthermore, in hypothyroid rat HGs, the mitochondrial number and
their total area decreased with respect to the controls, whereas the average area
of the individual mitochondrion did not change. However, the average area of the 
individual mitochondrion was reduced by ~50% in hypothyroid T3-treated HGs, and
the mitochondrial number and the total area of the mitochondrial compartment
increased. The mitochondrial morphometric data correlated well with the molecular
results. Indeed, hypothyroid status did not modify the expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis genes such as Ppargc1a, Nrf1 and Tfam, whereas T3
treatment increased the expression level of these genes.

PMID: 23873539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Cell. 2013 Jul 15;26(1):59-72. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.06.005.

Otx2 and Onecut1 promote the fates of cone photoreceptors and horizontal cells
and repress rod photoreceptors.

Emerson MM(1), Surzenko N, Goetz JJ, Trimarchi J, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics and Ophthalmology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cone photoreceptors carry out phototransduction in daylight conditions and
provide the critical first step in color vision. Despite their importance, little
is known about the developmental mechanisms involved in their generation,
particularly how they are determined relative to rod photoreceptors, the cells
that initiate vision in dim light. Here, we report the identification of a
cis-regulatory module (CRM) for the thyroid hormone receptor beta (Thrb) gene, an
early cone marker. We found that ThrbCRM1 is active in progenitor cells biased to
the production of cones and an interneuronal cell type, the horizontal cell (HC).
Molecular analysis of ThrbCRM1 revealed that it is combinatorially regulated by
the Otx2 and Onecut1 transcription factors. Onecut1 is sufficient to induce cells
with the earliest markers of cones and HCs. Conversely, interference with Onecut1
transcriptional activity leads to precocious rod development, suggesting that
Onecut1 is critically important in defining cone versus rod fates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3819454
PMID: 23867227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 20;3(3):302-11. Print 2013.

Inhibition of estrogen-dependent tumorigenesis by the thyroid hormone receptor ß 
in xenograft models.

Park JW(1), Zhao L, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute Bethesda, MD, USA.

Association studies suggest that thyroid hormone receptor ß (TRß) could function 
as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer development, but unequivocal evidence is
still lacking. To understand the role of TRß in breast tumor development, we
adopted the gain-of-function approach by stably expressing the THRB gene in a
human breast cancer cell line, MCF-7 (MCF-7-TRß). Parental MCF-7 cells express
the estrogen receptor, but not TRs. MCF-7 cells, stably expressing only the
selectable marker, the Neo gene, were also generated as control for comparison
(MCF-7-Neo cells). Cell-based studies indicate that the estrogen (E2)-dependent
growth of MCF-7 cells was inhibited by the expression of TRß in the presence of
the thyroid hormone (T3). In a xenograft mouse model, large tumors rapidly
developed after inoculation of MCF-7-Neo cells in athymic mice. In contrast,
markedly smaller tumors (98% smaller) were found when MCF-7-TRß cells were
inoculated in athymic mice, indicating that TRß inhibited the E2-dependent tumor 
growth of MCF-7 cells. Further detailed molecular analysis showed that TRß acted 
to activate apoptosis and decrease proliferation of tumor cells, resulting in
inhibition of tumor growth. The TRß-mediated inhibition of tumor growth was
elucidated via down-regulation of the JAK-STAT-cyclin D pathways. This in vivo
evidence shows that TRß could act as a tumor suppressor in breast tumorigenesis. 
The present study provides new insights into the role of TR in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3696536
PMID: 23841029  [PubMed]


59. Thyroid. 2014 Feb;24(2):296-304. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0118. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Three-dimensional telomere dynamics in follicular thyroid cancer.

Wark L(1), Danescu A, Natarajan S, Zhu X, Cheng SY, Hombach-Klonisch S, Mai S,
Klonisch T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Human Anatomy & Cell Science, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Manitoba , Winnipeg, Canada .

BACKGROUND: Over the last decade, annual incidence rates for thyroid cancer have 
been among the highest of all cancers in the Western world. However, the genomic 
mechanisms impacting thyroid carcinogenesis remain elusive.
METHODS: We employed an established mouse model of follicular thyroid cancer
(FTC) with a homozygous proline to valine mutation (Thrb(PV/PV)) in the thyroid
receptor ß1 (TRß1) and applied quantitative three-dimensional (3D) telomere
analysis to determine 3D telomeric profiles in Thrb(PV)(/PV), Thrb(PV/)(+), and
Thrb(+/+) mouse thyrocytes before and after histological presentation of FTC.
RESULTS: Using quantitative fluorescent in situ hybridization (Q-FISH) and
TeloView image analysis, we found altered telomeric signatures specifically in
mutant mouse thyrocytes. As early as 1 month of age, Thrb(PV/PV) mouse thyrocytes
showed more telomeres than normal and heterozygous age-matched counterparts.
Importantly, at the very early age of 1 month, 3D telomeric profiles of
Thrb(PV/PV) thyrocyte nuclei reveal genetic heterogeneity with several nuclei
populations exhibiting different telomere numbers, suggestive of various degrees 
of aneuploidy within the same animal. This was detected exclusively in
Thrb(PV/PV) mice well before the presentation of histological signs of thyroid
carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified quantitative 3D telomere analysis as a novel tool for 
early detection and monitoring of thyrocyte chromosomal (in)stability. This
technique has the potential to identify human patients at risk for developing
thyroid carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3926167
PMID: 23819464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Thyroid. 2013 Dec;23(12):1638-43. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0174. Epub 2013 Sep 13.

Incidental identification of a thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) gene variant 
in a family with autoimmune thyroid disease.

Larsen CC(1), Dumitrescu A, Guerra-Argüero LM, Gállego-Suárez C, Vazquez-Mellado 
A, Vinogradova M, Fletterick R, Refetoff S, Weiss RE.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago , Chicago, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is a rare condition usually
diagnosed in patients with classic thyroid function tests (TFTs) of elevated
thyroid hormone levels with nonsuppressed TSH. The presence of autoimmune thyroid
disease (AITD) can confound the clinical diagnosis of RTH. A family was evaluated
because several members had elevated TSH and normal or low serum T4
concentrations with AITD. While these individuals were initially reported to have
RTH, they were found to have a normal thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) gene
sequence, and three other asymptomatic family members were found to harbor the
variant TRß G339S.
METHODS: The THRB gene was sequenced in 19 members of a large Mexican/Aztec
family. In vitro expression of the mutant TRß protein was performed, as well as
computer modeling of the variant compared to known mutations in the flanking
codons.
RESULTS: Investigation of an individual with AITD who was incorrectly diagnosed
with RTH led to the fortuitous discovery of a THRB gene variant (G339S) in the
proposita's father, paternal aunt, and cousin. This variant was not detected in
analysis of 124 unrelated alleles. All individuals harboring G339S had normal
TFTs. Normal in vitro expression and function of G339S and molecular modeling
predicted that this variant would not have an effect on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis as determined by thyroid hormone binding in
vitro and thyroid function tests in vivo, despite profound effects seen in
mutations in the adjacent codons 338 and 340.
CONCLUSION: We report an individual with normal TFTs and AITD harboring a novel
THRB gene variant. In addition to illustrating the importance of accurate
diagnosis of thyroid disease so that proper treatment and counseling can be
given, TRß codon 339 is not essential for normal TRß function.

PMCID: PMC3868256
PMID: 23806029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Endocr Connect. 2012 Oct 10;1(2):68-77. doi: 10.1530/EC-12-0017. Print 2012 Nov
1.

Common genetic variants in pituitary-thyroid axis genes and the risk of
differentiated thyroid cancer.

Pastor S(1), Akdi A, González ER, Castell J, Biarnés J, Marcos R, Velázquez A.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Mutagènesi, Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de
Biociències Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès
Barcelona Spain ; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública, ISCIII Barcelona Spain.

Thyroid hormone receptors, THRA and THRB, together with the TSH receptor, TSHR,
are key regulators of thyroid function. Alterations in the genes of these
receptors (THRA, THRB and TSHR) have been related to thyroid diseases, including 
thyroid cancer. Moreover, there is evidence suggesting that predisposition to
differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) is related to common genetic variants with
low penetrance that interact with each other and with environmental factors. In
this study, we investigated the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the THRA (one SNP), THRB (three SNPs) and TSHR (two SNPs) genes with
DTC risk. A case-control association study was conducted with 398 patients with
sporadic DTC and 479 healthy controls from a Spanish population. Among the
polymorphisms studied, only THRA-rs939348 was found to be associated with an
increased risk of DTC (recessive model, odds ratio=1.80, 95% confidence
interval=1.03-3.14, P=0.037). Gene-gene interaction analysis using the genotype
data of this study together with our previous genotype data on TG and TRHR
indicated a combined effect of the pairwises: THRB-TG (P interaction=0.014,
THRB-rs3752874 with TG-rs2076740; P interaction=0.099, THRB-rs844107 with
TG-rs2076740) and THRB-TRHR (P interaction=0.0024, THRB-rs3752874 with
TRHR-rs4129682) for DTC risk in a Spanish population. Our results confirm that
THRA is a risk factor for DTC, and we show for the first time the combined effect
of THRB and TG or TRHR on DTC susceptibility, supporting the importance of
gene-gene interaction in thyroid cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3682231
PMID: 23781307  [PubMed]


62. Endocrinology. 2013 Aug;154(8):2936-47. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1128. Epub 2013 Jun 
7.

Diet-induced obesity increases tumor growth and promotes anaplastic change in
thyroid cancer in a mouse model.

Kim WG(1), Park JW, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2013 Aug;154(8):2567-9.

Recent epidemiological studies provide strong evidence suggesting obesity is a
risk factor in several cancers, including thyroid cancer. However, the molecular 
mechanisms by which obesity increases the risk of thyroid cancer are poorly
understood. In this study, we evaluated the effect of diet-induced obesity on
thyroid carcinogenesis in a mouse model that spontaneously develops thyroid
cancer (Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice). These mice harbor a mutated thyroid hormone
receptor-ß (denoted as PV) and haplodeficiency of the Pten gene. A high-fat diet 
(HFD) efficiently induced the obese phenotype in Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice after 
15 weeks. Thyroid tumor growth was markedly greater and survival was
significantly lower in Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice fed an HFD than in controls fed 
a low-fat diet (LFD). The HFD increased thyroid tumor cell proliferation by
increasing the protein levels of cyclin D1 and phosphorylated retinoblastoma
protein to propel cell cycle progression. Histopathological analysis showed that 
the frequency of anaplasia of thyroid cancer was significantly greater (2.6-fold)
in the HFD group than the LFD group. The HFD treatment led to an increase in
parametrial/epididymal fat pad and elevated serum leptin levels in
Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice. Further molecular analyses indicated that the HFD
induced more aggressive pathological changes that were mediated by increased
activation of the Janus kinase 2-signaling transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway and induction of STAT3 target gene
expression. Our findings demonstrate that diet-induced obesity exacerbates
thyroid cancer progression in Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice and suggest that the
STAT3 signaling pathway could be tested as a potential target for the treatment
of thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3713208
PMID: 23748362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Thyroid. 2014 Feb;24(2):260-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0054. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Inhibition of tumorigenesis by the thyroid hormone receptor ß in xenograft
models.

Kim WG(1), Zhao L, Kim DW, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies showed a close association between several types of 
human cancers and somatic mutations of thyroid hormone receptor ß (TRß) and
reduced expression of TRß due to epigenetic inactivation and/or deletion of the
THRB gene. These observations suggest that TRß could act as a tumor suppressor in
carcinogenesis. However, the mechanisms by which TRß could function to inhibit
tumorigenesis are less well understood.
METHODS: We used the human follicular thyroid cancer cell lines (FTC-133 and
FTC-236 cells) to elucidate how functional expression of the THRB gene could
affect tumorigenesis. We stably expressed the THRB gene in FTC cells and
evaluated the effects of the expressed TRß on cancer cell proliferation,
migration, and tumor growth in cell-based studies and xenograft models.
RESULTS: Expression of TRß in FTC-133 cells, as compared with control FTC cells
without TRß, reduced cancer cell proliferation and impeded migration of tumor
cells through inhibition of the AKT-mTOR-p70 S6K pathway. TRß expression in
FTC-133 and FTC-236 led to less tumor growth in xenograft models. Importantly,
new vessel formation was significantly suppressed in tumors induced by FTC cells 
expressing TRß compared with control FTC cells without TRß. The decrease in
vessel formation was mediated by the downregulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor in FTC cells expressing TRß.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that TRß acts as a tumor suppressor through 
downregulation of the AKT-mTOR-p70 S6K pathway and decreased vascular endothelial
growth factor expression in FTC cells. The present results raise the possibility 
that TRß could be considered as a potential therapeutic target for thyroid
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3926148
PMID: 23731250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Oct;34(10):2389-400. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt175. Epub 2013
May 22.

Complex temporal changes in TGFß oncogenic signaling drive thyroid carcinogenesis
in a mouse model.

Kim DW(1), Walker RL, Meltzer PS, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Molecular Biology and.

Despite recent advances, understanding of molecular genetic alterations
underlying thyroid carcinogenesis remains unclear. One key question is how
dynamic temporal changes in global genomic expression affect carcinogenesis as
the disease progresses. To address this question, we used a mouse model that
spontaneously develops follicular thyroid cancer similar to human cancer (Thrb
(PV/PV) mice). Using complementary DNA microarrays, we compared global gene
expression profiles of thyroid tumors of Thrb (PV/PV) mice with the age- and
gender-matched thyroids of wild-type mice at 3 weeks and at 2, 4, 6 and 14
months. These time points covered the pathological progression from early
hyperplasia to capsular invasion, vascular invasion and eventual metastasis.
Microarray data indicated that 462 genes were upregulated (Up-cluster genes) and 
110 genes were downregulated (Down-cluster genes). Three major expression
patterns (trending up, cyclical and spiking up and then down) and two (trending
down and cyclical) were apparent in the Up-cluster and Down-cluster genes,
respectively. Functional clustering of tumor-related genes followed by Ingenuity 
Pathways Analysis identified the transforming growth factor ß (TGF ß)-mediated
network as key signaling pathways. Further functional analyses showed sustained
activation of TGFß receptor-pSMAD2/3 signaling, leading to decreased expression
of E-cadherin and increased expression of fibronectin, vimentin, collagens and
laminins. These TGFß-induced changes facilitated epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, which promotes cancer invasion and migration. Thus, complex temporal 
changes in gene expression patterns drive thyroid cancer progression, and
persistent activation of TGFß-TGFRßII-pSMAD2/3 signaling leads to EMT, thus
promoting metastasis. This study provides new understanding of progression and
metastatic spread of human thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3786374
PMID: 23698635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jun;98(6):E1148-51. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1413. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Coexistence of THRB and TBG gene mutations in a Turkish family.

Ferrara AM(1), Cakir M, Henry PH, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Resistance to thyroid hormone is a syndrome characterized by high
serum free T4 levels and unsuppressed serum TSH concentration. Thyroxine-binding 
globulin complete deficiency manifests with low serum total T4 and T3 levels and 
normal serum TSH concentration. Our objective is to describe a family with the
coexistence of resistance to thyroid hormone and thyroxine-binding globulin
complete deficiency.
METHODS: We conducted clinical studies and genetic analyses.
RESULTS: The proband presented with mental retardation, hearing loss, and
recurrent upper respiratory tract infections accompanied by high serum levels of 
TSH, T3, T4, and high thyroglobulin antibody titers. His elder sister presented
with normal TSH and T3 and high serum T4 levels. Both patients were found to be
heterozygous for the mutation P453A in the thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB)
gene. One of the proband's brothers had low serum total T3 and T4 and normal TSH 
concentrations, without any clinical manifestations. He was hemizygous for the
mutation P50fs51X in the TBG gene. The proband's mother showed slightly elevated 
TSH, normal total T3 and T4, and elevated titers of thyroperoxidase antibodies
and thyroglobulin antibodies. She was heterozygous for both THRB and TBG genes
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of the coexistence of
THRB and TBG gene mutations in the same individual (mother of the proband),
whereas other affected family members had only 1 of the 2 genes mutated. The case
illustrates the difficulty that might be encountered in the interpretation of
thyroid function tests when different genetic defects affecting thyroid function 
coexist.

PMCID: PMC3667268
PMID: 23633200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61253. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061253. Print 2013.

Genetic variants associated with increased risk of malignant pleural
mesothelioma: a genome-wide association study.

Matullo G(1), Guarrera S, Betti M, Fiorito G, Ferrante D, Voglino F, Cadby G, Di 
Gaetano C, Rosa F, Russo A, Hirvonen A, Casalone E, Tunesi S, Padoan M, Giordano 
M, Aspesi A, Casadio C, Ardissone F, Ruffini E, Betta PG, Libener R, Guaschino R,
Piccolini E, Neri M, Musk AW, de Klerk NH, Hui J, Beilby J, James AL, Creaney J, 
Robinson BW, Mukherjee S, Palmer LJ, Mirabelli D, Ugolini D, Bonassi S, Magnani
C, Dianzani I.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Foundation, HuGeF, Turin, Italy. giuseppe.matullo@unito.it

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130109.

Asbestos exposure is the main risk factor for malignant pleural mesothelioma
(MPM), a rare aggressive tumor. Nevertheless, only 5-17% of those exposed to
asbestos develop MPM, suggesting the involvement of other environmental and
genetic risk factors. To identify the genetic risk factors that may contribute to
the development of MPM, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS;
370,000 genotyped SNPs, 5 million imputed SNPs) in Italy, among 407 MPM cases and
389 controls with a complete history of asbestos exposure. A replication study
was also undertaken and included 428 MPM cases and 1269 controls from Australia. 
Although no single marker reached the genome-wide significance threshold, several
associations were supported by haplotype-, chromosomal region-, gene- and
gene-ontology process-based analyses. Most of these SNPs were located in regions 
reported to harbor aberrant alterations in mesothelioma (SLC7A14, THRB, CEBP350, 
ADAMTS2, ETV1, PVT1 and MMP14 genes), causing at most a 2-3-fold increase in MPM 
risk. The Australian replication study showed significant associations in five of
these chromosomal regions (3q26.2, 4q32.1, 7p22.2, 14q11.2, 15q14). Multivariate 
analysis suggested an independent contribution of 10 genetic variants, with an
Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) of 0.76 when only exposure and covariates were
included in the model, and of 0.86 when the genetic component was also included, 
with a substantial increase of asbestos exposure risk estimation (odds ratio, OR:
45.28, 95% confidence interval, CI: 21.52-95.28). These results showed that
genetic risk factors may play an additional role in the development of MPM, and
that these should be taken into account to better estimate individual MPM risk in
individuals who have been exposed to asbestos.

PMCID: PMC3634031
PMID: 23626673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jul;1830(7):4004-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.03.018.
Epub 2013 Mar 23.

Resistance to thyroid hormone mediated by defective thyroid hormone receptor
alpha.

Schoenmakers N(1), Moran C, Peeters RP, Visser T, Gurnell M, Chatterjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone acts via receptor subtypes (TRa1, TRß1, TRß2) with
differing tissue distributions, encoded by distinct genes (THRA, THRB). THRB
mutations cause a disorder with central (hypothalamic-pituitary) resistance to
thyroid hormone action with markedly elevated thyroid hormone and normal TSH
levels.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: This review describes the clinical features, genetic and
molecular pathogenesis of a homologous human disorder mediated by defective THRA.
Clinical features include growth retardation, skeletal dysplasia and constipation
associated with low-normal T4 and high-normal T3 levels and a low T4/T3 ratio,
together with subnormal reverse T3 levels. Heterozygous TRa1 mutations in
affected individuals generate defective mutant receptors which inhibit wild-type 
receptor action in a dominant negative manner.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in human TRa1 mediate RTH with features of
hypothyroidism in particular tissues (e.g. skeleton, gastrointestinal tract), but
are not associated with a markedly dysregulated pituitary-thyroid axis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Human THRA mutations could be more common but may have
eluded discovery due to the absence of overt thyroid dysfunction. Nevertheless,
in the appropriate clinical context, a thyroid biochemical signature (low T4/T3
ratio, subnormal reverse T3 levels), may enable future identification of cases.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23528896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2013;103:259-76. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385979-2.00009-5.

Metamorphosis in a frog that does not have a tadpole.

Elinson RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA. elinson@duq.edu

The evolutionary removal of the tadpole from the frog life history is a very
successful strategy, particularly in the tropics. These direct developers form
limbs and a frog-like head early in embryogenesis, and they have reduced or lost 
tadpole-specific structures, like gills, a long, coiled intestine, and tadpole
teeth and jaws. Despite the apparently continuous development to the frog
morphology, the direct developer, Eleutherodactylus coqui, undergoes a cryptic
metamorphosis requiring thyroid hormone. As in Xenopus laevis, there is a
stimulation by corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF) and an upregulation of
thyroid hormone receptor ß (thrb). In addition to changes in skin and muscle,
thyroid hormone stimulates yolk utilization for froglet growth from a novel
tissue, the nutritional endoderm. The activities of CRF and corticosterone (CORT)
in metamorphosis may provide the basis for the multiple evolutionary origins of
direct development in anuran amphibians. Potential roles for maternally supplied 
thyroid hormone and its receptor and for deiodinases in regulating tissue
sensitivity to thyroid hormone should be the subjects of future investigations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23347522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar 18;50(2):255-66. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0188. Print 2013 
Apr.

Septic shock non-thyroidal illness syndrome causes hypothyroidism and conditions 
for reduced sensitivity to thyroid hormone.

Castro I(1), Quisenberry L, Calvo RM, Obregon MJ, Lado-Abeal J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center School of Medicine, Lubbock, Texas 79430-9410, 
USA.

Non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) is part of the neuroendocrine response to
stress, but the significance of this syndrome remains uncertain. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NTIS on
thyroid hormone (TH) levels and TH molecular targets, as well as the relationship
between septic shock nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF-kB) activation and TH receptor ß (THRB) gene expression at a
multi-tissue level in a pig model. Prepubertal domestic pigs were given i.v.
saline or LPS for 48<U+200A>h. Serum and tissue TH was measured by chemiluminescence and
RIA. Expression of THRs and cofactors was measured by real-time PCR, and
deiodinase (DIO) activity was measured by enzyme assays. Tissue NF-kB nuclear
binding activity was evaluated by EMSA. LPS-treated pigs had decreased TH levels 
in serum and most tissues. DIO1 expression in liver and kidney and DIO1 activity 
in kidney decreased after LPS. No changes in DIO2 activity were observed between 
groups. LPS induced an increase in hypothalamus, thyroid, and liver DIO3
activity. Among the other studied genes, monocarboxylate transporter 8 and THRB
were the most commonly repressed in endotoxemic pigs. LPS-induced NF-kB
activation was associated with a decrease in THRB gene expression only in frontal
lobe, adrenal gland, and kidney cortex. We conclude that LPS-induced NTIS in pigs
is characterized by hypothyroidism and tissue-specific reduced TH sensitivity.
The role of NF-kB in regulating THRB expression during endotoxemia, if any, is
restricted to a limited number of tissues.

PMID: 23296981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 25;216(3):389-402. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0389. Print 2013
Mar.

Prenatal undernutrition and postnatal overnutrition alter thyroid hormone axis
function in sheep.

Johnsen L(1), Kongsted AH, Nielsen MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Groennegaardsvej 7, DK-1870
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Mounting evidence led us to hypothesize that i) function of the thyroid hormone
(TH) axis can be programed by late gestation undernutrition (LG-UN) and ii)
early-postnatal-life overnutrition (EL-ON) exacerbates the fetal impacts on TH
axis function. In a 2 × 2 factorial experiment, 21 twin-bearing sheep were fed
one of two diets during late gestation: NORM (fulfilling energy and protein
requirements) or LOW (50% of NORM). From day 3 to 6 months after birth (around
puberty), the twin lambs were assigned to each their diet: conventional (CONV) or
high-carbohydrate, high-fat, where after half the lambs were killed. Remaining
sheep (exclusively females) were fed the same moderate diet until 2 years of age 
(young adults). At 6 months and 2 years of age, fasting challenges were conducted
and target tissues were collected at autopsy. LG-UN caused adult hyperthyroidism 
associated with increased thyroid expression of genes regulating TH synthesis and
deiodination. In one or more of the target tissues, liver, cardiac muscle, and
longissimus dorsi muscle, gene expressions were increased by LG-UN for TH
receptors (THRA and THRB) and deiodinases but were decreased in visceral and
subcutaneous adipose tissues. EL-ON increased TH levels in adolescent lambs, but 
this was reversed after diet correction and not evident in adulthood. We conclude
that LG-UN programed TH axis function at the secretory level and differentially
in target tissues, which was increasingly manifested with age. Differential TH
signaling in adipose vs other tissues may be part of a mechanism whereby fetal
malnutrition can predispose for obesity and other metabolic disorders.

PMID: 23287634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Endocrinol Diabetes Metab Case Rep. 2013;2013:130032. doi: 10.1530/EDM-13-0032.
Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Multiple Hürthle cell adenomas in a patient with thyroid hormone resistance.

Xifra G(1), Mauri S(1), Gironès J(2), Rodríguez Hermosa JI(2), Oriola J(3),
Ricart W(1), Fernández-Real JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition Hospital Dr Josep Trueta
Girona Spain. (2)Department of Surgery Hospital Dr Josep Trueta Girona Spain.
(3)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department CDB Hospital Clinic Barcelona
Spain. (4)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition Hospital Dr Josep
Trueta Girona Spain ; CIBERobn, patophysiology of obesity and nutrition Spain.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone resistance (RTH) is a rare cause of thyroid
dysfunction. High TSH levels, as described in RTH syndrome, are known to be
associated with an increased risk of developing thyroid nodules with subsequent
growth and malignancy.
PATIENT FINDINGS: In 2006, a 29-year-old Caucasian man presented with a palpable 
mass in the neck. Increased free thyroxine and triiodothyronine levels were found
in the context of unsuppressed TSH levels, despite no signs or symptoms of
hyperthyroidism. Ultrasonography revealed a multinodular and enlarged goitre, and
fine-needle aspiration cytology revealed suspicious features of malignancy. After
excluding pituitary tumour and levothyroxine (l-T4) treatment, the patient was
diagnosed with generalized RTH. Screening for all the known mutations in thyroid 
hormone receptor-ß (TR ß (THRB)) was negative. Thyroidectomy disclosed five
Hürthle adenomas and three hyperplasic nodules. Euthyroidism was achieved after
surgery with 6.1<U+200A>µg/kg per day of l-T4.
CONCLUSION: RTH may be a risk factor that predisposes to the development of
multiple Hürthle cell adenomas. To our knowledge, this is the first case of
multiple Hürthle cell adenomas in a patient with RTH.
LEARNING POINTS: High TSH levels, as described in RTH syndrome, are known to be
associated with an increased risk of developing thyroid nodules, with subsequent 
growth and malignancy.The exact role of TR ß mutants in thyroid carcinogenesis is
still undefined.We report the first case of multiple Hürthle cell adenomas
associated with RTH.

PMCID: PMC3965282
PMID: 24683474  [PubMed]


72. Minerva Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;37(4):291-304.

Thyroid hormone receptors in health and disease.

Boelen A(1), Kwakkel J, Fliers E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. a.boelen@amc.uva.nl

Thyroid hormones (TH) play a key role in energy homeostasis throughout life.
Thyroid hormone production and secretion by the thyroid gland is regulated via
the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid (HPT)-axis. Thyroid hormone has to be
transported into the cell, where it can bind to the thyroid hormone receptor (TR)
in the nucleus to exert its effect on cellular gene-transcription. Mutations in
both the THRA and THRB gene have been described, each inducing a characteristic
phenotype clearly showing the selective effect of an excess or shortage of
thyroid hormone in specific TRa and TRß regulated organs. Profound changes in
thyroid hormone metabolism occur during a variety of non-thyroidal illnesses,
each associated with reduced TR expression in a tissue-specific manner. However, 
thyroid hormone action at the tissue level during illness is not a simple
reflection of the extent of TR expression as illness has additional differential 
effects on local thyroid hormone availability in various organs.

PMID: 23235186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Oct 18;13(10):13352-77. doi: 10.3390/ijms131013352.

NotI microarrays: novel epigenetic markers for early detection and prognosis of
high grade serous ovarian cancer.

Kashuba V(1), Dmitriev AA, Krasnov GS, Pavlova T, Ignatjev I, Gordiyuk VV,
Gerashchenko AV, Braga EA, Yenamandra SP, Lerman M, Senchenko VN, Zabarovsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm SE-171 77, Sweden. eugene.zabarovsky@ki.se.

Chromosome 3-specific NotI microarray (NMA) containing 180 clones with 188 genes 
was used in the study to analyze 18 high grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC)
samples and 7 benign ovarian tumors. We aimed to find novel methylation-dependent
biomarkers for early detection and prognosis of HGSOC. Thirty five NotI markers
showed frequency of methylation/deletion more or equal to 17%. To check the
results of NMA hybridizations several samples for four genes (LRRC3B, THRB, ITGA9
and RBSP3 (CTDSPL)) were bisulfite sequenced and confirmed the results of NMA
hybridization. A set of eight biomarkers: NKIRAS1/RPL15, THRB, RBPS3 (CTDSPL),
IQSEC1, NBEAL2, ZIC4, LOC285205 and FOXP1, was identified as the most prominent
set capable to detect both early and late stages of ovarian cancer. Sensitivity
of this set is equal to (72 ± 11)% and specificity (94 ± 5)%. Early stages
represented the most complicated cases for detection. To distinguish between
Stages I + II and Stages III + IV of ovarian cancer the most perspective set of
biomarkers would include LOC285205, CGGBP1, EPHB1 and NKIRAS1/RPL15. The
sensitivity of the set is equal to (80 ± 13)% and the specificity is (88 ± 12)%. 
Using this technique we plan to validate this panel with new epithelial ovarian
cancer samples and add markers from other chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC3497331
PMID: 23202957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Endocrinology. 2013 Jan;154(1):25-35. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1728. Epub 2012 Nov
26.

Reactivation of the silenced thyroid hormone receptor ß gene expression delays
thyroid tumor progression.

Kim WG(1), Zhu X, Kim DW, Zhang L, Kebebew E, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 37 Convent Drive, 
Room 5128, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

That a knock-in mouse harboring a dominant-negative thyroid hormone receptor
(TR)-ß (Thrb) mutation develops metastatic thyroid cancer strongly suggests the
involvement of TRß in carcinogenesis. Epigenetic silencing of the THRB gene is
common in human cancers. The aim of the present study was to determine how DNA
methylation affected the expression of the THRB gene in differentiated thyroid
cancer (DTC) and how reexpression of the THRB gene attenuated the cancer
phenotypes. We used methylation-specific PCR to examine the expression and
promoter methylation of the THRB gene in DTC tissues. Thyroid cancer cells with
hypermethylated THRB were treated with the demethylating agents
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5'-aza-CdR) and zebularine to evaluate their impact on
the cancer cell phenotypes. THRB mRNA expression in DTC was 90% lower than in
normal controls, and this decrease was associated with a higher tumor/lymph node 
staging. The promoter methylation level of the THRB gene had a significant
negative correlation with the expression level of the THRB gene. Treatment of
FTC-236 cells with 5'-aza-CdR or zebularine induced reexpression of the THRB gene
and inhibited cell proliferation and migration. FTC-236 cells stably expressing
TRß exhibited lower cell proliferation and migration through inhibition of
ß-catenin signaling pathways compared with FTC-236 without TRß. 5'-Aza-CdR also
led to suppression of tumor growth in an in vivo xenograft model using FTC-236
cells consistent with the cell-based studies. These finding indicate that TRß is 
a tumor suppressor and could be tested as a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3529371
PMID: 23183175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Med Sci. 2012;9(9):748-56. doi: 10.7150/ijms.5081. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

THRB genetic polymorphisms can predict severe myelotoxicity after definitive
chemoradiotherapy in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Miki I(1), Nakamura T, Kuwahara A, Yamamori M, Nishiguchi K, Tamura T, Okuno T,
Omatsu H, Mizuno S, Hirai M, Azuma T, Sakaeda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kobe, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Chemotherapy-related toxicities are difficult to predict before
treatment. In this study, we investigated whether thyroid hormone receptor beta
(THRB) genetic polymorphisms can serve as a potential biomarker in patients with 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: Forty-nine Japanese patients with ESCC who received a definitive
chemoradiotherapy (CRT) with 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin in conjunction with
concurrent irradiation were retrospectively analyzed. Severe acute toxicities,
including leukopenia, stomatitis, and cheilitis, were evaluated according to 6
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene; the intronic SNPs of
rs7635707 G/T, rs6787255 A/C, rs9812034 G/T, and rs9310738 C/T and the SNPs in
the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of rs844107 C/T and rs1349265 G/A.
RESULTS: Distribution of the 4 intronic SNPs, but not the 2 SNPs in the 3'-UTR,
showed a significant difference between patients with and without severe acute
leukopenia. Stomatitis and cheilitis were not associated with any of the 6
analyzed SNPs. Frequency of haplotype of the 4 intronic SNPs reached
approximately 97% with the 2 major haplotypes G-A-G-C (73.4%) and T-C-T-T
(23.5%).
CONCLUSIONS: THRB intronic SNPs can provide useful information on CRT-related
severe myelotoxicity in patients with ESCC. Future studies will be needed to
confirm these findings.

PMCID: PMC3491433
PMID: 23136537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Thyroid. 2013 Apr;23(4):506-10. doi: 10.1089/thy.2012.0080. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

The first case of association between postpartum thyroiditis and thyroid hormone 
resistance in an Italian patient showing a novel p.V283A THRB mutation.

Paragliola RM(1), Concolino P, De Rosa A, Mello E, Zuppi C, Pontecorvi A,
Capoluongo E, Corsello SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Catholic University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Postpartum thyroiditis (PPT) is characterized by the development of
postpartum thyroid dysfunction, which may occur up to 12 months after delivery.
The syndrome usually presents with transient thyrotoxicosis, followed by
transient hypothyroidism. The association of this condition with resistance to
thyroid hormones (RTH) has never been described.
PATIENT FINDINGS: In this report, we describe a 30-year-old patient affected by
RTH due to a novel p.V283A thyroid hormone receptor-ß (THRB) heterozygous
mutation in exon 8, which affects the ligand-binding domain, never before
described in literature. A simple polymorphism was excluded through screening of 
100 healthy controls.
SUMMARY: The patient became pregnant twice (in 2008 and in 2009) and developed
PPT after both deliveries. Two months after her first pregnancy and one month
after her second pregnancy, she presented with severe endogenous thyrotoxicosis
and concomitant suppressed thyrotropin (TSH) levels, which represents an unusual 
finding in patients affected by RTH. Other causes of hyperthyroidism were
excluded. After the hyperthyroid phase, she became hypothyroid (TSH >75 mU/L and 
low free-thyroxine and free-tri-iodothyronine levels), and eventually returned to
her usual euthyroid status. During the course of PPT, no specific treatment was
required, except for ß-blockers used to treat tachycardia during the hyperthyroid
phase.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a unique case of a woman affected by RTH, due to a novel
mutation V283A in THRB, who experienced PPT with a severe thyrotoxic phase after 
both her pregnancies. The association between RTH and PPT has never been reported
in the literature. In particular, the marked suppression of TSH occurring when
levels of TH are particularly elevated is not a frequent condition during RTH.

PMID: 23134553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;26(12):2071-80. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1214. Epub 2012 Sep
26.

Maternal high-fat diet modulates the fetal thyroid axis and thyroid gene
expression in a nonhuman primate model.

Suter MA(1), Sangi-Haghpeykar H, Showalter L, Shope C, Hu M, Brown K, Williams S,
Harris RA, Grove KL, Lane RH, Aagaard KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Thyroid hormone (TH) is an essential regulator of both fetal development and
energy homeostasis. Although the association between subclinical hypothyroidism
and obesity has been well studied, a causal relationship has yet to be
established. Using our well-characterized nonhuman primate model of excess
nutrition, we sought to investigate whether maternal high-fat diet (HFD)-induced 
changes in TH homeostasis may underlie later in life development of metabolic
disorders and obesity. Here, we show that in utero exposure to a maternal HFD is 
associated with alterations of the fetal thyroid axis. At the beginning of the
third trimester, fetal free T(4) levels are significantly decreased with HFD
exposure compared with those of control diet-exposed offspring. Furthermore,
transcription of the deiodinase, iodothyronine (DIO) genes, which help maintain
thyroid homeostasis, are significantly (P < 0.05) disrupted in the fetal liver,
thyroid, and hypothalamus. Genes involved in TH production are decreased (TRH,
TSHR, TG, TPO, and SLC5A5) in hypothalamus and thyroid gland. In experiments
designed to investigate the molecular underpinnings of these observations, we
observe that the TH nuclear receptors and their downstream regulators are
disrupted with maternal HFD exposure. In fetal liver, the expression of TH
receptor ß (THRB) is increased 1.9-fold (P = 0.012). Thorough analysis of the
THRB promoter reveals a maternal diet-induced alteration in the fetal THRB
histone code, alongside differential promoter occupancy of corepressors and
coactivators. We speculate that maternal HFD exposure in utero may set the stage 
for later in life obesity through epigenomic modifications to the histone code,
which modulates the fetal thyroid axis.

PMCID: PMC3517714
PMID: 23015752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Thyroid. 2012 Oct;22(10):1069-75. doi: 10.1089/thy.2011.0450. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Long-term 3,5,3'-triiodothyroacetic acid therapy in a child with hyperthyroidism 
caused by thyroid hormone resistance: pharmacological study and therapeutic
recommendations.

Anzai R(1), Adachi M, Sho N, Muroya K, Asakura Y, Onigata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kanagawa Children's Medical
Center, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of short-term 3,5,3'-triiodothyroacetic acid
(TRIAC) therapy for the treatment of hyperthyroidism caused by thyroid hormone
resistance (RTH) has been documented. Here, we report a 3-year course of TRIAC
therapy in an RTH boy, with a quantitative evaluation of the therapeutic effects 
and pharmacological study of TRIAC.
PATIENT FINDINGS: The gene encoding the thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) of
the patient carries a P453T mutation. During treatment with up to 3.0<U+2009>mg TRIAC
per day, reduction in the thyroid volume, resolution of supraventricular
arrhythmia, and decrease in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and free-thyroxine 
(FT4) levels were achieved. In addition, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) symptoms improved, with a concomitant decline in the ADHD Rating Scale
score.
SUMMARY: A TRIAC pharmacokinetic study, conducted using triiodothyronine level as
a surrogate for TRIAC level, demonstrated that TRIAC disappears from the
circulation rapidly and has a shorter duration of TSH secretion inhibitory effect
in the RTH patient compared to that in the control subject. Studies of TSH and
FT4 levels over a period of 3 years indicated that the TRIAC effect is dose
dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: TRIAC was effective and safe in ameliorating the effects of
hyperthyroidism and ADHD symptoms in a child with known genetic RTH. Further, it 
was demonstrated that TRIAC has a short half-life and functions dose dependently.

PMID: 22947347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Endocrinology. 2012 Oct;153(10):5090-100. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Role of TSH in the spontaneous development of asymmetrical thyroid carcinoma in
mice with a targeted mutation in a single allele of the thyroid hormone-ß
receptor.

Zhao L(1), Zhu X, Won Park J, Fozzatti L, Willingham M, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

Mutations of the thyroid hormone receptor-ß gene (THRB) cause resistance to
thyroid hormone (RTH). A mouse model of RTH harboring a homozygous thyroid
hormone receptor (TR)-ß mutation known as PV (Thrb(PV/PV) mouse) spontaneously
develops follicular thyroid cancer (FTC). Similar to RTH patients with mutations 
of two alleles of the THRB gene, the Thrb(PV/PV) mouse exhibits elevated thyroid 
hormones accompanied by highly nonsuppressible TSH. However, the heterozygous
Thrb(PV/+) mouse with mildly elevated TSH (~2-fold) does not develop FTC. The
present study examined whether the mutation of a single allele of the Thrb gene
is sufficient to induce FTC in Thrb(PV/+) mice under stimulation by high TSH.
Thrb(PV/+) mice and wild-type siblings were treated with propylthiouracil (PTU)
to elevate serum TSH. Thrb(PV/+)mice treated with PTU (Thrb(PV/+)-PTU)
spontaneously developed FTC similar to human thyroid cancer, but wild-type
siblings treated with PTU did not. Interestingly, approximately 33% of
Thrb(PV/+)-PTU mice developed asymmetrical thyroid tumors, as is frequently
observed in human thyroid cancer. Molecular analyses showed activation of the
cyclin 1-cyclin-dependent kinase-4-transcription factor E2F1 pathway to increase 
thyroid tumor cell proliferation of Thrb(PV/+)-PTU mice. Moreover, via
extranuclear signaling, the PV also activated the integrin-Src-focal adhesion
kinase-AKT-metalloproteinase pathway to increase migration and invasion of tumor 
cells. Therefore, mutation of a single allele of the Thrb gene is sufficient to
drive the TSH-simulated hyperplastic thyroid follicular cells to undergo
carcinogenesis. The present study suggests that the Thrb(PV/+)-PTU mouse model
potentially could be used to gain insights into the molecular basis underlying
the association between thyroid cancer and RTH seen in some affected patients.

PMCID: PMC3512015
PMID: 22919057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040392. Epub 2012 Aug 6.

Genomic aberrations in an African American colorectal cancer cohort reveals a
MSI-specific profile and chromosome X amplification in male patients.

Brim H(1), Lee E, Abu-Asab MS, Chaouchi M, Razjouyan H, Namin H, Goel A, Schäffer
AA, Ashktorab H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, College of Medicine, Department of
Pathology, Howard University, Washington, D.C., United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: DNA aberrations that cause colorectal cancer (CRC) occur in multiple
steps that involve microsatellite instability (MSI) and chromosomal instability
(CIN). Herein, we studied CRCs from AA patients for their CIN and MSI status.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Array CGH was performed on 30 AA colon tumors. The MSI
status was established. The CGH data from AA were compared to published lists of 
41 TSG and oncogenes in Caucasians and 68 cancer genes, proposed via systematic
sequencing for somatic mutations in colon and breast tumors. The
patient-by-patient CGH profiles were organized into a maximum parsimony cladogram
to give insights into the tumors' aberrations lineage.
RESULTS: The CGH analysis revealed that CIN was independent of age, gender, stage
or location. However, both the number and nature of aberrations seem to depend on
the MSI status. MSI-H tumors clustered together in the cladogram. The chromosomes
with the highest rates of CGH aberrations were 3, 5, 7, 8, 20 and X. Chromosome X
was primarily amplified in male patients. A comparison with Caucasians revealed
an overall similar aberration profile with few exceptions for the following
genes; THRB, RAF1, LPL, DCC, XIST, PCNT, STS and genes on the 20q12-q13 cytoband.
Among the 68 CAN genes, all showed some level of alteration in our cohort.
CONCLUSION: Chromosome X amplification in male patients with CRC merits
follow-up. The observed CIN may play a distinctive role in CRC in AAs. The
clustering of MSI-H tumors in global CGH data analysis suggests that chromosomal 
aberrations are not random.

PMCID: PMC3412863
PMID: 22879877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncogene. 2013 May 30;32(22):2726-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.301. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

CD97 amplifies LPA receptor signaling and promotes thyroid cancer progression in 
a mouse model.

Ward Y(1), Lake R, Martin PL, Killian K, Salerno P, Wang T, Meltzer P, Merino M, 
Cheng SY, Santoro M, Garcia-Rostan G, Kelly K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

CD97, a member of the adhesion family of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
complexes with and potentiates lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) receptor signaling to 
the downstream effector RHOA. We show here that CD97 was expressed in a majority 
of thyroid cancers but not normal thyroid epithelium and that the level of CD97
expression was further elevated with progression to poorly differentiated and
undifferentiated carcinoma. Intratumoral progression also showed that CD97
expression correlates with invasiveness and dedifferentiation. To determine the
functional role of CD97, we produced a transgenic model of thyroglobulin
promoter-driven CD97 expression. Transgenic CD97 in combination with Thrb(PV), an
established mouse model of thyroid follicular cell carcinogenesis, significantly 
increased the occurrence of vascular invasion and lung metastasis. Expression of 
transgenic CD97 in thyroid epithelium led to elevated ERK phosphorylation and
increased numbers of Ki67+ cells in developing tumors. In addition, tumor cell
cultures derived from CD97 transgenic as compared with non-transgenic mice
demonstrated enhanced, constitutive and LPA-stimulated ERK activation. In human
thyroid cancer cell lines, CD97 depletion reduced RHO-GTP and decreased
LPA-stimulated invasion but not EGF-stimulated invasion, further suggesting that 
CD97 influences an LPA-associated mechanism of progression. Consistent with the
above, CD97 expression in human thyroid cancers correlated with LPA receptor and 
markers of aggressiveness including Ki67 and pAKT. This study shows an autonomous
effect of CD97 on thyroid cancer progression and supports the investigation of
this GPCR as a therapeutic target for these cancers.

PMID: 22797060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Horm Metab Res. 2012 Sep;44(9):704-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1312666. Epub 2012 Jun 
13.

A novel p.E311K mutation of thyroid receptor beta gene in resistance to thyroid
hormone syndrome, inherited in autosomal recessive trait.

Slezak R(1), Lukienczuk T, Noczynska A, Karpinski P, Lebioda A, Misiak B,
Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
rslezak@interia.eu

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) syndrome is caused by mutations in THRB gene 
and is inherited mainly as an autosomal dominant trait with dominant negative
effect. Most of up-to-now described RTH cases were heterozygous. We studied a
19-year-old woman presenting severe mental impairment, hyperkinetic behavior,
learning disability, hearing loss, tachycardia, goiter, strabismus, nystagmus,
and normal stature. The laboratory findings revealed elevated TSH, T3, and T4
serum levels. Her parents were healthy with normal serum level of TSH, fT3, and
fT4. Sequence based prediction of a substitution was analyzed by SDM, PolPhen,
and SNAP software whereas structural visualizations were performed in UCSF
Chimera. We found a novel mutation in THRB gene in position 1216 (G to A
transition, codon 311) resulting in novel Glu-311-Lys (p.E311K) substitution,
homozygous in proband presenting with severe symptoms of RTH and heterozygous in 
both of her healthy parents, thus suggesting autosomal recessive mode of
inheritance. p.E311K substitution was not found in 50 healthy, unrelated
individuals. p.E311K was shown to be deleterious by SDM, PolPhen, and SNAP
software. Structural visualizations of mutated protein performed by UCSF Chimera 
software disclosed a loss of hydrogen bonds between E311, R383, and R429 along
with abnormal residue-residue contact between K311 and L377. This is a very rare 
case of a homozygous mutation in a patient with severe symptoms of RTH and lack
of symptoms in both heterozygous parents. Although, computational analyses have
provided the evidence that p.E311K substitution may affect THRB function, lack of
dominant negative effect typical for THRB mutations could not be explained by
structure-based modeling. Further in vitro analysis is required to assess the
functional consequences of this substitution.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22696245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;26(6):926-39. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1290. Epub 2012 May
8.

Fundamentally distinct roles of thyroid hormone receptor isoforms in a thyrotroph
cell line are due to differential DNA binding.

Chiamolera MI(1), Sidhaye AR, Matsumoto S, He Q, Hashimoto K, Ortiga-Carvalho TM,
Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, 05508-900 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Thyroid hormones have a profound influence on human development and disease. The 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis involves finely tuned feedback mechanisms to 
maintain thyroid hormone (TH) levels. Despite the important role of TH-negative
feedback in regulating this axis, the mechanism by which this occurs is not
clearly defined. Previous in vivo studies suggest separate roles for the two
thyroid hormone receptor isoforms, THRA and THRB, in this axis. We performed
studies using a unique pituitary thyrotroph cell line (TaT1.1) to determine the
relative roles of THRA and THRB in the regulation of Tshb. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we found that THRB, not THRA, bound to the Tshb
promoter. By selectively depleting THRB, THRA, or both THRA and THRB in TaT1.1
cells, we found that simultaneous knockdown of both THRB and THRA abolished
T(3)-mediated down-regulation of Tshb at concentrations as high as 100 nm T(3).
In contrast, THRA knockdown alone had no effect on T(3)-negative regulation,
whereas THRB knockdown alone abolished T(3)-mediated down-regulation of Tshb mRNA
levels at 10 nm but not 100 nm T(3) concentrations. Interestingly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that THRA becomes enriched on the Tshb promoter
after knockdown of THRB. Thus, a likely mechanism for the differential effects of
THR isoforms on Tshb may be based on their differential DNA-binding affinity to
the promoter.

PMCID: PMC3355539
PMID: 22570333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012 May;87(5):461-74. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2012.01.016.

Genetic Loci implicated in erythroid differentiation and cell cycle regulation
are associated with red blood cell traits.

Ding K(1), Shameer K, Jouni H, Masys DR, Jarvik GP, Kho AN, Ritchie MD, McCarty
CA, Chute CG, Manolio TA, Kullo IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify common genetic variants influencing red blood cell (RBC)
traits.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a genomewide association study from June 2008 
through July 2011 of hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC count, mean corpuscular volume, 
mean corpuscular hemoglobin, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration in
12,486 patients of European ancestry from the electronic MEdical Records and
Genomics (eMERGE) network. We developed an electronic medical record-based
algorithm that included individuals who had RBC measurements obtained for
clinical care and excluded values measured in the setting of hematopoietic
disorders, comorbid conditions, or medications known to affect RBC production or 
a recent history of blood loss.
RESULTS: We identified 4 new genetic loci and replicated 11 loci previously
reported to be associated with one or more RBC traits in individuals of European 
ancestry. Notably, genes present in 3 of the 4 newly identified loci (THRB,
PTPLAD1, CDT1) and in 6 of the 11 replicated loci (KLF1, ALDH8A1, CCND3, SPTA1,
FBXO7, TFR2/EPO) are implicated in erythroid differentiation and regulation of
cell cycle in hematopoietic stem cells.
CONCLUSION: Genes in the erythroid differentiation and cell cycle regulation
pathways influence interindividual variation in RBC indices. Our results provide 
insights into the molecular basis underlying variation in RBC traits.

Copyright © 2012 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3538470
PMID: 22560525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jul;1830(7):3928-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.04.002. Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Thyroid hormone receptors and cancer.

Kim WG(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are ligand-dependent transcription
factors that mediate the actions of the thyroid hormone (T3) in development,
growth, and differentiation. The THRA and THRB genes encode several TR isoforms
that express in a tissue- and development-dependent manner. In the past decades, 
a significant advance has been made in the understanding of TR actions in
maintaining normal cellular functions. However, the roles of TRs in human cancer 
are less well understood. The reduced expression of TRs because of
hypermethylation, or deletion of TR genes found in human cancers suggests that
TRs could function as tumor suppressors. A close association of somatic mutations
of TRs with human cancers further supports the notion that the loss of normal
functions of TR could lead to uncontrolled growth and loss of cell
differentiation.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: In line with the findings from association studies in human
cancers, mice deficient in total functional TRs (Thra1(-/-)Thrb(-/-) mice) or
with a targeted homozygous mutation of the Thrb gene (denoted PV; Thrb(PV/PV)
mice) spontaneously develop metastatic thyroid carcinoma. This review will
examine the evidence learned from these genetically engineered mice that provided
strong evidence to support the critical role of TRs in human cancer.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Loss of normal functions of TR by deletion or by mutations
could contribute to cancer development, progression and metastasis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Novel mechanistic insights are revealed in how aberrant TR 
activities lead to carcinogenesis. Mouse models of thyroid cancer provide
opportunities to identify molecular targets as potential treatment modalities.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3406244
PMID: 22507269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Epigenetics. 2012 May;7(5):502-13. doi: 10.4161/epi.19801. Epub 2012 May 1.

Genetic and epigenetic analysis of non-small cell lung cancer with
NotI-microarrays.

Dmitriev AA(1), Kashuba VI, Haraldson K, Senchenko VN, Pavlova TV, Kudryavtseva
AV, Anedchenko EA, Krasnov GS, Pronina IV, Loginov VI, Kondratieva TT, Kazubskaya
TP, Braga EA, Yenamandra SP, Ignatjev I, Ernberg I, Klein G, Lerman MI,
Zabarovsky ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

This study aimed to clarify genetic and epigenetic alterations that occur during 
lung carcinogenesis and to design perspective sets of newly identified
biomarkers. The original method includes chromosome 3 specific NotI-microarrays
containing 180 NotI clones associated with genes for hybridization with 40 paired
normal/tumor DNA samples of primary lung tumors: 28 squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC) and 12 adenocarcinomas (ADC). The NotI-microarray data were confirmed by
qPCR and bisulfite sequencing analyses. Forty-four genes showed methylation
and/or deletions in more than 15% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples. 
In general, SCC samples were more frequently methylated/deleted than ADC.
Moreover, the SCC alterations were observed already at stage I of tumor
development, whereas in ADC many genes showed tumor progression specific
methylation/deletions. Among genes frequently methylated/deleted in NSCLC, only a
few were already known tumor suppressor genes: RBSP3 (CTDSPL), VHL and THRB. The 
RPL32, LOC285205, FGD5 and other genes were previously not shown to be involved
in lung carcinogenesis. Ten methylated genes, i.e., IQSEC1, RBSP3, ITGA 9, FOXP1,
LRRN1, GNAI2, VHL, FGD5, ALDH1L1 and BCL6 were tested for expression by qPCR and 
were found downregulated in the majority of cases. Three genes (RBSP3, FBLN2 and 
ITGA9) demonstrated strong cell growth inhibition activity. A comprehensive
statistical analysis suggested the set of 19 gene markers, ANKRD28, BHLHE40,
CGGBP1, RBSP3, EPHB1, FGD5, FOXP1, GORASP1/TTC21, IQSEC1, ITGA9, LOC285375,
LRRC3B, LRRN1, MITF, NKIRAS1/RPL15, TRH, UBE2E2, VHL, WNT7A, to allow early
detection, tumor progression, metastases and to discriminate between SCC and ADC 
with sensitivity and specificity of 80-100%.

PMID: 22491060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17812-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.311464. Epub
2012 Mar 22.

Advanced bone formation in mice with a dominant-negative mutation in the thyroid 
hormone receptor ß gene due to activation of Wnt/ß-catenin protein signaling.

O'Shea PJ(1), Kim DW, Logan JG, Davis S, Walker RL, Meltzer PS, Cheng SY,
Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NCI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Thyroid hormone (T(3)) acts in chondrocytes and bone-forming osteoblasts to
control bone development and maintenance, but the signaling pathways mediating
these effects are poorly understood. Thrb(PV/PV) mice have a severely impaired
pituitary-thyroid axis and elevated thyroid hormone levels due to a
dominant-negative mutant T(3) receptor (TRß(PV)) that cannot bind T(3) and
interferes with the actions of wild-type TR. Thrb(PV/PV) mice have accelerated
skeletal development due to unknown mechanisms. We performed microarray studies
in primary osteoblasts from wild-type mice and Thrb(PV/PV) mice. Activation of
the canonical Wnt signaling in Thrb(PV/PV) mice was confirmed by in situ
hybridization analysis of Wnt target gene expression in bone during postnatal
growth. By contrast, T(3) treatment inhibited Wnt signaling in osteoblastic
cells, suggesting that T(3) inhibits the Wnt pathway by facilitating proteasomal 
degradation of ß-catenin and preventing its accumulation in the nucleus.
Activation of the Wnt pathway in Thrb(PV/PV) mice, however, results from a gain
of function for TRß(PV) that stabilizes ß-catenin despite the presence of
increased thyroid hormone levels. These studies demonstrate novel interactions
between T(3) and Wnt signaling pathways in the regulation of skeletal development
and bone formation.

PMCID: PMC3366792
PMID: 22442145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Thyroid Res. 2012 Mar 7;5(1):2. doi: 10.1186/1756-6614-5-2.

Riedel's thyroiditis - a case report with genes' expression studies.

Wojciechowska-Durczynska K(1), Durczynski A, Sporny S, Strzelczyk J, Lewinski A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Polish Mother's Memorial
Hospital Research Institute, Medical University of Lodz, Rzgowska St, No,
281/289, 93-338 Lodz, Poland. alewin@csk.umed.lodz.pl.

BACKGROUND: Genetic background of Riedel's thyroiditis remains unknown. Herein,
we describe our results of studies on genes expression levels in Riedel's
thyroiditis.
CASE REPORT AND GENETIC FINDINGS: We report the case of 48-year old woman with
Riedel's thyroiditis who has presented unusual course of disease with
non-specific cervical discomfort, though as with no pain and/or no compression
symptoms. After surgery, thyroid specimens were quantitatively evaluated,
regarding PIK3CA, PIK3CD, PIK3CG, Tg, TGFB1, THRB, COL1, CDKN1C, CDH3 and
CACNA2D2 genes expression levels, by real-time PCR in the ABI PRISM® 7500
Sequence Detection System. Out of 10 above genes, in 2 cases the expression was
higher than in respective Controls of unchanged thyroid tissue. In the remaining 
8 cases, expression in question became comparable or lower as in Controls.
DISCUSSION: The association between increased expression levels of PIK3CA and
CDH3 genes and Riedel's thyroiditis is not well-defined. However, the increased
expression of PIK3CA and CDH3 genes in our case report and in previous studies of
other authors on various malignancies may suggest possible molecular relation
between Riedel's thyroiditis and certain neoplastic processes, the relation of
which requires further genetic evaluation. It is to be stressed that gene
expression studies in Riedel's thyroiditis are difficult to perform, mainly due
to fibrosis, resulting in scarce thyroid specimens and - in consequence - small
amount of genetic material.

PMCID: PMC3338376
PMID: 22397327  [PubMed]


89. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr;97(4):1328-36. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-2642. Epub 
2012 Feb 8.

Homozygous thyroid hormone receptor ß-gene mutations in resistance to thyroid
hormone: three new cases and review of the literature.

Ferrara AM(1), Onigata K, Ercan O, Woodhead H, Weiss RE, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, MC3090, 5841 South Maryland
Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

CONTEXT: The most common cause of resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is
heterozygous thyroid hormone receptor ß (THRB) gene mutations. Homozygous
mutations in the THRB gene are a rare event.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, the clinical findings of three new patients (belonging 
to two families) homozygous for mutations in the THRB gene are compared to three 
other families in which affected individuals lack a normal TRß.
METHODS: We conducted clinical studies and genetic analyses.
RESULTS: The clinical presentation in all three homozygous subjects was unusually
severe; their phenotype was characterized by compromised intellectual
development, tachycardia, goiter, growth retardation, and hearing loss. This was 
comparable with one other reported patient homozygous for mutant TRß, but not in 
RTH due to THRB gene deletions.
CONCLUSION: We report three new subjects, from two families, in whom RTH was
associated with homozygous mutations in the THRB gene. They represent an
important addition to the single known patient homozygous for a mutant TRß. The
clinical and laboratory abnormalities indicate a strong dominant-negative effect 
and are in agreement with data obtained from mice expressing a mutant Thrb in
both alleles. This report strengthens the concept that the mutated TRß interferes
with the function of the TRa1 in humans.

PMCID: PMC3319181
PMID: 22319036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;18(5):1281-90. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2892.
Epub 2012 Jan 23.

SKI-606, an Src inhibitor, reduces tumor growth, invasion, and distant metastasis
in a mouse model of thyroid cancer.

Kim WG(1), Guigon CJ, Fozzatti L, Park JW, Lu C, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

PURPOSE: Src is overexpressed or hyperactivated in a variety of human cancers,
including thyroid carcinoma. Src is a central mediator in multiple signaling
pathways that are important in oncogenesis and cancer progression. In this study,
we evaluated the effects of an Src inhibitor, SKI-606 (bosutinib), in a
spontaneous metastatic thyroid cancer model with constitutively activated Src
(Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice were treated with SKI-606 or
vehicle controls, beginning at 6 weeks of age until the mice succumbed to thyroid
cancer. We assessed the effects of SKI-606 on thyroid cancer progression and
analyzed the impact of SKI-606 on aberrant Src-mediated signaling.
RESULTS: SKI-606 effectively inhibited aberrant activation of Src and its
downstream targets to markedly inhibit the growth of thyroid tumor, thereby
prolonging the survival of treated mice. While Src inhibition did not induce cell
apoptosis, it decreased cell proliferation by affecting the expression of key
regulators of cell-cycle progression. Importantly, SKI-606 dramatically prevented
dedifferentiation, vascular invasion, and lung metastasis of thyroid cancer
cells. These responses were meditated by downregulation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathways and inhibition of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that Src is critical in the progression of
thyroid cancer, making oral SKI-606 a promising treatment strategy for refractory
thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3294177
PMID: 22271876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Genome Biol. 2012 Jan 20;13(1):R1. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-r1.

Genetic adaptation to high altitude in the Ethiopian highlands.

Scheinfeldt LB(1), Soi S, Thompson S, Ranciaro A, Woldemeskel D, Beggs W, Lambert
C, Jarvis JP, Abate D, Belay G, Tishkoff SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic analysis of high-altitude populations residing in the Andes
and Tibet has revealed several candidate loci for involvement in high-altitude
adaptation, a subset of which have also been shown to be associated with
hemoglobin levels, including EPAS1, EGLN1, and PPARA, which play a role in the
HIF-1 pathway. Here, we have extended this work to high- and low-altitude
populations living in Ethiopia, for which we have measured hemoglobin levels. We 
genotyped the Illumina 1M SNP array and employed several genome-wide scans for
selection and targeted association with hemoglobin levels to identify genes that 
play a role in adaptation to high altitude.
RESULTS: We have identified a set of candidate genes for positive selection in
our high-altitude population sample, demonstrated significantly different
hemoglobin levels between high- and low-altitude Ethiopians and have identified a
subset of candidate genes for selection, several of which also show suggestive
associations with hemoglobin levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight several candidate genes for involvement in
high-altitude adaptation in Ethiopia, including CBARA1, VAV3, ARNT2 and THRB.
Although most of these genes have not been identified in previous studies of
high-altitude Tibetan or Andean population samples, two of these genes (THRB and 
ARNT2) play a role in the HIF-1 pathway, a pathway implicated in previous work
reported in Tibetan and Andean studies. These combined results suggest that
adaptation to high altitude arose independently due to convergent evolution in
high-altitude Amhara populations in Ethiopia.

PMCID: PMC3334582
PMID: 22264333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1548-60. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1834. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Thyroid hormone receptors control developmental maturation of the middle ear and 
the size of the ossicular bones.

Cordas EA(1), Ng L, Hernandez A, Kaneshige M, Cheng SY, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1772, USA.

Thyroid hormone is critical for auditory development and has well-known actions
in the inner ear. However, less is known of thyroid hormone functions in the
middle ear, which contains the ossicles (malleus, incus, stapes) that relay
mechanical sound vibrations from the outer ear to the inner ear. During the later
stages of middle ear development, prior to the onset of hearing, middle ear
cavitation occurs, involving clearance of mesenchyme from the middle ear cavity
while the immature cartilaginous ossicles attain appropriate size and ossify.
Using in situ hybridization, we detected expression of Thra and Thrb genes
encoding thyroid hormone receptors a1 and ß (TRa1 and TRß, respectively) in the
immature ossicles, surrounding mesenchyme and tympanic membrane in the mouse.
Thra(+/PV) mice that express a dominant-negative TRa1 protein exhibited deafness 
with elevated auditory thresholds and a range of middle ear abnormalities
including chronic persistence of mesenchyme in the middle ear into adulthood,
markedly enlarged ossicles, and delayed ossification of the ossicles.
Congenitally hypothyroid Tshr(-/-) mice and TR-deficient Thra1(-/-);Thrb(-/-)
mice displayed similar abnormalities. These findings demonstrate that middle ear 
maturation is TR dependent and suggest that the middle ear is a sensitive target 
for thyroid hormone in development.

PMCID: PMC3281545
PMID: 22253431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2012 Mar 1;176(1):39-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.12.026.
Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Developmental expression, differential hormonal regulation and evolution of
thyroid and glucocorticoid receptor variants in a marine acanthomorph teleost
(Sciaenops ocellatus).

Applebaum SL(1), Finn RN, Faulk CK, Joan Holt G, Scott Nunez B.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas at Austin, Marine Science Institute, 750 Channel View 
Drive, Port Aransas, TX 78373, USA. sappleba@usc.edu

Interactions between the thyroid hormone (TH) and corticosteroid (CS) hormone
axes are suggested to regulate developmental processes in vertebrates with a
larval phase. To investigate this hypothesis, we isolated three nuclear receptors
from a larval acanthomorph teleost, the red drum (Sciaenops ocellatus), and
established their orthologies as thraa, thrb-L and gra-L using phylogenomic and
functional analyses. Functional characterization of the TH receptors in COS-1
cells revealed that Thraa and Thrb-L exhibit dose-dependent transactivation of a 
luciferase reporter in response to T3, while SoThraa is constitutively active at 
a low level in the absence of ligand. To test whether interactions between the TH
and CS systems occur during development, we initially quantified the in vivo
receptor transcript expression levels, and then examined their response to
treatment with triiodothyronine (T3) or cortisol. We find that sothraa and
sothrb-L are autoregulated in response to exogenous T3 only during early larval
development. T3 did not affect sogra-L expression levels, nor did cortisol alter 
levels of sothraa or sothrb-L at any stage. While differential expression of the 
receptors in response to non-canonical ligand hormone was not observed under the 
conditions in this study, the correlation between sothraa and sogra-L transcript 
abundance during development suggests a coordinated function of the TH and CS
systems. By comparing the findings in the present study to earlier
investigations, we suggest that the up-regulation of thraa may be a specific
feature of metamorphosis in acanthomorph teleosts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22226731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Nov;32(3):472-7. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2011.09.002.
Epub 2011 Sep 10.

Changes of thyroid hormone levels and related gene expression in zebrafish on
early life stage exposure to triadimefon.

Liu S(1), Chang J, Zhao Y, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, Zhejiang University,
Kaixuan Road 268, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310029, PR China.

In this study, zebrafish was exposed to triadimefon. Thyroid hormones levels and 
the expression of related genes in the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis,
including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH-beta), deiodinases (dio1 and dio2) and
the thyroid hormone receptor (thraa and thrb) were evaluated. After triadimefon
exposure, increased T4 can be explained by increased thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH-beta). The conversion of T4 to T3 (deiodinase type I-dio1) was decreased,
which reduced the T3 level. Thyroid hormone receptor beta (thrb) mRNA levels were
significantly down-regulated, possibly as a response to the decreased T3 levels. 
The overall results indicated that triadimefon exposure could alter gene
expression in the HPT axis and that mechanisms of disruption of thyroid status by
triadimefon could occur at several steps in the synthesis, regulation, and action
of thyroid hormones.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22004968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 18;108(42):17462-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1107474108. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Resistance to thyroid hormone is modulated in vivo by the nuclear receptor
corepressor (NCOR1).

Fozzatti L(1), Lu C, Kim DW, Park JW, Astapova I, Gavrilova O, Willingham MC,
Hollenberg AN, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mutations in the ligand-binding domain of the thyroid hormone receptor ß (TRß)
lead to resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). These TRß mutants function in a
dominant-negative fashion to interfere with the transcription activity of
wild-type thyroid hormone receptors (TRs), leading to dysregulation of the
pituitary-thyroid axis and resistance in peripheral tissues. The molecular
mechanism by which TRß mutants cause RTH has been postulated to be an inability
of the mutants to properly release the nuclear corepressors (NCORs), thereby
inhibiting thyroid hormone (TH)-mediated transcription activity. To test this
hypothesis in vivo, we crossed Thrb(PV) mice (a model of RTH) expressing a human 
TRß mutant (PV) with mice expressing a mutant Ncor1 allele (Ncor1(<U+0394>ID) mice) that
cannot recruit a TR or a PV mutant. Remarkably, in the presence of NCOR1<U+0394>ID, the 
abnormally elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone and TH levels found in Thrb(PV)
mice were modestly but significantly corrected. Furthermore, thyroid hyperplasia,
weight loss, and other hallmarks of RTH were also partially reverted in mice
expressing NCOR1<U+0394>ID. Taken together, these data suggest that the aberrant
recruitment of NCOR1 by RTH TRß mutants leads to clinical RTH in humans. The
present study suggests that therapies aimed at the TR-NCOR1 interaction or its
downstream actions could be tested as potential targets in treating RTH.

PMCID: PMC3198316
PMID: 21987803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 19;31(16):2007-16. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.390. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

Activation of tumor cell proliferation by thyroid hormone in a mouse model of
follicular thyroid carcinoma.

Lu C(1), Zhu X, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

Thyroid cancers are the most common malignancy of the endocrine system in humans.
To understand the molecular genetic events underlying thyroid carcinogenesis, we 
have generated a mouse model that spontaneously develops follicular thyroid
carcinoma similar to human thyroid cancer (Thrb(PV/PV) mouse). This mutant mouse 
harbors a dominant-negative mutated thyroid hormone receptor ß (denoted PV). The 
PV mutation was identified in a patient with resistance to thyroid hormone (TH). 
Thrb(PV/PV) mice exhibit highly elevated serum thyroid-stimulating hormone levels
and increased TH. We have previously shown that thyroid-stimulating hormone is
required, but not sufficient to induce metastatic follicular thyroid cancer in
Thrb(PV/PV) mice. However, whether the elevated TH also contributes to the
thyroid carcinogenesis of Thrb(PV/PV) mice was not elucidated. To understand the 
role of TH in thyroid carcinogenesis, we blocked the production of TH by treating
Thrb(PV/PV) mice with propylthiouracil (Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice) and compared the
development of thyroid cancer in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU and untreated Thrb(PV/PV) mice. 
We found that thyroid tumor growth was reduced by ~42% in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice as
compared with Thrb(PV/PV) mice. Analysis by bromodeoxyuridine-nuclear labeling
showed decreased incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine in thyroid tumor cells of
Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice, indicative of decreased tumor cell proliferation. However, 
cleaved-caspase 3 staining showed no apparent changes in apoptosis of tumor cells
in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice. Molecular studies identified a marked attenuation of the
PI3K-AKT-ß-catenin signaling pathway that led to decreased protein levels of
cyclin D2, thereby decreasing tumor cell proliferation in Thrb(PV/PV)-PTU mice.
Furthermore, matrix metalloproteinase-2, a downstream target of ß-catenin and a
key regulator during tumor invasion and metastasis, was also decreased. Thus, the
present study uncovers a critical role of TH in promoting the thyroid
carcinogenesis of Thrb(PV/PV) mice via membrane signaling events. Importantly,
these findings suggest that anti-thyroid drugs could be considered as possible
therapeutic agents of thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3728834
PMID: 21909131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Vis. 2011;17:2241-7. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Enhanced S-cone function with preserved rod function: a new clinical phenotype.

Kinori M(1), Pras E, Kolker A, Ferman-Attar G, Moroz I, Moisseiev J,
Bandah-Rozenfeld D, Mizrahi-Meissonnier L, Sharon D, Rotenstreich Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, The Goldschleger Eye Institute, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical findings and genetic analysis in two brothers
having a novel retinal disease characterized by an enhanced S-cone phenotype with
normal rod function.
METHODS: Both patients underwent complete ophthalmologic examinations, including 
fundus photography, electroretinography (ERG), fluorescein angiography and
optical coherence tomography (OCT). Mutation analysis of the following candidate 
genes was performed: nuclear receptor subfamily 2 group E member 3 (NR2E3),
neural retina leucine zipper (NRL), nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group D member 1
(NR1D1), and thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB).
RESULTS: Spectral photopic ERG responses demonstrated enhanced S-cone function in
both patients. Their scotopic b-wave ERG amplitude responses, however, were
within normal limits. Their scotopic a-wave amplitude responses were within the
lower limit of normal. The a- and b-wave latencies were normal for one sibling
and on the upper limit of normal for the other. Peripheral retinal findings were 
normal. OCT showed flattening of the macular curvature and thinning of the
photoreceptor layer. Mutation analysis of NR2E3, NRL, NR1D1, and THRB genes was
negative.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe what appears to be a previously unidentified familial
retinal phenotype with enhanced S-cone function and well preserved rod system
function in contrast to the severely reduced rod function seen in the enhanced
S-cone syndrome (ESCS). Genetic analysis of candidate genes did not reveal the
cause of disease. We postulate that the disease might be caused by mutation of
another, as yet unidentified gene, which encodes a protein that functions as a
negative inhibitor of rod and S-cone development.

PMCID: PMC3164686
PMID: 21897746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):5053-64. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1372. Epub 2011 Aug
30.

Developmental and cell-specific expression of thyroid hormone transporters in the
mouse cochlea.

Sharlin DS(1), Visser TJ, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, Clinical Endocrinology Branch, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1772, USA.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):4478-80.

Thyroid hormone is essential for the development of the cochlea and auditory
function. Cochlear response tissues, which express thyroid hormone receptor ß
(encoded by Thrb), include the greater epithelial ridge and sensory epithelium
residing inside the bony labyrinth. However, these response tissues lack direct
blood flow, implying that mechanisms exist to shuttle hormone from the
circulation to target tissues. Therefore, we investigated expression of candidate
thyroid hormone transporters L-type amino acid transporter 1 (Lat1),
monocarboxylate transporter (Mct)8, Mct10, and organic anion transporting
polypeptide 1c1 (Oatp1c1) in mouse cochlear development by in situ hybridization 
and immunofluorescence analysis. L-type amino acid transporter 1 localized to
cochlear blood vessels and transiently to sensory hair cells. Mct8 localized to
the greater epithelial ridge, tympanic border cells underlying the sensory
epithelium, spiral ligament fibrocytes, and spiral ganglion neurons, partly
overlapping with the Thrb expression pattern. Mct10 was detected in a highly
restricted pattern in the outer sulcus epithelium and weakly in tympanic border
cells and hair cells. Organic anion transporting polypeptide 1c1 localized
primarily to fibrocytes in vascularized tissues of the spiral limbus and spiral
ligament and to tympanic border cells. Investigation of hypothyroid Tshr(-/-)
mice showed that transporter expression was delayed consistent with retardation
of cochlear tissue maturation but not with compensatory responses to
hypothyroidism. The results demonstrate specific expression of thyroid hormone
transporters in the cochlea and suggest that a network of thyroid hormone
transport underlies cochlear development.

PMCID: PMC3230046
PMID: 21878515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Transl Med. 2011 Aug 26;9:144. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-144.

An intronic SNP in the thyroid hormone receptor ß gene is associated with
pituitary cell-specific over-expression of a mutant thyroid hormone receptor ß2
(R338W) in the index case of pituitary-selective resistance to thyroid hormone.

Alberobello AT(1), Congedo V, Liu H, Cochran C, Skarulis MC, Forrest D, Celi FS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, NIDDK-NIH Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

BACKGROUND: The syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is caused by
mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor ß gene (THRB). The syndrome varies from
asymptomatic to diffuse hypothyroidism, to pituitary-selective resistance with
predominance of hyperthyroid signs and symptoms. The wide spectrum of clinical
presentation is not completely attributable to specific THRB mutations. The THRB 
gene encodes two main isoforms, TR ß1 which is widely distributed, and TR ß2,
whose expression is limited to the cochlea, retina, hypothalamus, and pituitary. 
Recent data demonstrated that in mice an intron enhancer region plays a critical 
role in the pituitary expression of the ß2 isoform of the receptor. We thus
hypothesized that polymorphisms in the human homologous region could modulate the
pituitary expression of the mutated gene contributing to the clinical
presentation of RTH.
METHODS: Screening and in vitro characterization of polymorphisms of the intron
enhancer region of the THRB gene in the index case of pituitary-selective RTH.
RESULTS: The index case of pituitary-selective resistance is characterized by the
missense R338W exon 9 mutation in cis with two common SNPs, rs2596623T and
rs2596622C, located in the intron enhancer region of the THRB gene. Reporter gene
assay experiments in GH3 pituitary-derived cells indicate that rs2596623T
generates an increased pituitary cell-specific activity of the TR ß2 promoter
suggesting that rs2596623T leads to pituitary over-expression of the mutant
allele.
CONCLUSIONS: The combined coding mutation and non-coding SNP therefore generate a
tissue-specific dominant-negative condition recapitulating the patient's peculiar
phenotype. This case illustrates the role of regulatory regions in modifying the 
clinical presentation of genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3170239
PMID: 21871106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Nov;96(11):3326-36. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1004. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

MicroRNAs in thyroid cancer.

de la Chapelle A(1), Jazdzewski K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, 804 Biomedical Research Tower, 460 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio
43210, USA. albert.delachapelle@osumc.edu

CONTEXT: Traditionally, factors predisposing to diseases are either genetic
("nature") or environmental, also known as lifestyle-related ("nurture").
Papillary thyroid cancer is an example of a disease where the respective roles of
these factors are surprisingly unclear.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: Original articles and reviews summarizing our current
understanding of the role of microRNA in thyroid tumorigenesis are reviewed and
evaluated.
CONCLUSION: The genetic predisposition to papillary thyroid cancer appears to
consist of a variety of gene mutations that are mostly either of low penetrance
and common or of high penetrance but rare. Moreover, they likely interact with
each other and with environmental factors. The culpable genes may not be of the
traditional, protein-coding type. A limited number of noncoding candidate genes
have indeed been described, and we propose here that the failure to find
mutations in traditional protein-coding genes is not coincidental. Instead, a
more likely hypothesis is that changes in the expression of multiple regulatory
RNA genes, e.g. microRNAs, may be a major mechanism. Our review of the literature
strongly supports this notion in that a polymorphism in one microRNAs (miR-146a) 
predisposes to thyroid carcinoma, whereas numerous other microRNAs are involved
in signaling (mainly PTEN/PI3K/AKT and T3/THRB) that is central to thyroid
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3410255
PMID: 21865360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Prion. 2011 Jul-Sep;5(3):154-60. doi: 10.4161/pri.5.3.16892. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Genome wide association studies and prion disease.

Lukic A(1), Mead S.

Author information: 
(1)National Prion Clinic, UCLH NHS Trust, London, UK.

Over the last decade remarkable advances in genotyping and sequencing technology 
have resulted in hundreds of novel gene associations with disease. These have
typically involved high frequency alleles in common diseases and with the advent 
of next generation sequencing, disease causing recessive mutations in rare
inherited syndromes. Here we discuss the impact of these advances and other gene 
discovery methods in the prion diseases. Several quantitative trait loci in mouse
have been mapped and their human counterparts analysed (HECTD2, CPNE8); other
candidate genes regions have been chosen for functional reasons (SPRN, CTSD).
Human genome wide association has been done in variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
(CJD) and are ongoing in larger collections of sporadic CJD with findings around,
but not clearly beyond, the levels of statistical significance required in these 
studies (THRB-RARB, STMN2). Future work will include closer integration of animal
and human genetic studies, larger and combined genome wide association, analysis 
of structural genetic variantion and next generation sequencing studies involving
the entire coding exome or genome.

PMCID: PMC3226040
PMID: 21844666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Oct;11(7):1761-8. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2011.07.015. Epub
2011 Aug 4.

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based differentiation of Shigella isolates
by pyrosequencing.

Hayford AE(1), Mammel MK, Lacher DW, Brown EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition,
US Food and Drug Administration, Laurel, MD 20708, USA. alice.hayford@fda.hhs.gov

Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) is an important genetic tool
that provides molecular markers for rapid differentiation of closely related
strains. We have applied SNP discovery and analysis for distinguishing each of
the four Shigella serogroups (Boydii, Dysenteriae, Flexneri, and Sonnei) and for 
discriminating individual strains within the same serogroup by using 24 SNPs
selected from nine genes. Five SNPs were identified from sequence analysis of two
housekeeping genes (gapA and thrB) used previously in our lab to differentiate
Shigella isolates into distinct lineages. The remaining 19 SNPs were identified
by in silico analyses of eight Shigella genomes and are within the genes lpxC,
sanA, yaaH, ybaP, ygaZ, yhbO, and ynhA. A total of 118 Shigella strains
comprising 20 Boydii, 29 Dysenteriae, 42 Flexneri, and 27 Sonnei isolates were
analyzed using the SNP typing scheme reported here. The combination of the 24
SNPs resulted in the identification of 26 SNP genotypes among the four Shigella
serogroups and also provided some discriminatory resolution among individual
strains within the same serogroup. The SNPs presented here should prove useful in
identifying Shigella using PCR amplification and rapid sequence typing
strategies.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21839856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Med Clin (Barc). 2011 Nov 12;137(12):551-4. doi: 10.1016/j.medcli.2010.11.037.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

[Clinical and molecular study of five families with resistance to thyroid
hormones].

[Article in Spanish]

Lado Abeal J(1), Albero Gamboa R, Araujo Vilar D, Barca Mallo O, Bernabeú Moron
I, Calvo MT, Castro Piedras I, Martin Calamata J, Palos Paz F, Peinó R, Peteiro
D, Victoria B.

Author information: 
(1)UETeM, Departamento de Medicina, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Santiago
de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, La Coruña, España. joaquin.lado@ttuhsc.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is a syndrome
mostly caused by mutations in thyroid hormone receptor beta gen (THRB). We
present five families with RTH phenotype.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: THRB gene sequencing. In vitro studies to evaluate the
mutants response to thyroid hormones and their dominant negative effect.
Mechanism of resistance in patients with RTH without THRB mutations quantifying
expression of regulator of calcineurin 2 (ZAKI4) and Kruppel-like factor 9 (BTEB)
genes in patients fibroblast cultures.
RESULTS: THRB mutations were found in three cases: R243Q, R320C, R429Q. Mutants
showed a decreased response to T3. R243Q and R320C had a strong dominant negative
effect. One subject without THRB mutation showed changes in ZAKI4 and BTEB
expression similar to R320C and the other showed expression levels higher than
normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Three cases of RTH were caused by THRB heterozygous mutations but in
two cases mutations were not found. THRB mutation carriers and one of the
patients without mutations share a similar mechanism of resistance and in the
other subject RTH is TRß independent.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dis Markers. 2011;30(4):151-61. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0790.

Absolute quantitation of DNA methylation of 28 candidate genes in prostate cancer
using pyrosequencing.

Vasiljevic N(1), Wu K, Brentnall AR, Kim DC, Thorat MA, Kudahetti SC, Mao X, Xue 
L, Yu Y, Shaw GL, Beltran L, Lu YJ, Berney DM, Cuzick J, Lorincz AT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, Mathematics and Statistics,
Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts & the London School of Dentistry 
and Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

Aberrant DNA methylation plays a pivotal role in carcinogenesis and its mapping
is likely to provide biomarkers for improved diagnostic and risk assessment in
prostate cancer (PCa). We quantified and compared absolute methylation levels
among 28 candidate genes in 48 PCa and 29 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH)
samples using the pyrosequencing (PSQ) method to identify genes with diagnostic
and prognostic potential. RARB, HIN1, BCL2, GSTP1, CCND2, EGFR5, APC, RASSF1A,
MDR1, NKX2-5, CDH13, DPYS, PTGS2, EDNRB, MAL, PDLIM4, HLAa, ESR1 and TIG1 were
highly methylated in PCa compared to BPH (p < 0.001), while SERPINB5, CDH1,
TWIST1, DAPK1, THRB, MCAM, SLIT2, CDKN2a and SFN were not. RARB methylation above
21% completely distinguished PCa Separation based on methylation level of SFN,
SLIT2 and SERPINB5 distinguished low and high Gleason score cancers, e.g. SFN and
SERPINB5 together correctly classified 81% and 77% of high and low Gleason score 
cancers respectively. Several genes including CDH1 previously reported as
methylation markers in PCa were not confirmed in our study. Increasing age was
positively associated with gene methylation (p < 0.0001).Accurate quantitative
measurement of gene methylation in PCa appears promising and further validation
of genes like RARB, HIN1, BCL2, APC and GSTP1 is warranted for diagnostic
potential and SFN, SLIT2 and SERPINB5 for prognostic potential.

PMCID: PMC3825083
PMID: 21694441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;1(1):1-13.

Genomic profiling of genes contributing to metastasis in a mouse model of thyroid
follicular carcinoma.

Lu C(1), Mishra A, Zhu YJ, Meltzer P, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Metastasis is the major cause of thyroid cancer-related death. However, little is
known about the genes involved in the metastatic spread of thyroid carcinomas. We
have created a mouse that spontaneously develops metastatic follicular thyroid
carcinoma (FTC). This mouse harbors a targeted mutation (denoted TRßPV) in the
thyroid hormone receptor ß gene (Thrb(PV/PV) mice). Our recent studies show that 
the highly elevated level of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) in Thrb(PV/PV)
mice promotes proliferation of thyroid tumor cells, but requires the
collaboration of the oncogenic action of TRßPV to empower the tumor cells to
undergo distant metastasis. To uncover genes destined to drive the metastatic
process, we used cDNA microarrays to compare the genomic expression profile of
laser capture microdissected thyroid tumor lesions of Thrb(PV/PV) mice with that 
of hyperplastic thyroid cells of wild-type mice having elevated TSH induced by
treatment with the anti-thyroid drug propylthiouracil (WT-PTU mice). Analyses of 
microarray data indicated that the expressions of 150 genes were significantly
altered between Thrb(PV/PV) and WT-PTU mice (87 genes had higher expression and
63 genes had lower expression in Thrb(PV/PV) mice than in WT-PTU mice).
Thirty-six percent of genes with altered expression function as key regulators in
metastasis. The remaining genes were involved in various cellular processes
including metabolism, intracellular trafficking, transcriptional regulation,
post-transcriptional modification, and cell-cell/extracellular matrix signaling. 
The present studies have uncovered novel genes responsible for the metastatic
spread of FTC and, furthermore, have shown that the metastatic process of thyroid
cancer requires effective collaboration among genes with diverse cellular
functions. Importantly, the present studies indicate that the tumor cells in the 
primary lesions are endowed with the genes destined to promote metastasis. Thus, 
our study has provided new insights into the understanding of the metastatic
spread of human thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3090007
PMID: 21562609  [PubMed]


106. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(2):168-191.

Global expression profiling reveals gain-of-function oncogenic activity of a
mutated thyroid hormone receptor in thyroid carcinogenesis.

Lu C(1), Mishra A, Zhu YJ, Meltzer P, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are critical in regulating gene expression in
normal physiological processes. Decreased expression and/or somatic mutations of 
TRs have been shown to be associated several types of human cancers including
liver, breast, lung, and thyroid. To understand the molecular mechanisms by which
mutated TRs promote carcinogenesis, an animal model of follicular thyroid
carcinoma (FTC) (Thrb(PV/PV) mice) was used in the present study. The Thrb(PV/PV)
mouse harbors a knockin dominant negative PV mutation, identified in a patient
with resistance to thyroid hormone. To understand whether oncogenic actions of PV
involve not only the loss of normal TR functions but also gain-of-function
activities, we compared the gene expression profiles of thyroid lesions in
Thrb(PV/PV) mice and Thra1(-/-)Thrb(-/-) mice that also spontaneously develop
FTC, but with less severe malignancy. Analysis of the cDNA microarray data
derived from microdissected thyroid tumor cells of these two mice showed
contrasting global gene expression profiles. With stringent selection using
2.5-fold change (p<0.01) in cDNA microarray analysis, 241 genes with altered gene
expression were identified. Nearly half of the genes (n=103: 42.7% of total) with
altered gene expression in thyroid tumor cells of Thrb(PV/PV) mice were
associated with tumorigenesis and metastasis; some of these genes function as
oncogenes in human thyroid cancers. The remaining genes were found to function in
transcriptional regulation, RNA processing, cell proliferation, apoptosis,
angiogenesis, and cytoskeleton modification. These results indicate that the more
aggressive thyroid tumor progression in Thrb(PV/PV) mice was not due simply to
the loss of tumor suppressor functions of TR via mutation but also, importantly, 
to gain-of-function in the oncogenic activities of PV to drive thyroid
carcinogenesis. Thus, the present study identifies a novel mechanism by which a
mutated TRß evolves with an oncogenic advantage to promote thyroid
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3086765
PMID: 21547001  [PubMed]


107. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jun;25(6):908-21. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0474. Epub 2011 Apr
7.

Differential recruitment of nuclear coregulators directs the isoform-dependent
action of mutant thyroid hormone receptors.

Fozzatti L(1), Lu C, Kim DW, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, 37 Convent Drive, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

Studies using mice deficient in thyroid hormone receptors (TR) indicate that the 
two TR isoforms, TRa1 and TRß1, in addition to mediating overlapping biological
activities of the thyroid hormone, T3, also mediate distinct functions. Mice
harboring an identical dominant negative mutation (denoted PV) at the C terminus 
of TRa1 (Thra1(PV) mice) or ß1 (Thrb(PV) mice) also exhibit distinct phenotypes. 
These knockin mutant mice provide an opportunity to understand the molecular
basis of isoform-dependent functions in vivo. Here we tested the hypothesis that 
the distinct functions of TR mutant isoforms are directed by a subset of nuclear 
regulatory proteins. Tandem-affinity chromatography of HeLa nuclear extracts
showed that distinct 33 nuclear proteins including nuclear receptor corepressor
(NCoR1) and six other proteins preferentially associated with TRa1PV or TRß1PV,
respectively. These results indicate that recruitment of nuclear regulatory
proteins by TR mutants is subtype dependent. The involvement of NCoR1 in
mediating the distinct liver phenotype of Thra1(PV) and Thrb(PV) mice was further
explored. NCoR1 preferentially interacted with TRa1PV rather than with TRß1PV.
NCoR1 was recruited more avidly to the thyroid hormone response element-bound
TRa1PV than to TRß1PV in the promoter of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a
gene to repress its expression in the liver of Thra1(PV) mice, but not in
Thrb(PV) mice. This preferential recruitment of NCoR1 by mutant isoforms could
contribute, at least in part, to the distinct liver lipid phenotype of these
mutant mice. The present study highlights a novel mechanism by which TR isoforms 
direct their selective functions via preferential recruitment of a subset of
nuclear coregulatory proteins.

PMCID: PMC3100599
PMID: 21474540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Steroids. 2011 Aug;76(9):885-91. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.03.016. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

Extranuclear signaling of mutated thyroid hormone receptors in promoting
metastatic spread in thyroid carcinogenesis.

Lu C(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) mediate the critical activities of the thyroid
hormone (T3) in growth, development, and differentiation. Decreased expression
and/or somatic mutations of TRs have been shown to be associated with several
types of human cancers including liver, breast, lung, and thyroid. A direct
demonstration that TRß mutants could function as oncogenes is evidenced by the
spontaneous development of follicular thyroid carcinoma similar to human cancer
in a knockin mouse model harboring a mutated TRß (denoted as PV; Thrb(PV/PV)
mice). PV is a dominant negative mutation identified in a patient with resistance
to thyroid hormone. Analysis of altered gene expression and molecular studies of 
thyroid carcinogenesis in Thrb(PV/PV) mice show that the oncogenic activity of PV
is mediated by both nucleus-initiated transcription and extranuclear actions to
alter gene expression and signaling transduction activity. This article focuses
on recent findings of novel extranuclear actions of PV that affect signaling
cascades and thereby the invasiveness, migration, and motility of thyroid tumor
cells. These findings have led to identification of potential molecular targets
for treatment of metastatic thyroid cancer.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3129395
PMID: 21473875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 2011 Jul 28;30(30):3381-90. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.50. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

Mutation of thyroid hormone receptor-ß in mice predisposes to the development of 
mammary tumors.

Guigon CJ(1), Kim DW, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Correlative data suggest that thyroid hormone receptor-ß (TRß) mutations could
increase the risk of mammary tumor development, but unequivocal evidence is still
lacking. To explore the role of TRß mutants in vivo in breast tumor development
and progression, we took advantage of a knock-in mouse model harboring a mutation
in the Thrb gene encoding TRß (Thrb(PV) mouse). Although in adult nulliparous
females, a single ThrbPV allele did not contribute to mammary gland
abnormalities, the presence of two ThrbPV alleles led to mammary hyperplasia in
~36% Thrb(PV/PV) mice. The ThrbPV mutation further markedly augmented the risk of
mammary hyperplasia in a mouse model with high susceptibility to mammary tumors
(Pten(+/-) mouse), as demonstrated by the occurrence of mammary hyperplasia in
~60% of Thrb(PV/+)Pten(+/-) and ~77% of Thrb(PV/PV)Pten(+/-) mice versus ~33% of 
Thrb(+/+)Pten(+/-) mice. The Thrb(PV) mutation increased the activity of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT5) to increase cell proliferation 
and the expression of the STAT5 target gene encoding ß-casein in the mammary
gland. We next sought to understand the molecular mechanism underlying STAT5
overactivation by TRßPV. Cell-based studies with a breast cancer cell line (T47D 
cells) showed that thyroid hormone (T3) repressed STAT5 signaling in
TRß-expressing cells through decreasing STAT5-mediated transcription activity and
target gene expression, whereas sustained STAT5 signaling was observed in
TRßPV-expressing cells. Collectively, these findings show for the first time that
a TRß mutation promotes the development of mammary hyperplasia via aberrant
activation of STAT5, thereby conferring a fertile genetic ground for
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3457781
PMID: 21399657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 May;164(5):781-8. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-1130. Epub 2011 Mar 
2.

A large-scale association analysis of 68 thyroid hormone pathway genes with serum
TSH and FT4 levels.

Medici M(1), van der Deure WM, Verbiest M, Vermeulen SH, Hansen PS, Kiemeney LA, 
Hermus AR, Breteler MM, Hofman A, Hegedüs L, Kyvik KO, den Heijer M, Uitterlinden
AG, Visser TJ, Peeters RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, 3015 GE
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Minor variation in serum thyroid hormone (TH) levels can have
important effects on various clinical endpoints. Although 45-65% of the
inter-individual variation in serum TH levels is due to genetic factors, the
causative genes are not well established. We therefore studied the effects of
genetic variation in 68 TH pathway genes on serum TSH and free thyroxine (FT(4)) 
levels.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Sixty-eight genes (1512 polymorphisms) were studied in
relation to serum TSH and FT(4) levels in 1121 Caucasian subjects. Promising hits
(P<0.01) were studied in three independent Caucasian populations (2656 subjects) 
for confirmation. A meta-analysis of all four studies was performed.
RESULTS: For TSH, eight PDE8B polymorphisms (P=4×10(-17)) remained significant in
the meta-analysis. For FT(4), two DIO1 (P=8×10(-12)) and one FOXE1 (P=0.0003)
polymorphisms remained significant in the meta-analysis. Suggestive associations 
were detected for one FOXE1 (P=0.0028) and three THRB (P=0.0045) polymorphisms
with TSH, and one SLC16A10 polymorphism (P=0.0110) with FT(4), but failed to
reach the significant multiple-testing corrected P value (P<0.0022 and P<0.0033
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Using a large-scale association analysis, we replicated previously
reported associations with genetic variation in PDE8B, THRB, and DIO1. We
demonstrate effects of genetic variation in FOXE1 on serum FT(4) levels, and
borderline significant effects on serum TSH levels. A suggestive association of
genetic variation in SLC16A10 with serum FT(4) levels was found. These data
provide insight into the molecular basis of inter-individual variation in TH
serum levels.

PMID: 21367965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Aug;1812(8):929-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.12.019.
Epub 2010 Dec 29.

Role of thyroid receptor ß in lipid metabolism.

Pramfalk C(1), Pedrelli M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.

Thyroid hormones (THs) exert their actions by binding to thyroid hormone
receptors (TRs) and thereby affect tissue differentiation, development, and
metabolism in most tissues. TH-deficiency creates a less favorable lipid profile 
(e.g. increased plasma cholesterol levels), whereas TH-excess is associated with 
both positive (e.g. reduced plasma cholesterol levels) and negative (e.g.
increased heart rate) effects. TRs are encoded by two genes, THRA and THRB,
which, by alternative splicing, generate several isoforms (e.g. TRa1, TRa2, TRß1,
and TRß2). TRa, the major TR in the heart, is crucial for heart rate and for
cardiac contractility and relaxation, whereas TRß1, the major TR in the liver, is
important for lipid metabolism. Selective modulation of TRß1 is thus considered
as a potential therapeutic target to treat dyslipidemia without cardiac side
effects. Several selective TH analogs have been tested in preclinical studies
with promising results, but only a few of these compounds have so far been tested
in clinical studies. This review focuses on the role of THs, TRs, and selective
and non-selective TH analogs in lipid metabolism. This article is part of a
Special Issue entitled: Translating nuclear receptors from health to disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21194564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):E546-53. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1594. Epub 
2010 Dec 15.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) is a major target gene for microRNAs
deregulated in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).

Jazdzewski K(1), Boguslawska J, Jendrzejewski J, Liyanarachchi S, Pachucki J,
Wardyn KA, Nauman A, de la Chapelle A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, 804 Biomedical Research Tower, 460 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio
43210, USA. krystian.jazdzewski@osumc.edu

CONTEXT: Loss of the thyroid hormone receptor is common in tumors. In mouse
models, a truncated THRB gene leads to thyroid cancer. Previously, we observed
up-regulation of the expression of eight microRNAs (miRs) in papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC) tumors.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to determine whether THRB might be inhibited by miRs
up-regulated in PTC.
DESIGN: The potential binding of miR to the 3'-untranslated region of THRB was
analyzed in silico. Direct inhibition by miRs binding to the cloned
3'-untranslated region of THRB was evaluated using luciferase assays. Inhibition 
of endogenous THRB and its target genes (DIO1 and APP) was examined in cell lines
transfected by pre-miRs. The impact on thyroid hormone response element (TRE) was
evaluated in promoter assays. Correlations between the expression of THRB and
miRs was evaluated in 13 PTC tumor/normal tissue pairs.
RESULTS: THRB contains binding sites for the top seven miRs up-regulated in PTC
(P = 0.0000002). Direct interaction with THRB was shown for miR-21 and miR-146a. 
We observed lower levels of THRB transcripts in cell lines transfected with
miR-21, -146a, and -221 (down-regulation of 37-48%; P < 0.0001), but not with
miR-181a. THRB protein was suppressed down to 10-28% by each of four miRs.
Concomitant expression of DIO1 and APP was affected (down-regulation of 32-66%, P
< 0.0034 and up-regulation of 48-57%, P < 0.0002, respectively). All four miRs
affected TRE activity in promoter assays. Down-regulation of luciferase occurred 
after transfection with pTRE-TK-Luc construct and each of four miRs. The analysis
of tumor/normal tissue pairs revealed down-regulation of THRB in 11 of 13 pairs
(1.3- to 9.1-fold), and up-regulation of miR-21, -146a, -181a, and -221 in almost
all pairs.
CONCLUSIONS: MiRs up-regulated in PTC tumors directly inhibit the expression of
THRB, an important tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC3047217
PMID: 21159845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;19(4):91-9. doi: 10.1297/cpe.19.91. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

One Novel and Two Recurrent THRB Mutations Associated with Resistance to Thyroid 
Hormone: Structure-based Computational Mutation Prediction.

Narumi S(1), Cho H, Tamada I, Kozu Y, Tsuchiya T, Nagai T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Inactivating mutations of THRB, which encodes the thyroid hormone receptor ß
(TRß), cause resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH; OMIM 190160). To date, more than
100 THRB mutations have been reported among RTH patients. Most mutations
substitute a single amino-acid residue in the ligand-binding domain. In this
report, we describe clinical and molecular findings of three families with RTH.
Three families harbored one novel (p.I431M) and two recurrent (p.R320H and
p.R383C) THRB mutations. To examine the pathogenicity of identified mutations, we
introduced a novel computational mutation prediction method based on
three-dimensional structure data of TRß-T3 complex. First, to define the accuracy
of our prediction system, we evaluated ten previously reported 'positive control'
mutations, as well as 30 seemingly benign sequence variations observed among
vertebral species as 'negative controls'. We found that our system had a
sensitivity of 80% and a specificity of 93%. We then analyzed three mutations
detected in the present study and found that all three mutations are predicted to
be deleterious. Our data suggest that our structure-based prediction system would
be a prompt, inexpensive and feasible method for evaluating the pathogenicity of 
missense THRB mutations.

PMCID: PMC3687625
PMID: 23926384  [PubMed]


114. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Nov;163(5):765-73. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0376. Epub 2010 Aug
24.

Thyroid hormone receptors are down-regulated in skeletal muscle of patients with 
non-thyroidal illness syndrome secondary to non-septic shock.

Lado-Abeal J(1), Romero A, Castro-Piedras I, Rodriguez-Perez A, Alvarez-Escudero 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, STOP
9410, Lubbock, Texas 79430-9410, USA. joaquin.lado@ttuhsc.edu

AIM: Non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) is related to changes in thyroid
hormone (TH) physiology. Skeletal muscle (SM) plays a major role in metabolism,
and TH regulates SM phenotype and metabolism. We aimed to characterize the SM of 
non-septic shock NTIS patients in terms of: i) expression of genes and proteins
involved in TH metabolism and actions; and ii) NFKB's pathway activation, a
responsible factor for some of the phenotypic changes in NTIS. We also
investigated whether the patient's serum can induce in vitro the effects observed
in vivo.
METHODS: Serum samples and SM biopsies from 14 patients with non-septic shock
NTIS and 11 controls. Gene and protein expression and NFKB1 activation were
analyzed by quantitative PCR and immunoblotting. Human SM cell (HSkMC) cultures
to investigate the effects of patient's serum on TH action mediators.
RESULTS: Patients with non-septic shock NTIS showed higher levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines than controls. Expression of TRß (THRB), TRa1 (THRA), 
and retinoid X receptor <U+03B3> (RXRG) was decreased in NTIS patients. RXRA gene
expression was higher, but its protein was lower in NTIS than controls,
suggesting the existence of a post-transcriptional mechanism that down-regulates 
protein levels. NFKB1 pathway activation was not different between NTIS and
control patients. HSkMC incubated with patient's serum increased TH receptor and 
RXRG gene expression after 48<U+200A> h.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with non-septic shock NTIS showed decreased expression of
TH receptors and RXRs, which were not related to increased activation of the
NFKB1 pathway. These findings could not be replicated in cultures of HSkMCs
incubated in the patient's serum.

PMID: 20736347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Nov;1802(11):995-1005. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.07.025. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Untranslated regions of thyroid hormone receptor beta 1 mRNA are impaired in
human clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Master A(1), Wójcicka A, Piekielko-Witkowska A, Boguslawska J, Poplawski P,
Tanski Z, Darras VM, Williams GR, Nauman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Medical Centre of
Postgraduate Education, Warsaw, Poland.

Thyroid hormone receptor ß1 (TRß1) is a hormone-dependent transcription factor
activated by 3,5,3'-l-triiodothyronine (T3). TRß1 functions as a tumor suppressor
and disturbances of the THRB gene are frequent findings in cancer. Translational 
control mediated by untranslated regions (UTRs) regulates cell proliferation,
metabolism and responses to cellular stress, processes that are involved in
carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that reduced TRß1 expression in clear cell renal 
cell cancer (ccRCC) results from regulatory effects of TRß1 5' and 3'UTRs on
protein translation. We determined TRß1 expression and alternative splicing of
TRß1 5' and 3'UTRs in ccRCC and control tissue together with expression of the
type 1 deiodinase enzyme (coded by DIO1, a TRß1 target gene). Tissue
concentrations of T3 (which are generated in part by D1) and expression of
miRNA-204 (an mRNA inhibitor for which a putative interaction site was identified
in the TRß1 3'UTR) were also determined. TRß1 mRNA and protein levels were
reduced by 70% and 91% in ccRCC and accompanied by absent D1 protein, a 58%
reduction in tissue T3 concentration and 2-fold increase in miRNA-204. Structural
analysis of TRß1 UTR variants indicated that reduced TRß1 expression may be
maintained in ccRCC by posttranscriptional mechanisms involving 5'UTRs and
miRNA-204. The tumor suppressor activity of TRß1 indicates that reduced TRß1
expression and tissue hypothyroidism in ccRCC tumors is likely to be involved in 
the process of carcinogenesis or in maintaining a proliferative advantage to
malignant cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Oct;17(5):408-13. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e32833d6d46.

New insights into regulation of lipid metabolism by thyroid hormone.

Zhu X(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Oct;17(5):395.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Thyroid hormone (3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine) plays an
important role in thermogenesis and maintenance of lipid homeostasis. The present
article reviews the evidence that 3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine regulates lipid
metabolism via thyroid hormone receptors, focusing particularly on in-vivo
findings using genetically engineered mice.
RECENT FINDINGS: That lipid metabolism is regulated via thyroid hormone receptor 
isoforms in a tissue-dependent manner was recently uncovered by using knockin
mutant mice harboring an identical mutation in the Thra gene (Thra1(PV) mouse) or
the Thrb gene (Thrb(PV) mouse). The mutation in the Thra gene dramatically
decreases the mass of both white adipose tissue and liver. In contrast, the
mutation in the Thrb gene markedly increases the mass of liver with an excess
depot of lipids, but no significant abnormality is observed in white adipose
tissue. Molecular studies show that the expression of lipogenic genes is
decreased in white adipose tissue of Thra1(PV) mice, but not in Thrb(PV) mice.
Markedly increased lipogenic enzyme expression, and decreased fatty acid
beta-oxidation activity contribute to the adipogenic steatosis and lipid
accumulation in the liver of Thrb(PV) mice. In contrast, reduced expression of
genes critical for lipogenesis mediates decreased liver mass with lipid scarcity 
in Thra1(PV) mice.
SUMMARY: Studies using Thra1(PV) and Thrb(PV) mice indicate that apo-thyroid
hormone receptor-beta and apo-thyroid hormone receptor-alpha-1 mediate distinct
deleterious effects on lipid metabolism. Thus, both thyroid hormone receptor
isoforms contribute to the pathogenesis of lipid abnormalities in hypothyroidism,
but in a target tissue-dependent manner. These studies suggest that thyroid
hormone receptor isoform-specific ligands could be designed as therapeutic
targets for lipid abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC3457777
PMID: 20644471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Sep;45(3):133-45. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0007. Epub 2010 Jun 
29.

The role of the amino-terminal domain in the interaction of unliganded peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2 with nuclear receptor co-repressor.

Suzuki S(1), Sasaki S, Morita H, Oki Y, Turiya D, Ito T, Misawa H, Ishizuka K,
Nakamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2 (PPARG2) is a ligand-dependent
transcriptional factor involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. In the
presence of a ligand, PPARG2 associates with co-activators, while it recruits
co-repressors (CoRs) in the absence of a ligand. It has been reported that the
interaction of liganded PPARG2 with co-activators is regulated by the
amino-terminal A/B domain (NTD) via inter-domain communication. However, the role
of the NTD is unknown in the case of the interaction between unliganded PPARG2
and CoRs. To elucidate this, total elimination of the influence of ligands is
required, but the endogenous ligands of PPARG2 have not been fully defined.
PPARG1-P467L, a naturally occurring mutant of PPARG1, was identified in a patient
with severe insulin resistance. Reflecting its very low affinity for various
ligands, this mutant does not have transcriptional activity in the PPAR response 
element, but exhibits dominant negative effects (DNEs) on liganded wild-type
PPARG2-mediated transactivation. Using the corresponding PPARG2 mutant,
PPARG2-P495L, we evaluated the role of the NTD in the interaction between
unliganded PPARG2 and CoRs. Interestingly, the DNE of PPARG2-P495L was increased 
by the truncation of its NTD. NTD deletion also enhanced the DNE of a chimeric
receptor, PT, in which the ligand-binding domain of PPARG2 was replaced with that
of thyroid hormone receptor beta-1. Moreover, NTD deletion facilitated the in
vitro binding of nuclear receptor CoR with wild-type PPARG2, mutant P495L, and
the PT chimera (PPARG2-THRB). Inter-domain communication in PPARG2 regulates not 
only ligand-dependent transactivation but also ligand-independent silencing.

PMID: 20587609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Clin Invest. 2010 Apr;120(4):1345-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI38793. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

Resistance to thyroid hormone is associated with raised energy expenditure,
muscle mitochondrial uncoupling, and hyperphagia.

Mitchell CS(1), Savage DB, Dufour S, Schoenmakers N, Murgatroyd P, Befroy D,
Halsall D, Northcott S, Raymond-Barker P, Curran S, Henning E, Keogh J, Owen P,
Lazarus J, Rothman DL, Farooqi IS, Shulman GI, Chatterjee K, Petersen KF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), a dominantly inherited disorder usually
associated with mutations in thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB), is
characterized by elevated levels of circulating thyroid hormones (including
thyroxine), failure of feedback suppression of thyrotropin, and variable tissue
refractoriness to thyroid hormone action. Raised energy expenditure and
hyperphagia are recognized features of hyperthyroidism, but the effects of
comparable hyperthyroxinemia in RTH patients are unknown. Here, we show that
resting energy expenditure (REE) was substantially increased in adults and
children with THRB mutations. Energy intake in RTH subjects was increased by 40%,
with marked hyperphagia particularly evident in children. Rates of muscle TCA
cycle flux were increased by 75% in adults with RTH, whereas rates of ATP
synthesis were unchanged, as determined by 13C/31P magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. Mitochondrial coupling index between ATP synthesis and
mitochondrial rates of oxidation (as estimated by the ratio of ATP synthesis to
TCA cycle flux) was significantly decreased in RTH patients. These data
demonstrate that basal mitochondrial substrate oxidation is increased and energy 
production in the form of ATP synthesis is decreased in the muscle of RTH
patients and that resting oxidative phosphorylation is uncoupled in this
disorder. Furthermore, these observations suggest that mitochondrial uncoupling
in skeletal muscle is a major contributor to increased REE in patients with RTH, 
due to tissue selective retention of thyroid hormone receptor alpha sensitivity
to elevated thyroid hormone levels.

PMCID: PMC2846038
PMID: 20237409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jan 15;196(2):140-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.09.010.

Aberrant methylation of the THRB gene in tissue and plasma of breast cancer
patients.

Ling Y(1), Xu X, Hao J, Ling X, Du X, Liu X, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070,
Gansu Province, China.

The thyroid hormone receptors (TR) have three major isoforms, TRalpha1, TRalpha2,
and TRbeta1; these are ligand-dependent nuclear transcription factors. THRB, the 
gene encoding TRbeta1, is considered a potential cancer suppressor. The mechanism
of its inactivation is not yet clear. Aberrant silencing of THRB in breast cancer
tissue and plasma by promoter hypermethylation was investigated in the present
study. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to
examine THRB mRNA expression in the breast cancer tissues. Methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (MSP) combined with nested PCR was used to determine
the methylation status of the THRB gene promoter region in 40 cancer tissue and
40 plasma samples from breast cancer patients. Methylation status of MSP product 
in plasma was also evaluated by direct sequencing. The expression of THRB mRNA in
breast cancer tissues was lower than that in the normal tissues; hypermethylation
was found in 32 of 40 breast cancer tissues (80%) and in 28 of 40 plasma samples 
(70%). Loss of THRB gene expression was associated with the CpG island
hypermethylation of promoter regions. THRB gene CpG island methylation was not
related to clinical pathologic parameters. Sequencing results were identical to
agarose gel electrophoresis results. The present results indicate that
hypermethylation of THRB as an alternative gene silencing mechanism is highly
prevalent in breast cancer. Methylated tumor-specific DNA may serve as a plasma
biomarker for prognosis in patients with breast cancer.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20082849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Oct;149A(10):2231-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33004.

Multiple genomic aberrations in a patient with mental retardation and
hypogonadism: 45,X/46,X,psu dic(Y) karyotype, thyroid hormone receptor beta
(THRB) mutation and heterozygosity for Wilson disease.

Hes FJ(1), Madan K, Rombout-Liem IS, Szuhai K, Sørensen H, van Amstel HK, Bakker 
E, Visser TJ, Smit JW, Hansson K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical and Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. f.j.hes@lumc.nl

We report on multiple genomic aberrations in a patient with mental retardation.
In addition, he had hypogonadism, elevated thyroid hormone levels, hearing loss, 
delayed speech development and mild dysmorphic features. First, we identified a
mosaic karyotype, 45,X/46,X,psu dic(Y). The pseudo-dicentric Y chromosome has
three short arm segments. Second, we found a germline mutation (Pro453Thr) of the
thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB) which is associated with resistance to
thyroid hormone. Third, he was found to be a carrier of a heterozygous ATP7B
mutation (c.2575 + 5G > C), the Wilson disease gene. Even though an array-CGH
(with a density of approximately 1 Mb) did not reveal any further genomic gains
or losses, we cannot exclude that all contributing factors have been identified. 
However, this case report shows that with increasing technological possibilities 
we can find more than one cause for developmental problems in a single patient.
The identification of multiple causes in a single patient may complicate
explaining the disorder and genetic counseling.

PMID: 19725132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Endocrinol. 2009 Nov;203(2):291-9. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0539. Epub 2009 Aug 27.

A TRbeta-selective agonist confers resistance to diet-induced obesity.

Amorim BS(1), Ueta CB, Freitas BC, Nassif RJ, Gouveia CH, Christoffolete MA,
Moriscot AS, Lancelloti CL, Llimona F, Barbeiro HV, de Souza HP, Catanozi S,
Passarelli M, Aoki MS, Bianco AC, Ribeiro MO.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Science Course, CCBS, Presbyterian University Mackenzie, Rua da
Consolação, 930 Prédio 38, Curso de Biologia, São Paulo, SP 01302-907, Brazil.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRbeta also listed as THRB on the MGI
Database)-selective agonists activate brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenesis,
while only minimally affecting cardiac activity or lean body mass. Here, we
tested the hypothesis that daily administration of the TRbeta agonist GC-24
prevents the metabolic alterations associated with a hypercaloric diet. Rats were
placed on a high-fat diet and after a month exhibited increased body weight (BW) 
and adiposity, fasting hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance, increased plasma
levels of triglycerides, cholesterol, nonesterified fatty acids and
interleukin-6. While GC-24 administration to these animals did not affect food
ingestion or modified the progression of BW gain, it did increase energy
expenditure, eliminating the increase in adiposity without causing cardiac
hypertrophy. Fasting hyperglycemia remained unchanged, but treatment with GC-24
improved glucose tolerance by increasing insulin sensitivity, and also normalized
plasma triglyceride levels. Plasma cholesterol levels were only partially
normalized and liver cholesterol content remained high in the GC-24-treated
animals. Gene expression in liver, skeletal muscle, and white adipose tissue was 
only minimally affected by treatment with GC-24, with the main target being BAT. 
In conclusion, during high-fat feeding treatment with the TRbeta-selective
agonist, GC-24 only partially improves metabolic control probably as a result of 
accelerating the resting metabolic rate.

PMCID: PMC3133532
PMID: 19713219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2009 May;49(5):591-6.

[Construction of recombinant plasmids containing threonine operon and their
effects on L-threonine accumulation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Yan J, Yu L, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Chen N, Wen T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Engineering, Tianjin University of Science & Technology,
Tianjin 300457, China. meixiabe@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: We reconstructed two recombinant plasmids and studied their effects on
L-threonine accumulation of Escherichia coli W3110.
METHODS: We amplified the threonine operon containing ThrLp promoter, lead
peptide thrL, thrA, thrB and thrC genes by PCR from E. coli W3110 chromosome and 
ligated it into the pMD19 T-vector. Site-directed mutation were carried out by
gene splicing by overlap extension PCR to release the feedback inhibition of
aspartokinase I (thrA). Two recombinant plasmids pWYE112 and pWYE134 were
transformed into E. coli W3110 by electroporation. Fed-batch cultures of E. coli 
W3110 were carried out in 5-Liter fermentors and the L-threonine concentration
was measured by HPLC.
RESULTS: Fed-batch fermentation results showed that E. coli W3110 could
accumulate little L-threonine (0.036 +/- 0.004 g/L) but recombinant E. coli W3110
harboring the plasmid pWYE112 containing a threonine operon exhibited a
L-threonine production of 2.590 +/- 0.115 g/L. Furthermore, L-threonine
production reached 9.223 +/- 1.279 g/L when the feedback inhibition of thrA was
released.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of threonine operon can lead to the accumulation of
L-threonine. Further release of feedback inhibition of aspartokinase I can
enhance its accumulation.

PMID: 19637565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Feb;25(2):330-8. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.090729.

Candidate gene analysis of femoral neck trabecular and cortical volumetric bone
mineral density in older men.

Yerges LM(1), Klei L, Cauley JA, Roeder K, Kammerer CM, Ensrud KE, Nestlerode CS,
Lewis C, Lang TF, Barrett-Connor E, Moffett SP, Hoffman AR, Ferrell RE, Orwoll
ES, Zmuda JM; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

In contrast to conventional dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, quantitative
computed tomography separately measures trabecular and cortical volumetric bone
mineral density (vBMD). Little is known about the genetic variants associated
with trabecular and cortical vBMD in humans, although both may be important for
determining bone strength and osteoporotic risk. In the current analysis, we
tested the hypothesis that there are genetic variants associated with trabecular 
and cortical vBMD at the femoral neck by genotyping 4608 tagging and potentially 
functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 383 bone metabolism
candidate genes in 822 Caucasian men aged 65 years or older from the Osteoporotic
Fractures in Men Study (MrOS). Promising SNP associations then were tested for
replication in an additional 1155 men from the same study. We identified SNPs in 
five genes (IFNAR2, NFATC1, SMAD1, HOXA, and KLF10) that were robustly associated
with cortical vBMD and SNPs in nine genes (APC, ATF2, BMP3, BMP7, FGF18, FLT1,
TGFB3, THRB, and RUNX1) that were robustly associated with trabecular vBMD. There
was no overlap between genes associated with cortical vBMD and trabecular vBMD.
These findings identify novel genetic variants for cortical and trabecular vBMD
and raise the possibility that some genetic loci may be unique for each bone
compartment.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3153388
PMID: 19619005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Sep 24;308(1-2):63-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.01.007.
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Novel non-genomic signaling of thyroid hormone receptors in thyroid
carcinogenesis.

Guigon CJ(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

The thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are transcription factors that mediate the
pleiotropic activities of the thyroid hormone, T3. Four T3-binding isoforms,
TRalpha1, TRbeta1, TRbeta2, and TRbeta3, are encoded by two genes, THRA and THRB.
Mutations and altered expression of TRs have been reported in human cancers. A
targeted germ-line mutation of the Thrbeta gene in the mouse leads to spontaneous
development of follicular thyroid carcinoma (TRbeta(PV/PV) mouse). The TRbetaPV
mutant has lost T3-binding activity and displays potent dominant negative
activity. The striking phenotype of thyroid cancer exhibited by TRbeta(PV/PV)
mice has recently led to the discovery of novel non-genomic actions of TRbetaPV
that contribute to thyroid carcinogenesis. These actions involve direct physical 
interaction of TRbetaPV with cellular proteins, namely the regulatory subunit of 
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85alpha), the pituitary tumor transforming
gene (PTTG) and beta-catenin, that are critically involved in cell proliferation,
motility, migration, and metastasis. Thus, a TRbeta mutant (TRbetaPV), via a
novel mode of non-genomic action, acts as an oncogene in thyroid carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2744088
PMID: 19549593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Epigenetics. 2009 Apr 1;4(3):185-93. Epub 2009 Apr 12.

Epigenetic analysis of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Dunwell TL(1), Hesson LB, Pavlova T, Zabarovska V, Kashuba V, Catchpoole D,
Chiaramonte R, Brini AT, Griffiths M, Maher ER, Zabarovsky E, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, Medical School, University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.

We used a chromosome 3 wide NotI microarray for identification of epigenetically 
inactivated genes in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Three novel
genes demonstrated frequent methylation in childhood ALL. PPP2R3A (protein
phosphatase 2, regulatory subunit B", alpha) was frequently methylated in T (69%)
and B (82%)-ALL. Whilst FBLN2 (fibulin 2) and THRB (thyroid hormone receptor,
beta) showed frequent methylation in B-ALL (58%; 56% respectively), but were less
frequently methylated in T-ALL (17% for both genes). Recently it was demonstrated
that BNC1 (Basonuclin 1) and MSX1 (msh homeobox 1) were frequently methylated
across common epithelial cancers. In our series of childhood ALL BNC1 was
frequently methylated in both T (77%) and B-ALL (79%), whilst MSX1 showed T-ALL
(25%) specific methylation. The methylation of the above five genes was cancer
specific and expression of the genes could be restored in methylated leukemia
cell lines treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. This is the first report
demonstrating frequent epigenetic inactivation of PPP2R3A, FBLN2, THRB, BNC1 and 
MSX1 in leukemia. The identification of frequently methylated genes showing
cancer specific methylation will be useful in developing early cancer detection
screens and for targeted epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 19430199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jun;94(6):2106-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2361. Epub
2009 Mar 24.

Genetic causes of goiter and deafness: Pendred syndrome in a girl and
cooccurrence of Pendred syndrome and resistance to thyroid hormone in her sister.

Borck G(1), Seewi O, Jung A, Schönau E, Kubisch C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University
of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.

CONTEXT: Goiter and deafness can be associated in some genetic syndromes, e.g.
Pendred syndrome (PS) and resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). PS is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by goiter and sensorineural hearing impairment
with an enlarged vestibular aqueduct bilaterally. RTH is an autosomal dominant
condition of reduced tissue sensitivity to thyroid hormone in which goiter is
very frequent and hearing loss occurs in about 20% of patients. OBJECTIVE,
PATIENTS, AND DESIGN: The objective of this study was to identify the cause of
goiter and deafness in two sisters born to healthy unrelated parents. We present 
their history, clinical presentation, and follow-up and report the results of
molecular genetic investigations.
RESULTS: The elder sister had an elevated TSH level at newborn screening followed
by subclinical hypothyroidism, childhood-onset goiter, and bilateral progressive 
sensorineural hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular aqueducts, consistent
with a diagnosis of PS. Her younger sister had congenital goiter, elevated free
T3 and free T4 concentrations with unsuppressed TSH, sinus tachycardia, and
bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing impairment with enlarged vestibular
aqueducts. This clinical presentation was consistent with a diagnosis of RTH, in 
which, however, inner ear malformations are uncommon. Interestingly, molecular
genetic testing showed that, whereas the elder sister is affected by PS, the
younger sister has both PS (due to compound heterozygous SLC26A4 mutations) and
RTH (due to a novel de novo heterozygous THRB mutation).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of the cooccurrence, in the same
individual, of PS and RTH, two genetic syndromes both associated with goiter and 
hearing impairment.

PMID: 19318451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Probes. 2009 Jun-Aug;23(3-4):148-53. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2009.02.002.
Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Genotyping of resistance to thyroid hormone in South American population.
Identification of seven novel missense mutations in the human thyroid hormone
receptor beta gene.

Rivolta CM(1), Olcese MC, Belforte FS, Chiesa A, Gruñeiro-Papendieck L, Iorcansky
S, Herzovich V, Cassorla F, Gauna A, Gonzalez-Sarmiento R, Targovnik HM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Cátedra de Genética y Biología Molecular,
Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. crivolta@ffyb.uba.ar

Thyroid Hormone Receptor beta (THRB) defects, typically transmitted as autosomal 
dominant traits, cause Resistance to Thyroid Hormone (RTH). We analyzed the THRB 
gene in thirteen South American patients with clinical evidence RTH from eleven
unrelated families. Sequence analysis revealed seven novel missense mutations.
Four novel mutations were identified in exon 9. The first, a c.991A>G transition 
which originates a substitution of asparagine by aspartic acid (p.N331D). The
second nucleotide alteration consists of a guanine to cytosine transversion at
position 1003 (c.1003G>C) and results in substitution of the alanine at codon 335
by proline (p.A335P). The third mutation, a c.1022T>C transition produces a
change of leucine by proline (p.L341P). The fourth mutation detected in exon 9
was a c.1036C>T transition which replaces the leucine at codon 346 by
phenylalanine (p.L346F). The sequencing of the exon 10 detected three novel
missense mutations. The first, a c.1293A>G transition changing isoleucine 431 for
methionine (p.I431M). The second, the cytosine at position 1339 was replaced by
adenine (c.1339C>A) resulting in the replacement of proline by threonine
(p.P447T). The third mutation detected in exon 10 was a c.1358C>T transition
resulting in the substitution of proline at codon 453 by leucine (p.P453L).
Finally, sequencing analysis of the THRB gene revealed three substitutions
previously described (p.A268G, p.P453T and p.F459C). The p.P453T was found in two
patients. In conclusion, we report thirteen patients with RTH caused by
heterozygous mutations of the THRB gene. Seven of the identified mutations
correspond to novel substitutions.

PMID: 19268523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Heart Fail Rev. 2010 Mar;15(2):117-20. doi: 10.1007/s10741-008-9121-y. Epub 2009 
Jan 10.

Use of a new model of transgenic mice to clarify the respective functions of
thyroid hormone receptors in vivo.

Flamant F(1), Quignodon L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 
Université de Lyon UMR INRA CNRS 5242, IFR128 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon CEDEX
07, France. Frederic.flamant@ens-lyon.fr

3,5,3'-Triido-L: -thyronine (T3) exerts pleiotropic actions on development and
homeostasis mostly via its nuclear receptors, TRalpha1, TRbeta1, and TRbeta2,
encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. Muouse genetics data outline the contrasting 
functions of THRA and THRB, and suggest that these are dictated by both the
respective abundance of the receptor isoforms in a given cell type and the
differences in the intrinsic properties of the receptors. The diversity of
consequences of either hypothyroidism or THRA/THRB mutation is astonishing,
suggesting that TR controls a large number of genes and that the repertoire of
target gene differs from one tissue to another. In order to distinguish between
the direct and indirect actions of TH in vivo, we use the CRE/LoxP recombination 
system to control the expression of a mutant TRalpha1 receptor with dominant
negative properties. Ubiquitous expression of this mutation in heterozygous mice 
recapitulates many consequences of TH deficiency, except in tissues where TRbeta 
is highly expressed.

PMID: 19137427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Thyroid. 2008 Oct;18(10):1087-94. doi: 10.1089/thy.2008.0236.

Identification and consequences of polymorphisms in the thyroid hormone receptor 
alpha and beta genes.

Sørensen HG(1), van der Deure WM, Hansen PS, Peeters RP, Breteler MM, Kyvik KO,
Sørensen TI, Hegedüs L, Visser TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic factors exert considerable influence on thyroid function
variables. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in thyroid hormone pathway
genes have been associated with serum thyroid parameters implying small
alterations in the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. However, little is known 
about SNPs in the THRA (17q11.2) and THRB (3p24.2) genes. The aim of this study
was to map THRA and THRB for the occurrence and frequencies of SNPs and relate
these to thyroid parameters.
DESIGN AND METHODS: SNPs were identified by sequencing all THRA and THRB exons
and flanking regions in 52 randomly selected subjects. SNPs were genotyped in
1116 healthy Danish twins by TaqMan assays and related to thyroid parameters. One
SNP in THRB was additionally genotyped in the elderly population of the Rotterdam
Scan Study (n = 940).
MAIN OUTCOME: 15 SNPs (7 novel) in THRA and THRB were identified. Two SNPs in the
3' untranslated region of THRA were genotyped: a novel SNP (2390A/G) and 1895C/A 
(rs12939700). In THRB, a synonymous (735C/T; rs3752874) and an intronic SNP
(in9-G/A; rs13063628) were genotyped. No associations between SNPs and thyroid
hormone levels (total and free 3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine [T3] and thyroxine,
reverse T3) were found. THRB-in9-G/A was significantly associated with higher
serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (p(lnTSH) = 0.01) in the Danish twins,
but not in subjects of the Rotterdam Scan Study, although it showed a similar
trend.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the T3 receptor genes revealed 15 SNPs, including 7
novel. Only THRB-in9-G/A was associated with higher serum TSH in a large
population of Danish twins.

PMID: 18844476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Soc Biol. 2008;202(2):67-71. doi: 10.1051/jbio:2008008. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

[Thyroid hormone and its receptors: have mouse genetics clarified the
situation?].

[Article in French]

Flamant F(1), Quignodon L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon,
Université de Lyon, UMR INRA CNRS, 5242 IFR128, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France. frédéric.flamant@ens-lyon.fr

In vertebrates, the active form of thyroid hormone (T3) acts directly on
transcription by changing the conformation of the TR nuclear receptors (TR alpha 
1, TR beta 1 et TR beta 2) which are encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. These
receptors are bound to DNA at specific response elements in a ligand independent 
manner. Mouse genetics have clarified the respective function of each receptor
isoform, mainly reflecting THRA and THRB expression patterns. It also revealed
the importance of negative regulation by unliganded receptors not only in
pathological but also in physiological situations.

PMID: 18547502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1270-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.04.019.

Phosphodiesterase 8B gene variants are associated with serum TSH levels and
thyroid function.

Arnaud-Lopez L(1), Usala G, Ceresini G, Mitchell BD, Pilia MG, Piras MG, Sestu N,
Maschio A, Busonero F, Albai G, Dei M, Lai S, Mulas A, Crisponi L, Tanaka T,
Bandinelli S, Guralnik JM, Loi A, Balaci L, Sole G, Prinzis A, Mariotti S,
Shuldiner AR, Cao A, Schlessinger D, Uda M, Abecasis GR, Nagaraja R, Sanna S,
Naitza S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) controls thyroid growth and hormone secretion
through binding to its G protein-coupled receptor (TSHR) and production of cyclic
AMP (cAMP). Serum TSH is a sensitive indicator of thyroid function, and overt
abnormalities in thyroid function lead to common endocrine disorders affecting
approximately 10% of individuals over a life span. By genotyping 362,129 SNPs in 
4,300 Sardinians, we identified a strong association (p = 1.3 x 10(-11)) between 
alleles of rs4704397 and circulating TSH levels; each additional copy of the
minor A allele was associated with an increase of 0.13 muIU/ml in TSH. The
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is located in intron 1 of PDE8B, encoding a 
high-affinity cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase. The association was replicated in 
4,158 individuals, including additional Sardinians and two genetically distant
cohorts from Tuscany and the Old Order Amish (overall p value = 1.9 x 10(-20)).
In addition to association of TSH levels with SNPs in PDE8B, our genome scan
provided evidence for association with PDE10A and several biologically
interesting candidates in a focused analysis of 24 genes. In particular, we found
evidence for association of TSH levels with SNPs in the THRB (rs1505287, p = 7.3 
x 10(-5)), GNAQ (rs10512065, p = 2.0 x 10(-4)), TG (rs2252696, p = 2.2 x 10(-3)),
POU1F1 (rs1976324, p = 3.9 x 10(-3)), PDE4D (rs27178, p = 8.3 x 10(-3)), and TSHR
(rs4903957, p = 8.6 x 10(-3)) loci. Overall, the results suggest a primary effect
of PDE8B variants on cAMP levels in the thyroid. This would affect production of 
T4 and T3 and feedback to alter TSH release by the pituitary. PDE8B may thus
provide a candidate target for the treatment of thyroid dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2427267
PMID: 18514160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Infect Immun. 2008 Jun;76(6):2551-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00338-08. Epub 2008 Apr 7.

Identification of Streptococcus sanguinis genes required for biofilm formation
and examination of their role in endocarditis virulence.

Ge X(1), Kitten T, Chen Z, Lee SP, Munro CL, Xu P.

Author information: 
(1)The Philips Institute of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0566, USA.

Streptococcus sanguinis is one of the pioneers in the bacterial colonization of
teeth and is one of the most abundant species in the oral biofilm called dental
plaque. S. sanguinis is also the most common viridans group streptococcal species
implicated in infective endocarditis. To investigate the association of biofilm
and endocarditis, we established a biofilm assay and examined biofilm formation
with a signature-tagged mutagenesis library of S. sanguinis. Four genes that have
not previously been associated with biofilm formation in any other bacterium,
purB, purL, thrB, and pyrE, were putatively identified as contributing to in
vitro biofilm formation in S. sanguinis. By examining 800 mutants for attenuation
in the rabbit endocarditis model and for reduction in biofilm formation in vitro,
we found some mutants that were both biofilm defective and attenuated for
endocarditis. However, we also identified mutants with only reduced biofilm
formation or with only attenuation in the endocarditis model. This result
indicates that the ability to form biofilms in vitro is not associated with
endocarditis virulence in vivo in S. sanguinis.

PMCID: PMC2423065
PMID: 18390999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BJU Int. 2008 Jul;102(2):253-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2008.07600.x. Epub 2008 
Jul 1.

Microsatellite analysis of allelic imbalance in tumour and blood from patients
with prostate cancer.

Schwarzenbach H(1), Chun FK, Müller I, Seidel C, Urban K, Erbersdobler A, Huland 
H, Pantel K, Friedrich MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tumour Biology, University Medical Centre, Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Germany. hschwarz@uke.uni-hamburg.de

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether a high frequency of allelic imbalance (AI) is
associated with clinicopathological variables of patients with prostate cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analysed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite
(MS) instability (MSI) on circulating plasma DNA in a polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-based MS study of 230 patients with prostate cancer and 43 with benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) using a panel of 13 polymorphic MS markers.
RESULTS: The overall incidence of AI was significantly higher in primary tumours 
(34%) than in blood plasma samples from patients with prostate cancer (11%).
Although LOH (2.0%) and MSI (1.5%) were also found in BPH plasma samples, their
frequencies were low. AI identified in plasma samples from patients with prostate
cancer could be retrieved in 63% of the paired tumour samples. The highest
concordance of AI and retention of heterozygosity between tumour and plasma
samples was 83% at the marker D8S360. There were high frequencies of LOH at the
markers THRB, D7S522 and D8S137 in both types of specimens. The markers D11S898
and D11S1313 on the chromosome arm 11q showed frequent MSI. The comparison with
established risk factors showed significant associations of an increase in
prostate volume with AI at the combined markers D6S474/D7S522 in tumour tissues
and at D7S522 in plasma samples (P < 0.04). In the primary tumours there was a
further correlation of LOH at D11S1313 with increasing tPSA value (P = 0.005).
The combination of total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and % free PSA was
associated with LOH at THRB in plasma samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma-based MS analysis may have clinical value for the molecular
staging of prostate cancer.

PMID: 18336598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2008;68(7):563-7. doi: 10.1080/00365510701884592.

Biochemical characterization of four novel mutations in the thyroid hormone
receptor beta gene in patients with resistance to thyroid hormone.

Asadi AB(1), Torjesen PA, Haug E, Berg JP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Laboratory, Endocrine Center, Aker University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. 
babak.asadi@chello.no

In resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), decreased tissue responsiveness to
thyroid hormones is usually caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor
beta (THRB) gene. Subsequently, in serum the level of thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH) is not suppressed despite increased concentrations of thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3). In our laboratory, DNA sequences of exon 7 to 10 in the
THRB gene have been analysed in individuals with biochemical signs of RTH. Four
novel point mutations were identified (I250T, A279E, T327A and L440P) and their
effects on T3 binding activity characterized. The mutations were introduced into 
a vector carrying the wild-type THRB cDNA by in vitro mutagenesis. T3-binding
activity was measured by a filter-binding assay procedure in receptors generated 
from the vector by in vitro transcription and translation. Specific binding was
calculated as total activity subtracted by non-specific activity. The association
constants (Ka) of the wildtype (WT) and mutant receptors were determined by
Scatchard analysis. No specific T3-binding was observed for the receptor with the
A279E mutation. The binding affinity was reduced by 74% in the T327A mutant and
by about 50% in the I250T and L440P mutants compared to the WT receptor (Ka = 4.2
x 10(10) L/mol). The reduction of T3-binding affinity caused by the four
mutations in our study is comparable to the effects of THRB gene mutations found 
in other patients with RTH and supports the assumption that the signs of RTH
observed in our patients are caused by the mutations.

PMID: 19378427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Radiat Res. 2008 Jan;49(1):17-27. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

A novel role for thyroid hormone receptor beta in cellular radiosensitivity.

Matsuse M(1), Saenko V, Sedliarou I, Rogounovitch T, Nakazawa Y, Mitsutake N,
Akulevich N, Namba H, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Thyroid hormone receptors (THRs) widely govern cell growth, differentiation and
metabolism acting in a ligand- and cofactor-dependent manner to modulate
tissue-specific gene expression. Given a large variety of genes regulated by THRs
and multiplicity of cellular processes potentially influenced by THRs, we
addressed the role of THRB (thyroid hormone receptor beta) in cellular
radiosensitivity. Wild-type and mutant THRB were overexpressed in several cell
lines using an adenovirus-mediated gene delivery and their effects were examined 
after cell exposure to gamma-rays. Wild-type THRB decreased clonogenic survival
of the cell lines with low levels of endogenous THRB, retarded their growth and
synergized with radiation in decreasing proliferative potential and promoting
cellular senescence. These changes were accompanied by the accumulation of p21
(CDKN1A, CIP1, WAF1) and p16 (CDKN2A, INK4a) inhibitors of cyclin-dependent
kinases and by the decrease of Rb (retinoblastoma protein) phosphorylation.
Mutant THRB produced a radioprotective effect, attenuated radiation-induced
growth inhibition and cellular senescence. The results suggest that THRB may
modulate cellular radiosensitivity and stress-induced senescence.

PMID: 17965546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Thyroid. 2007 Aug;17(8):707-15.

Molecular and genotypic characterization of human thyroid follicular cell
carcinoma-derived cell lines.

Meireles AM(1), Preto A, Rocha AS, Rebocho AP, Máximo V, Pereira-Castro I,
Moreira S, Feijão T, Botelho T, Marques R, Trovisco V, Cirnes L, Alves C, Velho
S, Soares P, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Molecular Immunology, University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal.

OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to characterize the molecular and genotypic profile of
eight thyroid carcinoma-derived cell lines-TPC1, FB2, B-CPAP, K1, XTC-1, C643,
8505C, and Hth74-in order to use them as in vitro models of thyroid
carcinogenesis.
DESIGN: We evaluated the expression of five thyroid-specific genes (Tg, TSHr,
TPO, PAX8, and TTF-1) to establish the cell lineage and to assess the
differentiation status of each of the cell lines. We screened for mutations in
the most relevant oncogenes/tumor suppressor genes affected in thyroid
carcinogenesis: RAS, BRAF, CTNNB1, and TP53 along with RET/PTC rearrangements.
Considering the putative relevance in general carcinogenesis, we have also
studied other molecules such as EGFR, PI3K, RAF-1, and THRB. To determine the
genetic identity of the cell lines, we performed genotypic analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME: The panel of cell lines we have studied displayed activation of
several oncogenes (BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC) and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes
(TP53) known to be important for thyroid carcinogenesis. Two of the cell
lines-TPC1 and FB2-shared the same genotypic profile, probably representing
clones of an ancestor cell line (TPC1).
CONCLUSION: Due to their different molecular alterations, these cell lines
represent a valuable tool to study the molecular mechanisms underlying thyroid
carcinogenesis. We suggest that genotypic analyses should be included as a
routine procedure to guarantee the uniqueness of each cell line used in research.

PMID: 17725429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Amino Acids. 2008 Feb;34(2):213-22. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

Regulation of aspartate-derived amino acid homeostasis in potato plants (Solanum 
tuberosum L.) by expression of E. coli homoserine kinase.

Rinder J(1), Casazza AP, Hoefgen R, Hesse H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare
Pflanzenphysiologie, Golm, Germany.

The availability of the carbon backbone O-phosphohomoserine (OPHS) is critical to
methionine (met) and threonine (thr) synthesis. OPHS derives from homoserine and 
is formed by homoserine kinase (HSK). To clarify the function of HSK in cellular 
metabolism, the E. coli HSK ortholog thrB was expressed in potato plants
targeting the EcHSK protein to chloroplasts and to the cytosol. Both approaches
resulted in up to 11 times increased total HSK enzyme activity. Transgenic plants
exhibited reduced homoserine levels while met and thr did not accumulate
significantly. However, the precursor cysteine and upstream intermediates of met 
such as cystathionine and homocysteine did indicating an accelerated carbon flow 
towards the end products. Coincidently, plants with elevated cytosolic levels of 
EcHSK exhibited a reduction in transcript levels of the endogenous HSK, as well
as of threonine synthase (TS), cystathionine beta-lyase (CbL), and met synthase
(MS). In all plants, cystathionine gamma-synthase (CgS) expression remained
relatively unchanged from wild type levels, while S-adenosylmethionine synthetase
(SAMS) expression increased. Feeding studies with externally supplied homoserine 
fostered the synthesis of met and thr but the regulation of synthesis of both
amino acids retained the wild type regulation pattern. The results indicate that 
excess of plastidial localised HSK activity does not influence the de novo
synthesis of met and thr. However, expression of HSK in the cytosol resulted in
the down-regulation of gene expression of pathway genes probably mediated via
OPHS. We integrated these data in a novel working model describing the regulatory
mechanism of met and thr homeostasis.

PMID: 17624493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Metab Eng. 2007 Jul;9(4):327-36. Epub 2007 May 18.

Characteristics of methionine production by an engineered Corynebacterium
glutamicum strain.

Park SD(1), Lee JY, Sim SY, Kim Y, Lee HS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biotechnology, Korea University, Anam-dong, Sungbuk-ku,
Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

A methionine-producing strain was derived from a lysine-producing Corynebacterium
glutamicum through a process of genetic manipulation in order to assess its
potential to synthesize and accumulate methionine during growth. The strain
carries a deregulated hom gene (hom(FBR)) to abolish feedback inhibition of
homoserine dehydrogenase by threonine and a deletion of the thrB gene (delta
thrB) to abolish threonine synthesis. The constructed C. glutamicum
MH20-22B/hom(FBR)/delta thrB strain accumulated 2.9 g/l of methionine by batch
fermentation and showed resistance to methionine analogue ethionine at
concentrations up to 30 mM. The growth of the strain was apparently impaired as a
result of the accumulation of methionine biosynthetic intermediate, homocysteine.
Production assays also revealed that the accumulation of methionine in the growth
medium was transient and declined as the carbon source was depleted. During the
period of methionine disappearance, the methionine biosynthetic genes were
completely repressed in the engineered strains but not in the parental strain.
After all, we have not only successfully constructed a methionine-producing C.
glutamicum strain by genetic manipulation, but also revealed cellular constraints
in attaining high yield and productivity.

PMID: 17604670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Korean Med Sci. 2007 Jun;22(3):560-3.

A newly identified insertion mutation in the thyroid hormone receptor-beta gene
in a Korean family with generalized thyroid hormone resistance.

Kim JH(1), Park TS, Baek HS, Kim GH, Yoo HW, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
Chonbuk National University Medical School and Research Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Presbyterian Medical Center, 63418 Keumam-dong, Dukjin-gu, Jeonju,
Korea.

Thyroid hormone resistance syndrome (RTH) is a rare disorder and is characterized
by elevated levels of circulating free thyroid hormones, inappropriate secretion 
of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and reduced peripheral tissue response to
thyroid hormone. 90% of RTH subjects, when studied at the level of the gene, have
been found to harbor mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor-beta(THRB) gene.
These affected individuals have been shown to possess a variety of missense
mutations, resulting from changes in a single nucleotide in the THRB gene that
corresponds to amino acid alternation. However, insertion or deletion mutations
in the THRB gene sequence are quite rare, and have been observed in only a very
few cases. In this study, we describe two such cases, in which two members of the
same family were determined to harbor an insertion mutation in exon 10, and had
also been diagnosed with generalized RTH. This insertion mutation, specifically
the insertion of a cytosine at nucleotide 1358 of the THRB gene, is, to the best 
of our knowledge, the first such mutation reported among RTH patients in Korea.

PMCID: PMC2693656
PMID: 17596672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jul;48(7):3038-42.

Influence of thyroid hormone on thyroid hormone receptor beta-1 expression and
lacrimal gland and ocular surface morphology.

Dias AC(1), Módulo CM, Jorge AG, Braz AM, Jordão AA Jr, Filho RB, de Paula JS,
Rocha EM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Oftalmologia, Otorrinolaringologia e Cirurgia de Cabeça e
Pescoço, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Hormone diseases induce changes in the lacrimal gland (LG) and ocular
surface (OS). Thyroid hormone (TH) induces cell proliferation and lipid
metabolism through the activation of TH receptors. The aim of the present study
was to evaluate the location and comparative expression of TH receptor beta-1
(Thrb) in LG of rats with hypothyroidism and in controls and to evaluate the
impact of this disease on LG and OS structure and function.
METHODS: Hypothyroidism was induced in Wistar male rats by the long-term use of
tiamazole. Ten weeks later corneal cells were collected for impression cytology
(IC). Rats were humanely killed, and tissues were evaluated by immunoperoxidase
staining and Western blot for Thrb. The content of malondialdehyde (MDA) and
acetylcholine (ACh) in LG was determined by spectrophotometry (n = 5/group in all
experiments).
RESULTS: LG weight was significantly lower in hypothyroid rats (P < 0.05).
Western blot analysis indicated that LGs express Thrb and that hypothyroidism
induces a higher expression of this receptor. IC was significantly different and 
ACh was significantly lower in hypothyroid rats (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Chronically reduced levels of TH lead to biochemical and structural 
changes and modulate the levels of Thrb in LG. These events confirm that LG is a 
target organ for TH and may facilitate understanding of the mechanism related to 
dry eye in hypothyroidism.

PMID: 17591870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biomol Screen. 2007 Apr;12(3):385-95.

Expression of human nuclear receptors in plants for the discovery of
plant-derived ligands.

Doukhanina EV(1), Apuya NR, Yoo HD, Wu CY, Davidow P, Krueger S, Flavell RB,
Hamilton R, Bobzin SC.

Author information: 
(1)Ceres, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA 91320, USA.

Plants have the potential to produce a wide array of secondary metabolites that
have utility as drugs to treat human diseases. To tap this potential, functional 
human nuclear receptors have been expressed in plants to create in planta
screening assays as a tool to discover natural product ligands. Assays have been 
designed and validated using 3 nuclear receptors: the estrogen receptor (ER), the
androgen receptor (AR), and the heterodimeric retinoid X receptor-alpha plus
thyroid hormone receptor-beta (RXRA/THRB). Nuclear receptor-reporter constructs
have been expressed in plants to detect the presence of natural ligands that are 
produced de novo in several plant species during different stages of development,
in various tissues, and in response to different stress elicitors. Screening
experiments with ER, AR, and RXRA/THRB have been conducted, leading to the
identification of plant sources of natural product ligands of human nuclear
receptors. This in planta screen has led to the identification of previously
unreported ER ligands, providing evidence of the complementary value of this
approach to current in vitro high-throughput screening assays.

PMID: 17438068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 May;21(5):1108-19. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

An intron control region differentially regulates expression of thyroid hormone
receptor beta2 in the cochlea, pituitary, and cone photoreceptors.

Jones I(1), Ng L, Liu H, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

The Thrb gene, encoding thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRbeta), serves key roles 
in endocrine regulation and the development of the senses of hearing and color
vision. The versatile functions of this gene depend upon its expression of
distinct receptor isoforms by differential promoter activation. The TRbeta2
isoform has a particularly specialized distribution including in the anterior
pituitary and cochlea. TRbeta2 is also found in immature cone photoreceptors
where it has a unique role in programming the expression pattern of opsin
photopigments that mediate color vision. Given the importance of precise,
tissue-specific expression for the function of TRbeta2, we investigated the
genomic control elements that direct this expression in vivo using lacZ reporter 
transgenes in mice. The TRbeta2 promoter region is sufficient for cochlear
expression, whereas a complex intron control region is necessary for pituitary
and retinal expression. In the retina, the intron region directs peak expression 
in the embryo in postmitotic, immature cones. The retinal control region is
further subdivided into domains that specify and amplify expression,
respectively, indicating that timely, cone-specific expression reflects an
integrated response to complex signals. The mammalian Thrb gene has therefore
incorporated several mechanisms into a multifunctional intron control region that
regulates developmental induction of the distant promoter. This specialized
genomic organization underlies the unique expression pattern and functions of
TRbeta2.

PMID: 17341594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Mar;3(3):249-59.

Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function.

Bernal J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. jbernal@iib.uam.es

Thyroid hormones are important during development of the mammalian brain, acting 
on migration and differentiation of neural cells, synaptogenesis, and
myelination. The actions of thyroid hormones are mediated through nuclear thyroid
hormone receptors (TRs) and regulation of gene expression. The purpose of this
article is to review the role of TRs in brain maturation. In developing humans
maternal and fetal thyroid glands provide thyroid hormones to the fetal brain,
but the timing of receptor ontogeny agrees with clinical data on the importance
of the maternal thyroid gland before midgestation. Several TR isoforms, which are
encoded by the THRA and THRB genes, are expressed in the brain, with the most
common being TRalpha1. Deletion of TRalpha1 in rodents is not, however,
equivalent to hormone deprivation and, paradoxically, even prevents the effects
of hypothyroidism. Unliganded receptor activity is, therefore, probably an
important factor in causing the harmful effects of hypothyroidism. Accordingly,
expression of a mutant receptor with impaired triiodothyronine (T(3)) binding and
dominant negative activity affected cerebellar development and motor performance.
TRs are also involved in adult brain function. TRalpha1 deletion, or expression
of a dominant negative mutant receptor, induces consistent behavioral changes in 
adult mice, leading to severe anxiety and morphological changes in the
hippocampus.

PMID: 17315033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 30;104(5):1679-84. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Transformation of cone precursors to functional rod photoreceptors by bZIP
transcription factor NRL.

Oh EC(1), Khan N, Novelli E, Khanna H, Strettoi E, Swaroop A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience and Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA.

Networks of transcriptional regulatory proteins dictate specification of neural
lineages from multipotent retinal progenitors. Rod photoreceptor differentiation 
requires the basic motif-leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor NRL, because 
loss of Nrl in mice (Nrl-/-) results in complete transformation of rods to
functional cones. To examine the role of NRL in cell fate determination, we
generated transgenic mice that express Nrl under the control of Crx promoter in
postmitotic photoreceptor precursors of WT and Nrl-/- retina. We show that NRL
expression, in both genetic backgrounds, leads to a functional retina with only
rod photoreceptors. The absence of cones does not alter retinal lamination,
although cone synaptic circuitry is now recruited by rods. Ectopic expression of 
NRL in developing cones can also induce rod-like characteristics and partially
suppress cone-specific gene expression. We show that NRL is associated with
specific promoter sequences in Thrb (encoding TRbeta2 transcription factor
required for M-cone differentiation) and S-opsin and may, therefore, directly
participate in transcriptional suppression of cone development. Our studies
establish that NRL is not only essential but is sufficient for rod
differentiation and that postmitotic photoreceptor precursors are competent to
make binary decisions during early retinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1780067
PMID: 17242361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1764-73. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

The rat thyroid hormone receptor (TR) Deltabeta3 displays cell-, TR isoform-, and
thyroid hormone response element-specific actions.

Harvey CB(1), Bassett JH, Maruvada P, Yen PM, Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Group, Division of Medicine and Medical Research
Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, Clinical Research
Building 5th Floor, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United
Kingdom.

The THRB gene encodes the well-described thyroid hormone (T3) receptor (TR)
isoforms TRbeta1 and TRbeta2 and two additional variants, TRbeta3 and
TRDeltabeta3, of unknown physiological significance. TRbeta1, TRbeta2, and
TRbeta3 are bona fide T3 receptors that bind DNA and T3 and regulate expression
of T3-responsive target genes. TRDeltabeta3 retains T3 binding activity but lacks
a DNA binding domain and does not activate target gene transcription.
TRDeltabeta3 can be translated from a specific TRDeltabeta3 mRNA or is
coexpressed with TRbeta3 from a single transcript that contains an internal
TRDeltabeta3 translation start site. In these studies, we provide evidence that
the TRbeta3/Deltabeta3 locus is present in rat but not in other vertebrates,
including humans. We compared the activity of TRbeta3 with other TR isoforms and 
investigated mechanisms of action of TRDeltabeta3 at specific thyroid hormone
response elements (TREs) in two cell types. TRbeta3 was the most potent isoform, 
but TR potency was TRE dependent. TRDeltabeta3 acted as a cell-specific and
TRE-dependent modulator of TRbeta3 when coexpressed at low concentrations. At
higher concentrations, TRDeltabeta3 was a TRE-selective and cell-specific
antagonist of TRalpha1, -beta1, and -beta3. Both TRbeta3 and TRDeltabeta3 were
expressed in the nucleus in the absence and presence of hormone, and their
actions were determined by cell type and TRE structure, whereas TRDeltabeta3
actions were also dependent on the TR isoform with which it interacted. Analysis 
of these complex responses implicates a range of nuclear corepressors and
coactivators as cell-, TR isoform-, and TRE-specific modulators of T3 action.

PMCID: PMC2681178
PMID: 17218414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jan;192(1):83-6.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta mutations in the 'hot-spot region' are rare events 
in thyroid carcinomas.

Rocha AS(1), Marques R, Bento I, Soares R, Magalhães J, de Castro IV, Soares P.

Author information: 
(1)IPATIMUP, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of
Porto, Rua Roberto Frias s/n, 4200-065 Porto, Portugal. arocha@ipatimup.pt

Thyroid cancer constitutes the most frequent endocrine neoplasia. Targeted
expression of rearranged during transfection (RET)/papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC) and V600E V-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) to the
thyroid glands of transgenic mice results in tumours similar to those of human
PTC, providing evidence for the involvement of these oncogenes in PTC. Kato et
al. developed a mouse model that mimics the full spectrum of the human follicular
form of thyroid cancer (FTC). FTC rapidly develops in these mice through
introduction of the thyroid hormone receptor beta (THRB)(PV) mutant on the
background of the inactivated THRB wt locus. Our aim was to verify if, in the
context of human follicular thyroid carcinogenesis, THRB acted as a tumour
suppressor gene. We screened for mutations of the THRB gene in the hot-spot
region, spanning exons 7-10, in 51 thyroid tumours and six thyroid cancer cell
lines by PCR and direct sequencing. We did not find mutations in any of the
tumours or cell lines analysed. Our findings suggest that, in contrast to the
findings on the THRB-mutant transgenic mice, THRB gene mutations are not a
relevant mechanism for human thyroid carcinogenesis.

PMID: 17210745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Cancer. 2007 Apr 1;120(7):1465-71.

Detection of tumor-specific DNA in blood and bone marrow plasma from patients
with prostate cancer.

Schwarzenbach H(1), Chun FK, Lange I, Carpenter S, Gottberg M, Erbersdobler A,
Friedrich MG, Huland H, Pantel K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Germany.

Tumor tissues, blood plasma and bone marrow (BM) aspirates of 57 prostate cancer 
patients (PCa) without clinical signs of overt metastases were assessed for LOH
(loss of heterozygosity) by a PCR-based fluorescence microsatellite analysis,
using a panel of 15 markers. Additionally, micrometastatic tumor cells in BM were
monitored by an immunocytological cytokeratin assay. In total, 25 (44%), 32 (56%)
and 41 (72%) of the patients had at least 1 LOH in their blood, BM and tumor
samples, respectively. Among the informative cases, the frequency of LOH was
highest in blood plasma for the markers D8S360 (18%) and D10S1765 (15%), and in
BM plasma for THRB (24%) and D8S137 (22%). Comparison of blood plasma and BM with
tumors showed discrepant results in 35% and 45% of patients, respectively.
Whereas all LOHs at THRB in BM plasma were also detected in the autologous tumor 
tissues, LOHs at D6S474 and D11S898 in BM were not retrieved in the tumors. The
comparison with established risk factors showed a correlation of borderline
significance for LOH at D9S1748 in the BM aspirates (p=0.055) and a significant
correlation in the tumor samples (p=0.004) with increasing pathologic Gleason
scores. Interestingly, 22% of the PCa patients harbored tumor cells in their BM
and tended (p=0.065) to have more frequent LOH (16%) in BM plasma compared to
patients without tumor cells (9%). These data demonstrate, for the first time,
the presence of free tumor-specific DNA in blood and BM of PCa patients and
suggest a possible relationship to BM micrometastasis.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17205532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Sep;1075:222-9.

Comparison of genetic alterations detected in circulating microsatellite DNA in
blood plasma samples of patients with prostate cancer and benign prostatic
hyperplasia.

Müller I(1), Urban K, Pantel K, Schwarzenbach H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Prostate cancer is the most frequent malignant disease and the second most
frequent cause of death due to cancer in men in the Western world. Since serum
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and its subforms show poor specificity in
clinical practice, a molecular marker for the detection and discrimination of
prostate cancer (PCa) could be of great interest. To investigate the potential
significance of genetic aberrations, such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH), in PCa
we identified and characterized allelic losses in circulating tumor-associated
DNA in blood from patients with localized PCa. Genomic DNA extracted from
cell-free plasma of blood samples drawn from 65 PCa patients was analyzed using a
panel of 15 polymorphic microsatellite markers mapping to known tumor-suppressor 
genes. Comparative analyses were performed with a control group of 36 patients
with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). In the current study, we demonstrate
that PCa patients had higher DNA concentrations in their blood circulation than
BPH patients. In the marker panel studied, LOH was more frequently detected in
PCa patients (34%) than in BPH patients (22%). The incidence of LOH in the plasma
DNA of PCa patients was highest at chromosomal regions 3p24 (THRB, 22%) and 8p21 
(D8S360, 22%) in comparison to the BPH control cohort, which frequently showed
LOH at loci 8q21, 8p21, 9p21, and 11q22 (D8S286, D8S360, D9S1748, and D11S898,
each 6%). These results indicate that microsatellite analysis using plasma DNA
may be an interesting tool for molecular screening of PCa patients.

PMID: 17108215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;37(1):121-34.

Multiple molecular effect pathways of an environmental oestrogen in fish.

Filby AL(1), Thorpe KL, Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology Group, School of Biosciences,
Hatherly Laboratories, University of Exeter, Prince of Wales Road, Exeter, Devon 
EX4 4PS, UK. a.l.filby@exeter.ac.uk

Complex interrelationships in the signalling of oestrogenic effects mean that
environmental oestrogens present in the aquatic environment have the potential to
disrupt physiological function in fish in a more complex manner than portrayed in
the present literature. Taking a broader approach to investigate the possible
effect pathways and the likely consequences of environmental oestrogen exposure
in fish, the effects of 17beta-oestradiol (E(2)) were studied on the expression
of a suite of genes which interact to mediate growth, development and thyroid and
interrenal function (growth hormone GH (gh), GH receptor (ghr ), insulin-like
growth factor (IGF-I) (igf1), IGF-I receptor (igf1r ), thyroid hormone
receptors-alpha (thra) and -beta (thrb) and glucocorticoid receptor (gr ))
together with the expression analyses of sex-steroid receptors and ten other
genes centrally involved in sexual development and reproduction in fathead minnow
(fhm; Pimephales promelas). Exposure of adult fhm to 35 ng E(2)/l for 14 days
induced classic oestrogen biomarker responses (hepatic oestrogen receptor 1 and
plasma vitellogenin), and impacted on the reproductive axis, feminising "male"
steroidogenic enzyme expression profiles and suppressing genes involved in testis
differentiation. However, E(2) also triggered a cascade of responses for gh, ghr,
igf1, igf1r, thra, thrb and gr in the pituitary, brain, liver, gonad and gill,
with potential consequences for the functioning of many physiological processes, 
not just reproduction. Molecular responses to E(2) were complex, with most genes 
showing differential responses between tissues and sexes. For example, igf1
expression increased in brain but decreased in gill on exposure to E(2), and
responded in an opposite way in males compared with females in liver, gonad and
pituitary. These findings demonstrate the importance of developing a deeper
understanding of the endocrine interactions for unravelling the mechanisms of
environmental oestrogen action and predicting the likely health consequences.

PMID: 16901929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jan;47(1):120-32.

Thyroxine affects expression of KSPG-related genes, the carbonic anhydrase II
gene, and KS sulfation in the embryonic chicken cornea.

Conrad AH(1), Zhang Y, Walker AR, Olberding LA, Hanzlick A, Zimmer AJ, Morffi R, 
Conrad GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506-4901,
USA. aconrad@ksu.edu

PURPOSE: Opaque chick corneas become thin and transparent from embryonic day (E)9
to E20 of incubation. Thyroxine (T4) injected in ovo on E9 induces precocious
transparency by E12. The present study was conducted to determine whether corneal
cells differentially express genes for T4 regulation, keratan sulfate
proteoglycan (KSPG) synthesis, crystallins, and endothelial cell ion transporters
during transparency development and whether these expressions are altered when E9
embryos are treated with T4.
METHODS: E9 eggs received T4 or buffer; corneas were dissected on E12. Corneal
transparency was measured digitally and thickness was determined from cryostat
cross sections. mRNA expressions were determined by real-time PCR using cDNA
synthesized from whole-cell RNA, cells expressing T4 receptor mRNAs assessed by
in situ hybridization, and KS disaccharide sulfation measured by electrospray
ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS).
RESULTS: All corneal layers expressed T4 receptor alpha (THRA) mRNA; keratocytes 
and endothelial cells expressed T4 receptor beta (THRB) mRNA. During normal
development, THRB expression increased 20-fold from E12 to E20; THRA expression
remained constant. Expressions of most genes involved in KS synthesis increased
from E9 to E16, and then decreased from E16 to E20. From E9 to E20, expressions
of crystallin genes increased; T4/3-deiodinase DIII (DIO3) increased 10-fold; and
sodium-potassium ATPase transporter (ATP1A1), sodium-bicarbonate transporter
(NBC), and carbonic anhydrase II (CA2) increased 5- to 10-fold. E9 T4
administration decreased corneal thickness by E12; increased DIO3, THRB, and CA2 
expressions 5- to 20-fold; decreased KSPG core protein genes and galactose
sulfotransferase CHST1 expressions 2-fold; and reduced KS disulfated/monosulfated
disaccharide (DSD/MSD) ratios.
CONCLUSIONS: Thyroxine modifies expressions of KSPG synthesis and carbonic
anhydrase genes.

PMID: 16384953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biosci Bioeng. 1999;88(2):168-72.

Redirection of carbon flux to lysine in a recombinant of Corynebacterium
lactofermentum ATCC 21799 by limited supply of pantothenate.

An GH(1), Song KB, Sinskey AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 68-370, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77
Massachusetts Ave., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

To increase carbon flux to lysine, minimized production of amino acids that are
biosynthetically related to lysine, for example, isoleucine and valine, is
required. By limiting the supply of pantothenate, the precursor of coenzyme A,
the carbon flux was redirected from isoleucine and valine to lysine in the
recombinant of Corynebacterium lactofermentum ATCC 21799 containing the plasmid
pGC77. The pGC77 contains hom(dr), thrB, and ilvA encoding feedback-deregulated
homoserine dehydrogenase, homoserine kinase, and threonine dehydratase,
respectively. At 250 microM of isopropyl-beta-d-thiogalactopyranoside, the
recombinant (pGC77) produced lysine, valine, and isoleucine. Limiting the supply 
of pantothenate from 300 microg/l to 30 microg/l resulted in an increase in
lysine (from 4.5 to 6.4 g/l) and decreases in valine (from 3.1 to 1.6 g/l) and
isoleucine (from 0.9 to 0.3 g/l) production. The concentration of pyruvate was
higher and that of acetate lower in the pantothenate-limited culture than in the 
control, suggesting that the limited supply of pantothenate delayed the
conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. Increased availability of pyruvate by
limiting the supply of pantothenate might favor the integration of pyruvate into 
the lysine branch. The results of this study are useful for the production of
lysine with decreased concentrations of byproducts.

PMID: 16232592  [PubMed]


152. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2005 Oct;181(4):653-63. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Hyperactivity, impaired learning on a vigilance task, and a differential response
to methylphenidate in the TRbetaPV knock-in mouse.

Siesser WB(1), Cheng SY, McDonald MP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232-0325, USA.

RATIONALE: The thyroid hormones (T3 and T4) play a critical role in brain
development, and thyroid abnormalities have been linked to a variety of
psychiatric and neuropsychological disorders. Among patients with the rare
genetic syndrome resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), 40-70% meet the diagnostic 
criteria for attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). RTH is caused by a 
mutation in the thyroid receptor beta (Thrb) gene that results in reduced binding
of T3 to its receptor and elevated concentrations of T3, T4, and
thyroid-stimulating hormone.
OBJECTIVES: We tested a knock-in (KI) mouse expressing a mutant TRbeta allele
(TRbetaPV) for the behavioral features of ADHD and their response to
methylphenidate (MPH).
METHODS: The locomotor activity of the TRbetaPV KI mice was measured in activity 
monitors over multiple sessions. Sustained attention and the effects of MPH on
attention were assessed using a vigilance task.
RESULTS: The TRbetaPV KI mice are hyperactive and have learning deficits on a
vigilance task. Doses of MPH that impair the vigilance performance of wild-type
mice do not affect the performance of the TRbetaPV KI mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The TRbetaPV KI mice provide a tool for studying the underlying
neural deficits that contribute to thyroid-related neurological disorders,
hyperactivity, and altered responsiveness to MPH.

PMID: 15983791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Microbiol. 2005 Jul;57(2):468-83.

A genetic screen identifies genes and sites involved in pilin antigenic variation
in Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Sechman EV(1), Rohrer MS, Seifert HS.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Searle 6-450, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

It has previously been shown that the frequency of pilin antigenic variation in
Neisseria gonorrhoeae (the gonococcus, Gc) is regulated by iron availability. To 
identify factors involved in pilin variation in an iron-dependent or an
iron-independent manner, we conducted a genetic screen of transposon-mutated
gonococci using a pilus-dependent colony morphology phenotype to detect antigenic
variation deficient mutants. Forty-six total mutants representing insertions in
30 different genes were shown to have reduced colony morphology changes resulting
from impaired pilin variation. Five mutants exhibited an iron-dependent decrease 
in pilin variation, while the remaining 41 displayed an iron-independent decrease
in pilin variation. Based on the levels of antigenic variation impairment, we
defined the genes as being essential for, important for, or involved in antigenic
variation. DNA repair and DNA transformation frequencies of each mutant were
measured to determine whether other recombination-based processes were also
affected in the mutants. Each mutant was placed into one of six classes based on 
their pilin variation, DNA repair and DNA transformation phenotypes. Among the
many genes identified, recR is shown to be an additional member of the gonococcal
RecF-like recombination pathway. In addition, recG and ruvA represent the first
evidence that the processing of Holliday junctions is required for pilin
antigenic variation. Moreover, two independent insertions in a non-coding region 
upstream of the pilE gene suggest that cis-acting sequences important for pilin
variation are found in that region. Finally, insertions that effect expression of
the thrB and thrC genes suggest that molecules in the threonine biosynthetic
pathway are important for pilin variation. Many of the other genes identified in 
this genetic screen do not have an obvious role in pilin variation, DNA repair,
or DNA transformation.

PMID: 15978078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Clin Chim Acta. 2005 Aug;358(1-2):55-9.

DNA-based diagnosis of thyroid hormone resistance syndrome: a novel THRB mutation
associated with mild resistance to thyroid hormone.

Lam CW(1), On-Kei Chan A, Tong SF, Shek CC, Cheung Tiu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, China. ching-wanlam@cuhk.edu.hk

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormones govern a wide range of metabolic processes in the
body via thyroid hormone receptors (TR). We report a patient with mild resistance
to thyroid hormone who was initially misdiagnosed and treated as having
thyrotoxicosis.
METHODS: We used direct DNA sequencing of the THRB gene.
RESULTS: We identified a novel missense mutation, I276L, located in exon 8 of the
gene. The mutation is located in cluster 3 of the ligand-binding domain, a
protein domain associated with resistance to thyroid hormone.
CONCLUSION: DNA-based diagnosis of thyroid hormone resistance syndrome is simple,
reliable, and economical compared to traditional biochemical tests. Once the
mutation is identified, targeted screening for the whole family can be performed 
and the unnecessary use of anti-thyroid drugs or thyroidectomy can be avoided.

PMID: 15913586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2005 May-Jun;16(4):176-82.

Thyroid hormone receptor mutations and disease: beyond thyroid hormone
resistance.

Cheng SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.
sycheng@helix.nih.gov

Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are ligand-dependent transcription factors that
mediate the biological activities of thyroid hormone (T3). Two THR genes (A and
B), located on different chromosomes, yield four T3-binding isoforms with highly 
conserved sequences in the DNA- and ligand-binding domains. Mutations of THRB
cause a human genetic disease, thyroid hormone resistance syndrome (RTH).
Comprehensive genomic profiling unveiled the contribution of novel
change-of-function mutations of TRbeta to the pathogenesis of RTH. In addition,
abnormalities associated with mutations of the THRA gene have been uncovered
recently. The phenotypic manifestations of mutated THRB and THRA genes are
distinct, indicating isoform-dependent actions of TR mutants in vivo. Therefore, 
mutant TRs provide a new paradigm to understand the molecular basis of receptor
disease.

PMID: 15860414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biol Reprod. 2005 Sep;73(3):396-403. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Regulation of neonatal Sertoli cell development by thyroid hormone receptor
alpha1.

Holsberger DR(1), Kiesewetter SE, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
61802, USA.

Neonatal hypothyroidism increases adult Sertoli cell populations by extending
Sertoli cell proliferation. Conversely, hyperthyroidism induces premature
cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and stimulates maturational events like
seminiferous tubule canalization. Thyroid hormone receptors alpha1 and beta1,
which are commonly referred to as TRalpha1 and TRbeta1, respectively, are
expressed in neonatal Sertoli cells. We determined the relative roles of TRalpha1
and TRbeta1 in the thyroid hormone effect on testicular development and Sertoli
cell proliferation using Thra knockout (TRalphaKO), Thrb knockout (TRbetaKO), and
wild-type (WT) mice. Triiodothyronine (T3) treatment from birth until Postnatal
Day 10 reduced Sertoli cell proliferation to minimal levels in WT and TRbetaKO
mice versus that in their untreated controls, whereas T3 had a diminished effect 
on TRalphaKO Sertoli cell proliferation. Seminiferous tubule patency and luminal 
diameter were increased in T3-treated WT and TRbetaKO testes. In contrast, T3 had
no effect on these parameters in TRalphaKO mice. In untreated adult TRalphaKO
mice, Sertoli cell number, testis weight, and daily sperm production were
increased or trended toward an increase, but the increase in magnitude was
smaller than that seen in WT mice following neonatal hypothyroidism. Conversely, 
in TRbetaKO mice, Sertoli cell number, testis weight, and daily sperm production 
were similar to those in untreated WT mice. In addition, Sertoli cell number and 
testis weight in adult WT and TRbetaKO mice showed comparable increases following
hypothyroidism. Our results show that TRalphaKO mice have testicular effects
similar to those seen in WT mice following neonatal hypothyroidism and that
TRbetaKO mice, but not TRalphaKO mice, have normal Sertoli cell responsiveness to
T3. Thus, effects of exogenous manipulation of T3 on neonatal Sertoli cell
development are predominately mediated through TRalpha1.

PMID: 15858214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Hum Mutat. 2004 Nov;24(5):439.

Mutation analysis of NR2E3 and NRL genes in Enhanced S Cone Syndrome.

Wright AF(1), Reddick AC, Schwartz SB, Ferguson JS, Aleman TS, Kellner U,
Jurklies B, Schuster A, Zrenner E, Wissinger B, Lennon A, Shu X, Cideciyan AV,
Stone EM, Jacobson SG, Swaroop A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 
alan.wright@hgu.mrc.uk

Ten new and seventeen previously reported Enhanced S Cone Syndrome (ESCS)
subjects were used to search for genetic heterogeneity. All subjects were
diagnosed with ESCS on the basis of clinical, psychophysical and/or
electroretinography testing using published criteria. Mutation analysis was
performed on the NR2E3 nuclear receptor gene by single strand conformation
analysis and direct sequencing, which revealed either homozygous (N=13) or
compound heterozygous (N=11) mutations in 24 subjects (89%), heterozygous
mutations in 2 subjects (7%) and no mutations in 1 subject (4%). Fifteen
different mutations were identified, including six not previously reported. The
subject (Patient A) with no detected NR2E3 mutation had features not usually
associated with ESCS, in particular moderate rod photoreceptor function in
peripheral retina and an abnormally thick retinal nerve fibre layer. Mutation
analysis of the NRL, CRX, NR1D1 and THRB genes in this individual revealed a
heterozygous one base-pair insertion in exon 2 of the NRL gene, which results in 
a predicted truncation of the NRL protein. Loss-of-function NRL alleles have not 
been described previously in humans, but since the same mutation was present in
unaffected family members, it raises the possibility that the abnormal ESCS
phenotype in Patient A may result from a digenic mechanism, with a heterozygous
NRL mutation and a mutation in another unknown gene.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15459973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Bioinformatics. 2004 Dec 12;20(18):3455-61. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

A probabilistic measure for alignment-free sequence comparison.

Pham TD(1), Zuegg J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computing and Information Technology, Griffith University, Nathan
Campus, QLD 4111, Australia. t.pham@griffith.edu.au <t.pham@griffith.edu.au>

MOTIVATION: Alignment-free sequence comparison methods are still in the early
stages of development compared to those of alignment-based sequence analysis. In 
this paper, we introduce a probabilistic measure of similarity between two
biological sequences without alignment. The method is based on the concept of
comparing the similarity/dissimilarity between two constructed Markov models.
RESULTS: The method was tested against six DNA sequences, which are the thrA,
thrB and thrC genes of the threonine operons from Escherichia coli K-12 and from 
Shigella flexneri; and one random sequence having the same base composition as
thrA from E.coli. These results were compared with those obtained from CLUSTAL W 
algorithm (alignment-based) and the chaos game representation (alignment-free).
The method was further tested against a more complex set of 40 DNA sequences and 
compared with other existing sequence similarity measures (alignment-free).
AVAILABILITY: All datasets and computer codes written in MATLAB are available
upon request from the first author.

PMID: 15271780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Microbiology. 2004 May;150(Pt 5):1467-74.

Role of homoserine and threonine pathway intermediates as precursors for the
biosynthesis of aminoethoxyvinylglycine in Streptomyces sp. NRRL 5331.

Fernández M(1), Cuadrado Y, Aparicio JF, Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology INBIOTEC, Parque Científico de León, Avda. del
Real, no. 1, 24006 León, Spain.

The genes hom, thrB and thrC, encoding homoserine dehydrogenase, homoserine
kinase (HK) and threonine synthase, respectively, involved in the last steps of
threonine biosynthesis, have been studied in Streptomyces sp. NRRL 5331, the
producer of the ethylene synthetase inhibitor aminoethoxyvinylglycine (AVG), in
order to determine their role in the biosynthesis of AVG. Different null mutants 
were obtained by plasmid-mediated disruption of each of the three genes. thrC
gene disruption had no effect on AVG production, while the disruption of thrB
blocked HK activity and substantially reduced the yield of this metabolite,
probably due to the accumulation of homoserine and/or methionine which have a
negative effect on AVG biosynthesis. Disruption of hom (thrA) completely blocked 
AVG biosynthesis, indicating that homoserine lies at the branching point of the
aspartic-acid-derived biosynthetic route that leads to AVG. The four carbon atoms
of the vinylglycine moiety of AVG derive, therefore, from homoserine.

PMID: 15133108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jul;18(7):1631-42. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Multiple messenger ribonucleic acid variants regulate cell-specific expression of
human thyroid hormone receptor beta1.

Frankton S(1), Harvey CB, Gleason LM, Fadel A, Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Group, Division of Medicine and Medical Research
Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

Thyroid hormones are essential for development, growth, and metabolism and act
via T3 receptors (TR) alpha and beta. The THRA and THRB genes have discrete
physiological roles but their mRNAs are expressed widely in overlapping patterns.
There is poor correlation between TR mRNA and protein, indicating that expression
may be regulated by posttranscriptional mechanisms. Differences in the relative
levels of expressed TRalpha and beta proteins have been suggested to modulate
tissue T3 responsiveness. We determined the structure of the human THRB gene,
cloned seven alternately spliced 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) TRbeta1 mRNAs,
and identified five polyadenylation position elements in the 3'-UTR. At least six
TRbeta1 mRNAs between 1.35 and 7.5 kb in length were expressed in discrete
temporospatial patterns in fetal and adult human tissues. The 5'-UTRs contained
up to seven upstream short open reading frames, which did not influence the
structure of the TRbeta1 protein. In transfection studies, 5'-UTRs exerted
cell-specific effects on mRNA expression but consistently reduced protein
expression. Furthermore, each 5'-UTR strongly inhibited translation in vitro.
Thus, developmental and tissue-specific expression of human thyroid hormone
receptor beta1 5'-UTR mRNAs may regulate T3-responsiveness in target tissues by
modulating TRbeta protein translation and thereby controlling the ratio of
expressed TRalpha and -beta proteins.

PMID: 15105435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):13166-73. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

The thrH gene product of Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a dual activity enzyme with a 
novel phosphoserine:homoserine phosphotransferase activity.

Singh SK(1), Yang K, Karthikeyan S, Huynh T, Zhang X, Phillips MA, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The thrH gene product of Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been shown to complement both
homoserine kinase (thrB gene product) and phosphoserine phosphatase (serB gene
product) activities in vivo. Sequence comparison has revealed that ThrH is
related to phosphoserine phosphatases (PSP, EC 3.1.3.3) and belongs to the
l-2-haloacid dehalogenase-like protein superfamily. We have solved the crystal
structures of ThrH in the apoform and in complex with a bound product phosphate. 
The structure confirms an overall fold similar to that of PSP. Most of the
catalytic residues of PSP are also conserved in ThrH, suggesting that similar
catalytic mechanisms are used by both enzymes. Spectrophotometry-based in vitro
assays show that ThrH is indeed a phosphoserine phosphatase with a K(m) of 0.207 
mm and k(cat) of 13.4 min(-1), comparable with those of other PSPs. More
interestingly, using high pressure liquid chromatography-based assays, we have
demonstrated that ThrH is able to further transfer the phosphoryl group to
homoserine using phosphoserine as the phosphoryl group donor, indicating that
ThrH has a novel phosphoserine:homoserine phosphotransferase activity.

PMID: 14699121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Thyroid. 2003 Nov;13(11):1057-68.

The thyroid hormone receptor beta gene: structure and functions in the brain and 
sensory systems.

Jones I(1), Srinivas M, Ng L, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Thyroid hormone profoundly influences the development of the vertebrate nervous
system. The thyroid hormone receptor beta gene (Thrb) is a key mediator of many
of these actions. The Thrb gene is complex, spanning up to 400 kb in mammals, and
differentially expresses distinct receptor subtypes through independent
tissue-specific promoters and alternative splicing. These receptors serve a range
of functions in the brain as well as particularly sensitive functions in the
auditory and visual sensory systems. The Thrb gene illustrates how versatility in
neurodevelopmental control can be achieved at the receptor level.

PMID: 14651789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. EMBO Rep. 2003 Jun;4(6):581-7.

Effects of ligand and thyroid hormone receptor isoforms on hepatic gene
expression profiles of thyroid hormone receptor knockout mice.

Yen PM(1), Feng X, Flamant F, Chen Y, Walker RL, Weiss RE, Chassande O, Samarut
J, Refetoff S, Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Regulation and Neuroendocrinology Section, Clinical Endocrinology
Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases/NIH,
Room 8D12, Building 10, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. pauly@intra.niddk.nih.gov

Little is known about the overall patterns of thyroid hormone (Th)-mediated gene 
regulation by the main Th receptor (Tr) isoforms, Tr-alpha and Tr-beta, in vivo. 
We used 48 complementary DNA microarrays to examine hepatic gene expression
profiles of wild-type and Thra and Thrb knockout mice under different Th
conditions: no treatment, treatment with 3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T(3)),
Th-deprivation using propylthiouracil (PTU), and treatment with a combination of 
PTU and T(3). Hierarchical clustering analyses showed that positively regulated
genes fit into three main expression patterns. In addition, only a subpopulation 
of target genes repressed basal transcription in the absence of ligand.
Interestingly, Thra and Thrb knockout mice showed similar gene expression
patterns to wild-type mice, suggesting that these isoforms co-regulate most
hepatic target genes. Differences in the gene expression patterns of Thra/Thrb
double-knockout mice and Th-deprived wild-type mice show that absence of receptor
and of hormone can have different effects. This large-scale study of hormonal
regulation reveals the functions of Th and of Tr isoforms in the regulation of
gene expression patterns.

PMCID: PMC1319202
PMID: 12776178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cancer Lett. 2003 Mar 31;192(2):121-32.

Thyroid hormone receptors/THR genes in human cancer.

González-Sancho JM(1), García V, Bonilla F, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University Medical
College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine, T3) is a pleiotropic regulator of growth,
differentiation and tissue homeostasis in higher organisms that acts through the 
control of target gene expression. Most, if not all, major T3 actions are
mediated by specific high affinity nuclear receptors (TR) which are encoded by
two genes, THRA and THRB. Several TRalpha and TRbeta receptor isoforms are
expressed. Abundant and contradictory literature exists on the relationship
between circulating thyroid hormone levels, thyroid diseases and human cancer. In
1986, a connection between TR and cancer became evident when the chicken TRalpha1
was characterized as the c-erbA proto-oncogene, the cellular counterpart of the
retroviral v-erbA oncogene. V-erbA causes erythroleukemias and sarcomas in birds,
and hepatocellular carcinomas in transgenic mice. In recent years, many studies
have analyzed the presence of quantitative (abnormal levels) or qualitative
(mutations) alterations in the expression of THR genes in different types of
human neoplasias. While their role in tumor generation or progression is
currently unclear, both gross chromosomal and minor mutations (deletions,
aberrant splicing, point mutations) and changes in the level of expression of
THRA and THRB genes have been found. Together with other in vitro data indicating
connections between TR and p53, Rb, cyclin D and other cell cycle regulators and 
oncogenes, these results suggest that THRA and THRB may be involved in human
cancer.

PMID: 12668276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2002 Sep;3(3):279-88. Epub 2002 Feb 27.

Knock-in mouse model for resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH): an RTH mutation in 
the thyroid hormone receptor beta gene disrupts cochlear morphogenesis.

Griffith AJ(1), Szymko YM, Kaneshige M, Quiñónez RE, Kaneshige K, Heintz KA,
Mastroianni MA, Kelley MW, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Hearing Section, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20850, USA.

Thyroid hormone and the beta isoform of its receptor, Trb, are essential for
normal development of the mammalian auditory system. We have analyzed auditory
system function and structure in a mouse strain with a targeted Thrb mutation,
Thrb(PV), which leads to the loss of binding of thyroid hormone (T3) to the Trb
protein. Heterozygosity for the orthologous human THRB(PV) mutation and other
similar mutations in human THRB cause resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), which 
is occasionally associated with mild sensorineural hearing impairment. Auditory
brainstem response analysis of heterozygous Thrb(PV)/+ mice demonstrates that
they develop normal hearing. In contrast, Thrb(PV)/Thrb(PV) mice have severe
hearing impairment that is already present at 3 weeks of age. This hearing loss
is associated with disruption of postnatal morphogenesis of the tectorial
membrane and organ of Corti. Comparison with the previously described phenotype
of a Thrb -/- knockout strain suggests that Thrb(PV) disrupts the function of
other genes that are critical for development and/or maintenance of these
structures.

PMCID: PMC3202409
PMID: 12382103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2002 Oct;68(10):5051-6.

A plasmid selection system in Lactococcus lactis and its use for gene expression 
in L. lactis and human kidney fibroblasts.

Glenting J(1), Madsen SM, Vrang A, Fomsgaard A, Israelsen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lactic Acid Bacteria, Biotechnological Institute, DK-2970
Hørsholm, Denmark. jag@bioteknologisk.dk

We report the development of a nonantibiotic and nonpathogenic host-plasmid
selection system based on lactococcal genes and threonine complementation. We
constructed an auxotrophic Lactococcus lactis MG1363Deltathr strain which carries
deletions in two genes encoding threonine biosynthetic enzymes. To achieve
plasmid-borne complementation, we then constructed the minimal cloning vector,
pJAG5, based on the genes encoding homoserine dehydrogenase-homoserine kinase
(the hom-thrB operon) as a selective marker. Using strain MG1363Deltathr,
selection and maintenance of cells carrying pJAG5 were obtained in threonine-free
defined media. Compared to the commonly used selection system based on
erythromycin resistance, the designed complementation system offers a competitive
and stable plasmid selection system for the production of heterologous proteins
in L. lactis. The potential of pJAG5 to deliver genes for expression in
eukaryotes was evaluated by insertion of a mammalian expression unit encoding a
modified green fluorescent protein. The successful delivery and expression of
genes in human kidney fibroblasts indicated the potential of the designed
nonantibiotic host-plasmid system for use in genetic immunization.

PMCID: PMC126435
PMID: 12324356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Microbiology. 2002 May;148(Pt 5):1413-20.

Characterization of the hom-thrC-thrB cluster in
aminoethoxyvinylglycine-producing Streptomyces sp. NRRL 5331.

Fernández M(1), Cuadrado Y, Recio E, Aparicio JF, Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology INBIOTEC, Parque Científico de León, Avda. del
Real, no 1, 24006 León, Spain.

Three genes from the aminoethoxyvinylglycine (AVG)-producing Streptomyces sp.
NRRL 5331 involved in threonine biosynthesis, hom, thrB and thrC, encoding
homoserine dehydrogenase (HDH), homoserine kinase (HK) and threonine synthase
(TS), respectively, have been cloned and sequenced. The hom and thrC genes appear
to be organized in a bicistronic operon as deduced by disruption experiments. The
thrB gene, however, is transcribed as a monocistronic transcript. The encoded
proteins are quite similar to the HDH, HK and TS proteins from other bacterial
species. The overall organization of these three genes, in the order
hom-thrC-thrB, differs from that in other bacteria and is similar to that
reported in the Streptomyces coelicolor genome sequence. This is the first time
in which the gene cluster for the three last steps of threonine biosynthesis has 
been characterized from a streptomycete. Disruption of thrC indicated that
threonine is not a direct precursor for AVG biosynthesis in Streptomyces sp. NRRL
5331 and suggested that the branching point of the aspartic acid-derived
biosynthetic route of this metabolite should lie earlier on the threonine
biosynthetic route.

PMID: 11988515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2001 Dec;57(5-6):667-73.

Metabolic redirection of carbon flow toward isoleucine by expressing a catabolic 
threonine dehydratase in a threonine-overproducing Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Guillouet S(1), Rodal AA, An GH, Gorret N, Lessard PA, Sinskey AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

Carbon destined for lysine synthesis in Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 21799 can
be diverted toward threonine by overexpression of genes encoding a
feedback-insensitive homoserine dehydrogenase (hom(dr)) and homoserine kinase
(thrB). We studied the effects of introducing two different threonine dehydratase
genes into this threonine-producing system to gauge their effects on isoleucine
production. Co-expression of hom(dr), thrB, and ilvA, which encodes a native
threonine dehydratase, caused isoleucine to accumulate to a final concentration
of 2.2+/-0.2 g l(-1), five-fold more than accumulates in the wild-type strain,
and approximately twice as much as accumulates in the strain expressing only
hom(dr) and thrB. Comparing these data with previous results, we found that
overexpression of the three genes, hom(dr), thrB, and ilvA, in C. glutamicum ATCC
21799 is no better in terms of isoleucine production than the expression of a
single gene, tdcB, encoding a catabolic threonine dehydratase from Escherichia
coli. Co-expression of hom(dr), thrB, and tdcB, however, caused the concentration
of isoleucine to increase 20-fold compared to the wild-type strain, about four
times more than the corresponding ilvA-expressing strain. In this system, the
apparent yield of isoleucine production was multiplied by a factor of two [2.1
mmol (g dry cell weight)(-1)]. While the balance of excreted metabolites showed
that the carbon flow in this strain was completely redirected from the lysine
pathway into the isoleucine pathway, it also showed that more pyruvate was
diverted into amino acid synthesis.

PMID: 11778876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 15;21(24):9792-800.

Retardation of cochlear maturation and impaired hair cell function caused by
deletion of all known thyroid hormone receptors.

Rusch A(1), Ng L, Goodyear R, Oliver D, Lisoukov I, Vennstrom B, Richardson G,
Kelley MW, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Physiologisches Institut and Sektion Sensorische Biophysik, Hals-Nasen-Ohren
Klinik, Röntgenweg 11, Universität Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The deafness caused by early onset hypothyroidism indicates that thyroid hormone 
is essential for the development of hearing. We investigated the underlying roles
of the TRalpha1 and TRbeta thyroid hormone receptors in the auditory system using
receptor-deficient mice. TRalpha1 and TRbeta, which act as hormone-activated
transcription factors, are encoded by the Thra and Thrb genes, respectively, and 
both are expressed in the developing cochlea. TRbeta is required for hearing
because TRbeta-deficient (Thrb(tm1/tm1)) mice have a defective auditory-evoked
brainstem response and retarded expression of a potassium current (I(K,f)) in the
cochlear inner hair cells. Here, we show that although TRalpha1 is individually
dispensable, TRalpha1 and TRbeta synergistically control an extended array of
functions in postnatal cochlear development. Compared with Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice,
the deletion of all TRs in Thra(tm1/tm1)Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice produces exacerbated
and novel phenotypes, including delayed differentiation of the sensory
epithelium, malformation of the tectorial membrane, impairment of
electromechanical transduction in outer hair cells, and a low endocochlear
potential. The induction of I(K,f) in inner hair cells was not markedly more
retarded than in Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice, suggesting that this feature of hair cell
maturation is primarily TRbeta-dependent. These results indicate that distinct
pathways mediated by TRbeta alone or by TRbeta and TRalpha1 together facilitate
control over an extended range of functions during the maturation of the cochlea.

PMID: 11739587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2701-8.

Suppression of the deafness and thyroid dysfunction in Thrb-null mice by an
independent mutation in the Thra thyroid hormone receptor alpha gene.

Ng L(1), Rüsch A, Amma LL, Nordström K, Erway LC, Vennström B, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Box 1498, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425
Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Deletion of thyroid hormone receptor beta (TR beta), a ligand-dependent
transcription factor encoded by the Thrb gene, causes deafness and thyroid
hyperactivity in Thrb-null (Thrb(tm1/tm1)) mice and in a recessive form of the
human syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone. Here, we have determined that a 
targeted mutation (Thra(tm2)) in the related Thra gene, encoding thyroid hormone 
receptor alpha suppresses these phenotypes in mice. Thra encodes a TR alpha 1
receptor which is non-essential for hearing and a TR alpha 2 splice variant of
unknown function that neither binds thyroid hormone nor transactivates. The
Thra(tm2) mutation deletes TR alpha 2 and concomitantly causes overexpression of 
TR alpha 1 as a consequence of the exon structure of the gene. Thra(tm2/tm2) mice
have normal auditory thresholds indicating that TR alpha 2 is dispensable for
hearing, and have only marginally reduced thyroid activity. However, a potent
function for the Thra(tm2) allele is revealed upon its introduction into
Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice, where it suppresses the auditory and thyroid phenotypes
caused by loss of TR beta. These findings reveal a novel modifying function for a
Thra allele and suggest that increased expression of TR alpha 1 may substitute
for the absence of TR beta. The TR isotypes generated by the distinct Thrb and
Thra genes represent a small family of receptors that have diverged to mediate
different physiological roles; however, the ability of changes in Thra expression
to compensate for loss of Thrb indicates that many functions of these genes
remain closely related.

PMID: 11726557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neuroreport. 2001 Aug 8;12(11):2359-62.

Audiogenic seizure susceptibility in thyroid hormone receptor beta-deficient
mice.

Ng L(1), Pedraza PE, Faris JS, Vennström B, Curran T, Morreale de Escobar G,
Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison
Avenue, New York, NY 10029, USA.

As early-onset hypothyroidism produces audiogenic seizure susceptibility (AGS) in
rodents, the role of TR alpha 1 and TR beta thyroid hormone receptors in AGS was 
investigated. AGS occurs in mice lacking specifically TR beta (Thrb(tm1/tm1)) and
is marked by early onset and persistence, thereby differing from mouse strains
where AGS is age-restricted. Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice display AGS whether on a mixed
129/Sv x C57BL/6J or congenic C57BL/6J background. 27% of wild-type mice on the
mixed and 0% on the congenic background exhibited AGS. The inability of
Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice to downregulate the response to sustained acoustic stimulation
may reside in the brain or in the auditory system itself as Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice
also display auditory deficits. The AGS phenotype identifies a novel neurological
role for TR beta.

PMID: 11496110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2001 Jul;185(1):108-15.

Microsatellite alterations in exfoliated cervical epithelia deoxyribonucleic acid
as a marker for high-grade dysplasia.

Chang CL(1), Wang SY, Wu CC, Su TH, Wang KL, Chen HS, Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, 92, Section
2, Chung-Shan North Rd., Taipei 104, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of the use
of deoxyribonucleic acid microsatellite alterations in cervical epithelia in the 
prediction of high-grade dysplasia and to compare it with a strategy based on
human papillomavirus testing.
STUDY DESIGN: Our prospective study subjects were from a cohort of 498 women with
minimally abnormal Papanicolaou test results including atypical squamous cells of
undetermined significance and low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion who had
documented repeated Papanicolaou and human papillomavirus tests. Of these, 52
eligible patients having conizations or hysterectomies as their histologic
outcomes were subjected to tests of loss of heterozygosity on a panel of 5
microsatellites (D3S1110, THRB, D3S1228, D6S291, D3S1289) within the
deoxyribonucleic acid of exfoliated cervical epithelia. These genetic alterations
were analyzed through fluorescence polymerase chain reaction by comparison of
allele ratios of exfoliated cells with those of normal control tissue. Predictive
values for high-grade cervical dysplasia and cancer between this deoxyribonucleic
acid marker and human papillomavirus status were compared.
RESULTS: With the use of loss of heterozygosity in at least one locus for
predicting high-grade cervical neoplastic lesion, the sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, and negative predictive value were 96.7%, 59.1%,
76.3%, and 92.9%, which were superior to those of the human papillomavirus test
(80%, 59.1%, 72.7%, and 92.9%). As a triage for atypical squamous cells of
undetermined significance, its sensitivity and negative predictive value were up 
to 100%.
CONCLUSION: The promising results on determining microsatellite alteration in
dysplastic lesions might imply that it is possible to detect the earliest changes
by potential molecular markers with exfoliated cervical epithelial cells.

PMID: 11483913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Bioinformatics. 2001 May;17(5):429-37.

Analysis of genomic sequences by Chaos Game Representation.

Almeida JS(1), Carriço JA, Maretzek A, Noble PA, Fletcher M.

Author information: 
(1)ITQB/Universidade Nova Lisboa, PO Box 127, 2780 Oeiras, Portugal.
almeidaj@musc.edu

MOTIVATION: Chaos Game Representation (CGR) is an iterative mapping technique
that processes sequences of units, such as nucleotides in a DNA sequence or amino
acids in a protein, in order to find the coordinates for their position in a
continuous space. This distribution of positions has two properties: it is
unique, and the source sequence can be recovered from the coordinates such that
distance between positions measures similarity between the corresponding
sequences. The possibility of using the latter property to identify succession
schemes have been entirely overlooked in previous studies which raises the
possibility that CGR may be upgraded from a mere representation technique to a
sequence modeling tool.
RESULTS: The distribution of positions in the CGR plane were shown to be a
generalization of Markov chain probability tables that accommodates non-integer
orders. Therefore, Markov models are particular cases of CGR models rather than
the reverse, as currently accepted. In addition, the CGR generalization has both 
practical (computational efficiency) and fundamental (scale independence)
advantages. These results are illustrated by using Escherichia coli K-12 as a
test data-set, in particular, the genes thrA, thrB and thrC of the threonine
operon.

PMID: 11331237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Genet. 2001 Jan;27(1):94-8.

A thyroid hormone receptor that is required for the development of green cone
photoreceptors.

Ng L(1), Hurley JB, Dierks B, Srinivas M, Saltó C, Vennström B, Reh TA, Forrest
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Box 1498, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York, USA.

Color vision is facilitated by distinct populations of cone photoreceptors in the
retina. In rodents, cones expressing different opsin photopigments are sensitive 
to middle (M, 'green') and short (S, 'blue') wavelengths, and are differentially 
distributed across the retina. The mechanisms that control which opsin is
expressed in a particular cone are poorly understood, but previous in vitro
studies implicated thyroid hormone in cone differentiation. Thyroid hormone
receptor beta 2 (TR beta 2) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that is
expressed in the outer nuclear layer of the embryonic retina. Here we delete Thrb
(encoding Tr beta 2) in mice, causing the selective loss of M-cones and a
concomitant increase in S-opsin immunoreactive cones. Moreover, the gradient of
cone distribution is disturbed, with S-cones becoming widespread across the
retina. The results indicate that cone photoreceptors throughout the retina have 
the potential to follow a default S-cone pathway and reveal an essential role for
Tr beta 2 in the commitment to an M-cone identity. Our findings raise the
possibility that Thrb mutations may be associated with human cone disorders.

PMID: 11138006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Jun;28(2):196-202.

Lack of correlation between expression of retinoic acid receptor-beta and loss of
heterozygosity on chromosome band 3p24 in esophageal cancer.

Qiu H(1), Lotan R, Lippman SM, Xu XC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome arm 3p occurs frequently in human
cancers, including esophageal cancer, suggesting that tumor suppressor genes may 
be located on this chromosome arm. The retinoic acid receptor-beta (RARB) gene is
localized on chromosome band 3p24, and its expression is progressively lost
during esophageal carcinogenesis. Furthermore, growth inhibition of esophageal
cancer cell lines by all-trans retinoic acid has been associated with the
constitutive and induced expression of RARB. We therefore assessed LOH on
chromosome arm 3p and RARB expression in esophageal cancer to investigate the
mechanism of altered RARB expression during carcinogenesis. We first analyzed LOH
in 65 paired surgical specimens of normal mucosa and esophageal cancer by using
10 microsatellite markers, which resulted in 44 informative cases for subsequent 
study. LOH on chromosome band 3p24 was found to occur at an overall rate of 36.4%
(16/44) by three markers (D3S1293, THRB, and D3S1283). LOH for these three
individual markers was 14.0%, 47.4%, and 20.9%, respectively. Meanwhile, RARB
expression was lost in 43.2% (19/44) of these 44 samples. The loss of RARB
expression was not correlated with LOH on chromosome band 3p24 (gamma = -0.22,
-0.069, and -0.02, P = 0.15, 0.78, and 0.9 for D3S1293, THRB, and D3S1283,
respectively), although both altered RARB expression and LOH in esophageal cancer
were statistically significant (P = 0.001 and 0.0001, respectively), indicating
that the loss of RARB expression cannot be explained by LOH on 3p24.

PMID: 10825004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Microbiology. 1999 Nov;145 ( Pt 11):3273-82.

Organization of threonine biosynthesis genes from the obligate methylotroph
Methylobacillus flagellatus.

Marchenko GN(1), Marchenko ND, Tsygankov YD, Chistoserdov AY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Selection of Industrial Micro-organisms, Moscow,
Russia. gmarchenko@ccmail.sunysb.edu

The genes encoding aspartate kinase (ask), homoserine dehydrogenase (hom),
homoserine kinase (thrB) and threonine synthase (thrC) from the obligate
methylotroph Methylobacillus flagellatus were cloned. In maxicells hom and thrC
directed synthesis of 51 and 48 kDa polypeptides, respectively. The hom, thrB and
thrC genes and adjacent DNA areas were sequenced. Of the threonine biosynthesis
genes, only hom and thrC were tightly linked in the order hom-thrC. The gene for 
thymidylate synthase (thyA) followed thrC and the gene for aspartate
aminotransferase (aspC) preceded hom. All four genes (aspC-hom-thrC-thyA) were
transcribed in the same direction. mRNA analysis indicated that hom-thrC are
apparently transcribed in one 7.5 kb transcript in M. flagellatus. Promoter
analysis showed the presence of a functional promoter between aspC and hom. No
functional promoter was found to be associated with the DNA stretch between hom
and thrC. The thrB gene encoded an unusual type of homoserine kinase and was not 
linked to other threonine biosynthesis genes.

PMID: 10589737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Microbiology. 1999 Apr;145 ( Pt 4):845-53.

ThrH, a homoserine kinase isozyme with in vivo phosphoserine phosphatase activity
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Patte JC(1), Clepet C, Bally M, Borne F, Méjean V, Foglino M.

Author information: 
(1)LCB, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Marseille, France.
patte@ibsm.cnrs-mrs.fr

Homoserine kinase, the product of the thrB gene, catalyses an obligatory step of 
threonine biosynthesis. In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, unlike Escherichia coli,
inactivation of the previously identified thrB gene does not result in threonine 
auxotrophy. A new gene, named thrH, was isolated that, when expressed in E. coli 
thrB mutant strains, results in complementation of the mutant phenotype. In P.
aeruginosa, threonine auxotrophy is observed only when both thrB and thrH are
simultaneously inactivated. Thus, thrH encodes a protein with an in vivo
homoserine-kinase-like activity. Surprisingly, thrH overexpression allows
complementation of serine auxotrophy of E. coli and P. aeruginosa serB mutants.
These mutants are affected in the phosphoserine phosphatase protein, an enzyme
involved in serine biosynthesis. Comparison analysis revealed sequence homology
between ThrH and the SerB proteins from different organisms. This could explain
the in vivo phosphoserine phosphatase activity of ThrH when overproduced. ThrH
differs from the protein encoded by the serB gene which was identified in P.
aeruginosa. Thus, two SerB-like proteins co-exist in P. aeruginosa, a situation
also found in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

PMID: 10220164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Br J Cancer. 1999 Apr;79(11-12):1821-7.

The prognostic significance of allelic imbalance at key chromosomal loci in oral 
cancer.

Partridge M(1), Emilion G, Pateromichelakis S, A'Hern R, Lee G, Phillips E,
Langdon J.

Author information: 
(1)Kings College School of Medicine and Dentistry, Denmark Hill, London, UK.

Forty-eight primary oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) were screened for allelic
imbalance (AI) at 3p24-26, 3p21, 3p13, 8p21-23, 9p21, 9q22 and within the Rb, p53
and DCC tumour suppressor genes. AI was detected at all TNM stages with stage 4
tumours showing significantly more aberrations than stage 1-3. A factional
allelic loss (FAL) score was calculated for all tumours and a high score was
associated with development of local recurrence (P = 0.033) and reduced survival 
(P = 0.0006). AI at one or more loci within the 3p24-26, 3p21, 3p13 and 9p21
regions or within the THRB and DCC genes was associated with reduced survival.
The hazard ratios for survival analysis revealed that patients with AI at
3p24-26, 3p13 and 9p21 have an approximately 25 times increase in their mortality
rate relative to a patient retaining heterozygosity at these loci. AI at specific
pairs of loci, D3S686 and D9S171 and involving at least two of D3S1296, DCC and
D9S43, was a better predictor of prognosis than the FAL score or TNM stage. These
data suggest that it will be possible to develop a molecular staging system which
will be a better predict of outcome than conventional clinicopathological
features as the molecular events represent fundamental biological characteristics
of each tumour.

PMCID: PMC2362810
PMID: 10206299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):289-92.

Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for
an ancient, large-scale duplication.

Koh YS(1), Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The THRA gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha shares an unusual partial
overlap with the NR1D1 gene encoding the orphan receptor Rev-ErbAalpha. Though
THRA and NR1D1 have close relatives in THRB and NR1D2, which encode TRbeta and
Rev-ErbAbeta, these beta isoforms do not share an analogous overlap. Here we
report that the human THRB and NR1D2 genes are separated by approximately 1 Mb on
chromosome 3 and that these two genes are also linked to the RARB gene, which
encodes retinoic acid receptor beta. Since previous results indicate that the
THRA/NR1D1 locus is also linked to the RARA gene, these results suggest that the 
two receptor gene clusters were generated by a single large-scale duplication.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer. 1998 Oct 1;83(7):1391-400.

Endocrine tumors of the cervix: morphologic assessment, expression of human
papillomavirus, and evaluation for loss of heterozygosity on 1p,3p, 11q, and 17p.

Mannion C(1), Park WS, Man YG, Zhuang Z, Albores-Saavedra J, Tavassoli FA.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Laboratory of Gynecologic and Breast Pathology, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cervical endocrine tumors are rare lesions, with a varied diagnostic 
nomenclature. A recent consensus meeting proposed a standardized terminology.
This study evaluated: 1) applicability of histopathologic guidelines; 2) evidence
of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at selected sites; and 3) the presence of human
papillomavirus (HPV) detected by nonisotopic in situ hybridization (ISH).
METHODS: Thirty-eight cases (patient age range, 19-88 years; mean, 48 years) were
retrieved. Outcome data were available for 32 patients. Classification was based 
on architectural and cytologic features. Tissue was available from 15 cases for
LOH analysis with D3S1234(3p14), D3S1289(3p21), THRB(3p24), TP53(17p13),
D1S468(1p36), and INT-2(11q13). In ten cases, tissue was analyzed by nonisotopic 
ISH with HPV probes for types 6/11, 16/18, and 31/33.
RESULTS: Tumors were divided into four groups: small cell carcinoma (SCC) (n=25);
large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNC) (n=5); SCC with focal LCNC
differentiation (n=3), and carcinoid tumor (n=5). Tumors defined as exclusively
or predominantly SCC had a particularly poor prognosis, with 20 patients dead of 
disease (<6 years after diagnosis) and 6 alive with disease (after <3 years of
follow-up). LOH at various 3p loci (3p14, 3p21, and 3p24) was observed in eight
cases. One patient demonstrated LOH on 17p(TP53). Eight of ten cases assessed by 
ISH showed nuclear staining using a combined HPV-16/18 probe.
CONCLUSIONS: Cervical endocrine tumors are highly aggressive and can be
subdivided into definable categories. LOH at 3p loci is a frequent finding, as is
nuclear staining with a combined HPV-16/18 probe. LOH at 17p(TP53 locus) appears 
to be relatively uncommon, suggesting that p53 mutations may not be
developmentally significant.

PMID: 9762941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cancer. 1998 Jan 19;75(2):199-204.

HPV-associated cervical cancers show frequent allelic loss at 3p14 but no
apparent aberration of FHIT mRNA.

Chu TY(1), Shen CY, Chiou YS, Lu JJ, Perng CL, Yu MS, Liu HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.
tychu@email.gcn.net.tw

The genetic aberration involved in the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 3p14 has
recently been attributed to the disruption of the FHIT gene in many cancers. This
study analyzed HPV DNA and allelic status of 5 microsatellite markers spaning
3p13-3p25 in 57 cases of cervical cancer. With no homozygous deletion found in
any case, a 39% overall frequency of LOH was noted. The presence of tumorigenic
HPV DNA (91%) did not correlate with the allelic loss at any marker, including
THRB (3p22-24) and D3S1228 (3p14) which were found with high LOH rates of 43%
(12/28) and 37% (11/30), respectively. Further analysis of FHIT mRNA in 29
cancers by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR showed a full-length transcript in all 
cases. However, additional minor transcripts were occasionally observed in cancer
tissues (9/29) as well as in normal tissues (12/31) by nested PCR of the RT
products. Sequence analysis of these transcripts showed exclusive internal exon
deletions, suggesting a source of minor splicing variants. No apparent mutation
of the mRNA sequences was found in 8 transcripts examined, except for a silent
polymorphism and a site of alternative splicing. The results suggest that,
although frequently reported to be abrogated in several cancers, the mRNA of FHIT
remains intact in cervical cancer. Other genes closely linked to FHIT may be
responsible for frequent LOH at 3p14 observed in cervical cancer.

PMID: 9462708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int J Cancer. 1997 Mar 28;71(1):20-5.

Chromosome 3p24-26 and 3p22-12 loss in human prostatic adenocarcinoma.

Dahiya R(1), McCarville J, Hu W, Lee C, Chui RM, Kaur G, Deng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California at San Francisco 94121, USA.

Identification of loss of heterozygosity on specific genetic loci is crucial for 
understanding the pathogenesis of prostate cancer at the molecular level. This is
especially important because the deleted regions may contain putative tumor
suppressor genes. Chromosome 3p loss appears to be frequently associated with
various epithelial cancers. To our knowledge, there is no report on loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) of chromosome 3 in human prostate cancer. The present study 
was designed to investigate the LOH on chromosome 3p in microdissected samples of
delineated regions of normal and invasive carcinoma areas of prostatic epithelium
from the same tumor sections. For this purpose, DNA was extracted from
microdissected normal and tumor cells of 38 prostate cancers, amplified by PCR
and analyzed for LOH on chromosome 3p using 6 different polymorphic DNA markers
(D3S1560, THRB, D3S647, D3S1298, D3S1228 and D3S1296). Our results suggest that
LOH was identified in 34 of 38 cases (89%) with at least one marker. Twelve of 30
informative cases showed LOH at D3S1560; 18 of 22 informative cases showed loss
at THRB; 20 of 38 informative cases showed deletion at D3S647; 16 of 38
informative cases showed loss at D3S1298; 12 of 34 informative cases showed LOH
at D3S1228; and 6 of 34 informative cases showed LOH at D3S1296 regions. Our
results suggest that the LOH is on the 3p24-26 and 3p22-12 regions of the short
arm of chromosome 3, indicating 2 discrete areas of deletion on chromosome 3p.
The deletion at 3p24-26 and 3p22-12 was not related to the stage or grade of the 
tumor.

PMID: 9096660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Mar;18(3):200-11.

A 3p21.3 region is preferentially eliminated from human chromosome 3/mouse
microcell hybrids during tumor growth in SCID mice.

Kholodnyuk I(1), Kost-Alimova M, Kashuba V, Gizatulin R, Szeles A, Stanbridge EJ,
Zabarovsky ER, Klein G, Imreh S.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

We have previously shown that four markers spanning the 3p24-p21.3 region, THRB, 
AP20R, D3S1029, and D3S32, were regularly eliminated from three human chromosome 
3 (chr3)/mouse microcell hybrids (MCHs) during tumor growth in SCID mice. In an
attempt to narrow down the eliminated region, we have studied 22 new SCID mouse
tumors derived from 5 MCH lines carrying human chr3. They were analyzed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Southern blotting, and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). MCHs that carried human chr1, chr8, chr13, and chr17 were
examined as controls. We could identify a common eliminated region (CER) at
3p21.3, bordered distally by D3S1260 and proximally by D3S643/D3F15S2. Eight of
53 chr3-specific PCR markers, AP20R, D3S966, D3S3559, D3S1029, WI-7947, D3S2354, 
AFMb362wb9, and D3S32. were localized within the CER. This finding is consistent 
with the notion that a tumor suppressor gene may be located in this area, as
suggested by frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) within this region observed in
several types of solid tumors.

PMID: 9071573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Adv Cancer Res. 1997;71:27-92.

Deletions of the short arm of chromosome 3 in solid tumors and the search for
suppressor genes.

Kok K(1), Naylor SL, Buys CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

The concept that cells can become malignant upon the elimination of parts of
chromosomes inhibiting cell division dates back to Boveri in 1914. Deletions
occurring in tumor cells are therefore considered a first indication of possible 
locations of tumor suppressor gene. Approaches used to localize and identify the 
paradigm of tumor suppressors, RB1, have also been applied to localize tumor
suppressor genes on 3p, the short arm of chromosome 3. This review discusses the 
methodological advantages and limitations of the various approaches. From a
review of the literature on losses of 3p in different types of solid tumors it
appears that some tumor types show involvement of the same region, while between 
others the regions involved clearly differ. Also discussed are results of
functional assays of tumor suppression by transfer of part of chromosome 3 into
tumor cell lines. The likelihood that a common region of deletions would contain 
a tumor suppressor is strongly enhanced by coincidence of that region with a
chromosome fragment suppressing tumorigenicity upon introduction in tumor cells. 
Such a situation exists for a region in 3p21.3 as well as for one or more in
3p12-p14. The former region is considered the location of a lung cancer
suppressor. The same gene or a different one in the same region may also play a
role in the development of other cancers including renal cell cancer. In the
latter cancer, there may be additional roles of the VHL region and/or a 3p12-p14 
region. The breakpoint region of a t(3;8) originally found to be constitutively
present in a family with hereditary renal cell cancer now seems to be excluded
from such a role. Specific genes on 3p have been suggested to act as suppressor
genes based on either their location in a common deletion region, a markedly
reduced expression or presence of aberrant transcripts, their capacity to
suppress tumorigenicity upon transfection in to tumor cells, the presumed
function of the gene product, or a combination of several of these criteria. A
number of genes are evaluated for their possible role as a tumor suppressor
according to these criteria. General agreement on such a role seems to exist only
for VHL. Though hMLH1 plays an obvious role in the development of specific
mismatch repair-deficient cancers, it cannot revert the tumor phenotype and
therefore cannot be considered a proper tumor suppressor. The involvement of VHL 
and MLH1 also in some specific hereditary cancers allowed to successfully apply
linkage analysis for their localization. TGFBR2 might well have a tumor
suppressor function. It does reduce tumorigenicity upon transfection. Other 3p
genes coding for receptor proteins THRB and RARB, are unlikely candidates for
tumor suppression. Present observations on a possible association of FHIT with
tumor development leave a number of questions unanswered, so that provisionally
it cannot be considered a tumor suppressor. Regions that have been identified as 
crucial in solid tumor development appear to be at the edge of synteny blocks
that have been rearranged through the chromosome evolution which led to the
formation of human chromosome 3. Although this may merely represent a chance
occurrence, it might also reflect areas of genomic instability.

PMID: 9111863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1996 Dec;62(12):4345-51.

l-Isoleucine Production with Corynebacterium glutamicum: Further Flux Increase
and Limitation of Export.

Morbach S, Sahm H, Eggeling L.

The synthesis of l-isoleucine with Corynebacterium glutamicum involves 11
reaction steps, in at least five of which activity or expression is regulated. We
used four genes and alleles encoding feedback-resistant enzymes (Fbr) in various 
combinations to assay flux increase through the sequence. During strain
construction, the order of genes overexpressed was important. Only when ilvA(Fbr)
was first overexpressed could hom(Fbr) be introduced. This succession apparently 
prevents the toxic accumulation of biosynthesis intermediates. The best strain
constructed (SM13) was characterized by high-level expression of hom(Fbr), thrB, 
and ilvA(Fbr). With this strain a yield of 0.22 g of l-isoleucine per g of
glucose was obtained, with a maximal specific productivity of 0.10 g of
l-isoleucine per g (dry weight) per h. In strain SM13, with the high metabolite
flux through the reaction sequence, effects on (i) other enzyme levels, (ii)
time-dependent variations with process time, and (iii) concentrations of
cytosolic intermediates were quantified. Most importantly, the intracellular
l-isoleucine concentration is always higher at all process times than the
extracellular concentration. The intracellular concentration rises to 110 mM,
whereas extracellularly only 60 mM is accumulated. Also the immediate
l-isoleucine precursor 2-ketomethyl valerate accumulates in the cell. Therefore, 
in the high-level l-isoleucine producer SM13, the export of this amino acid is
the major limiting reaction step and therefore is a new target of strain design
for biotechnological purposes.

PMCID: PMC1388995
PMID: 16535457  [PubMed]


186. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1996 Dec;46(5-6):554-8.

Construction of L-lysine-overproducing strains of Brevibacterium lactofermentum
by targeted disruption of the hom and thrB genes.

Fernández-González C(1), Gil JA, Mateos LM, Schwarzer A, Schäfer A, Kalinowski J,
Pühler A, Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ecología, Genética y Microbiología, Facultad de Biología,
Universidad de León, Spain.

The mobilization of plasmids from gram-negative Escherichia coli to gram-positive
Brevibacterium lactofermentum, mediated by P-type transfer functions, was used to
construct disrupted mutants blocked specifically in the homoserine branch of the 
aspartate pathway. The mutant strain B. lactofermentum R31 showed an efficiency
of conjugal transfer two to three orders of magnitude higher than that of the
wild-type strain B. lactofermentum ATCC 13869. The hom- and thrB-disrupted
mutants of B. lactofermentum ATCC 13869 were lysine overproducers. B.
lactofermentum R31 mutants do not overproduce lysine because R31 is an
alanine-overproducing strain and channels the pyruvate needed for lysine
biosynthesis to the production of alanine.

PMID: 9008889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Head Neck. 1996 Nov-Dec;18(6):529-37.

Two regions of homozygosity on chromosome 3p in squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck: comparison with cytogenetic analysis.

Buchhagen DL(1), Worsham MJ, Dyke DL, Carey TE.

Author information: 
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Department of Pathology,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Loss effecting the short arm of chromosome 3 occurs in nearly 60% of 
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (SCCHN). Karyotype analysis
indicated that these losses occur in two regions, 3p13-p14 and 3p21-p24. To test 
these findings, we examined tumor DNA from 38 SCCHN cell lines for heterozygosity
and homozygosity at 6 polymorphic loci spanning this region.
METHODS: The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify polymorphic
restriction sites on 3p, the amplified products were digested with the
appropriate restriction enzyme, electrophoresed on agarose gels, and assessed for
the presence of one or both alleles. The 38 SCCHN cell lines were established
from 31 patients and included 16 that had been karyotyped. In 6 cases two or
three tumor cell lines established from separate tumors in the same patients were
studied.
RESULTS: The cell lines exhibited a very low frequency of heterozygosity for the 
regions 3p12-3p21 (D3S3, D3S30 and D3S2) and distal 3p21-3p24 (D3F15S2 and THRB),
when compared with that observed in the normal population. In contrast, D3S32,
located within 3p21, was heterozygous in 38% of the tumors which is close to the 
frequency seen in the normal population (50%). In most cases the PCR results were
consistent with the cytogenetic predictions. However, in 4 cell lines 3p loss was
predicted from the karyotype, but heterozygosity for D3S32 was present.
CONCLUSIONS: These experiments support cytogenetic data that indicate two regions
of 3p loss in SCCHN tumors. The 3p regions that show a high frequency of
homozygosity may contain tumor suppressor genes involved in the development
and/or progression of squamous cancer. The region surrounding D3S32 may contain
an essential gene that is conserved in two copies even when much of 3p is lost.

PMID: 8902566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Bacteriol. 1996 Jul;178(13):3689-94.

Cloning and transcriptional analysis of two threonine biosynthetic genes from
Lactococcus lactis MG1614.

Madsen SM(1), Albrechtsen B, Hansen EB, Israelsen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, Biotechnological Institute, Denmark.

Two genes, hom and thrB, involved in threonine biosynthesis in Lactococcus lactis
MG1614, were cloned and sequenced. These genes, which encode homoserine
dehydrogenase and homoserine kinase, were initially identified by the homology of
their gene products with known homoserine dehydrogenases and homoserine kinases
from other organisms. The identification was supported by construction of a
mutant containing a deletion in hom and thrB that was unable to grow in a defined
medium lacking threonine. Transcriptional analysis showed that the two genes were
located in a bicistronic operon with the order 5' hom-thrB 3' and that
transcription started 66 bp upstream of the translational start codon of the hom 
gene. A putative -10 promoter region (TATAAT) was located 6 bp upstream of the
transcriptional start point, but no putative -35 region was identified. A DNA
fragment covering 155 bp upstream of the hom translational start site was
functional in pAK80, an L. lactis promoter probe vector. In addition,
transcriptional studies showed no threonine-dependent regulation of hom-thrB
transcription.

PMCID: PMC178148
PMID: 8682767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nat Genet. 1996 Jul;13(3):354-7.

Thyroid hormone receptor beta is essential for development of auditory function.

Forrest D(1), Erway LC, Ng L, Altschuler R, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Congenital thyroid disorders are often associated with profound deafness,
indicating a requirement for thyroid hormone (T3) and its receptors in the
development of hearing. Two T3 receptor genes, Tr alpha and Tr beta are
differentially expressed, although in overlapping patterns, during development.
Thus, the extent to which they mediate unique or redundant functions is unclear. 
We demonstrate that Tr beta-deficient (Thrb-/-) mice exhibit a permanent deficit 
in auditory function across a wide range of frequencies, although they show no
other overt neurological defects. The auditory-evoked brainstem response (ABR) in
Thrb-/- mice, although greatly diminished, displayed normal waveforms, which
suggested that the primary defect resides in the cochlea. Although hypothyroidism
causes cochlear malformation, there was no evidence of this in Thrb-/- mice.
These findings suggest that Tr beta controls the maturation of auditory function 
but not morphogenesis of the cochlea. Thrb-/- mice provide a model for the human 
endocrine disorder of resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH), which is typically
associated with dominant mutations in Tr beta. However, deafness is generally
absent in RTH, indicating that dominant and recessive mutations in Tr beta have
different consequences on the auditory system. Our results identify Tr beta as an
essential transcription factor for auditory development and indicate that
distinct Tr genes serve certain unique functions.

PMID: 8673137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. EMBO J. 1996 Jun 17;15(12):3006-15.

Recessive resistance to thyroid hormone in mice lacking thyroid hormone receptor 
beta: evidence for tissue-specific modulation of receptor function.

Forrest D(1), Hanebuth E, Smeyne RJ, Everds N, Stewart CL, Wehner JM, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, NY 10029, USA.

The diverse functions of thyroid hormone (T3) are presumed to be mediated by two 
genes encoding the related receptors, TRalpha and TRbeta. However, the in vivo
functions of TRalpha and TRbeta are undefined. Here, we report that targeted
inactivation of the mouse TRbeta gene results in goitre and elevated levels of
thyroid hormone. Also, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is released by
pituitary thyrotropes and which is normally suppressed by increased levels of
thyroid hormone, was present at elevated levels in homozygous mutant (Thrb-/-)
mice. These findings suggest a unique role for TRbeta that cannot be substituted 
by TRalpha in the T3-dependent feedback regulation of TSH transcription. Thrb-/- 
mice provide a recessive model for the human syndrome of resistance to thyroid
hormone (RTH) that exhibits a similar endocrine disorder but which is typically
caused by dominant TRbeta mutants that are transcriptional inhibitors. It is
unknown whether TRalpha, TRbeta or other receptors are targets for inhibition in 
dominant RTH; however, the analysis of Thrb-/- mice suggests that antagonism of
TRbeta-mediated pathways underlies the disorder of the pituitary-thyroid axis.
Interestingly, in the brain, the absence of TRbeta may not mimic the defects
often associated with dominant RTH, since no overt behavioural or neuroanatomical
abnormalities were detected in Thrb-/- mice. These data define in vivo functions 
for TRbeta and indicate that specificity in T3 signalling is conferred by
distinct receptor genes.

PMCID: PMC450242
PMID: 8670802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1996 Jun 15;330(2):373-9.

Functional group characterization of homoserine kinase from Escherichia coli.

Huo X(1), Viola RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, The University of Akron, Akron, Ohio 44325-3601, USA.

Homoserine kinase (EC 2.7.1.39), a key enzyme in the aspartate pathway of amino
acid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli, catalyzes the phosphorylation of
L-homoserine to form L-homoserine phosphate. The ThrB gene coding for this enzyme
has been cloned, and the enzyme has been overexpressed and purified to
homogeneity with a simplified purification scheme. An examination of the pH
dependence of the V/K profile for L-homoserine shows that the enzyme loses
activity upon protonation of a single functional group and upon de-protonation of
a second functional group, with both groups appearing to be of the cationic acid 
type. Incubation of the enzyme with diethylpyrocarbonate leads to the complete
loss of enzyme activity. Spectral and chemical characterization of the
derivatized enzyme has shown that this activity loss is caused by the
modification of a histidine residue. Treatment of the enzyme with
pyridoxal-5'-phosphate also results in enzyme inactivation. The spectra evidence 
for the formation of a Schiff base, and the complete protection afforded by
substrates and inhibitors, indicate that homoserine kinase also contains a lysine
that is essential for catalytic activity.

PMID: 8660667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1996 May;122(5):497-501.

Definition of a tumor suppressor gene locus on the short arm of chromosome 3 in
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck by means of microsatellite markers.

Rowley H(1), Jones A, Spandidos D, Field J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Liverpool,
England.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor genes are important in the development of head and
neck cancer. Using microsatellite markers that map close to the region 3p24-pter,
we determined the frequency of allele loss close to this site with a view to
narrowing the search for a putative tumor suppressor gene involved in the
development of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, which may facilitate
future positional cloning techniques.
DESIGN: Laboratory-based project with tumor and normal specimens subjected to
molecular genetic analysis. Tumor-normal tissue DNA pairs were analyzed for
allelic imbalance and microsatellite instability on chromosome 3p in the region
3p24-pter by the polymerase chain reaction and microsatellite markers D3S1304,
D3S656, D3S1252, D3S1293, THRB, and D3S1266.
SETTING: Molecular genetics and oncology research laboratory.
PATIENTS: Paired tumor-normal DNA samples were obtained from 46 patients with
tumors of the head and neck.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Detection of loss of heterozygosity and microsatellite
instability on chromosome 3 in the region 3p24-p25.1.
RESULTS: We found loss of heterozygosity with at least one marker in 48% of
informative cases and loss of heterozygosity or microsatellite instability in 57%
of informative cases. The minimal region of loss was found in the region bounded 
by D3S656 and D31293.
CONCLUSION: A putative tumor suppressor gene in head and neck cancer lies between
D3S656 and D3S1293 in the 3p25.1 region.

PMID: 8615966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1996 Jan 15;135(2-3):275-80.

4-Phospho-hydroxy-L-threonine is an obligatory intermediate in pyridoxal
5'-phosphate coenzyme biosynthesis in Escherichia coli K-12.

Zhao G(1), Winkler ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Houston
Medical School 77030-1501, USA.

We show that thrB-encoded homoserine kinase is required for growth of Escherichia
coli K-12 pdxB mutants on minimal glucose medium supplemented with
4-hydroxy-L-threonine (synonym, 3-hydroxyhomoserine) or D-glycolaldehyde. This
result is consistent with a model in which 4-phospho-hydroxy-L-threonine
(synonym, 3-hydroxyhomoserine phosphate), rather than 4-hydroxy-L-threonine, is
an obligatory intermediate in pyridoxal 5'-phosphate biosynthesis. Ring closure
using 4-phospho-hydroxy-L-threonine as a substrate would lead to formation of
pyridoxine 5'-phosphate, and not pyridoxine, as the first B6-vitamer synthesized 
de novo. These considerations suggest that E. coli
pyridoxal/pyridoxamine/pyridoxine kinase is not required for the main de novo
pathway of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate biosynthesis, and instead plays a role only in 
the B6-vitamer salvage pathway.

PMID: 8595869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Psychiatr Genet. 1996 Fall;6(3):99-105.

Linkage analysis and exclusion of regions of chromosomes 3 and 8 in Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome following the identification of a balanced reciprocal
translocation 46 XY, t(3:8)(p21.3 q24.1) in a case of Tourette syndrome.

Brett PM(1), Curtis D, Robertson MM, Dahlitz M, Gurling HM.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Psychiatry, University College London Medical School,
UK.

Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) and related disorders such as chronic
multiple tics and obsessive compulsive behaviour are likely to be genetically
transmitted with a Mendelian autosomal dominant mode of transmission. Following
our discovery of a patient with GTS who also carried a balanced translocation 46 
XY, t(3:8) (p21.3 q24.1), a linkage study of several families was performed
covering the areas on chromosomes 3 and 8 implicated by the cytogenetic
abnormality in this unique GTS patient. A positive multipoint lod score of 2.9
was obtained on chromosome 3 with markers at the loci RAF1, THRB and D3S11.
Subsequently, the genetic map of this region was improved and new polymorphic
markers close to our original three markers were identified. With the new map the
maximum two-point lod with any marker was reduced to 1.77 at RAF1, and the
FASTMAP approximate multipoint lod excluded the likely region of the breakpoint. 
After constructing a somatic cell hybrid, the original three markers were mapped 
relative to the break point of the translocation and to other new markers. It was
confirmed that the original markers were at least 20 cM away from the position of
the break point. In addition, we traced further family members of our
translocation GTS proband, and identified affected individuals who did not
possess the translocation. We concluded that the translocation was not
responsible for the GTS symptoms in our affected proband.

PMID: 8902885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 1996;24:198-209.

Frequent involvement of chromosome 3p alterations in lung carcinogenesis:
allelotypes of 215 established cell lines at six chromosome 3p loci.

Buchhagen DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)NCI-NMOB, National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

We have determined the allelotypes of 215 established lung cancer cell lines by
PCR analysis at six loci on the short arm of chromosome 3 (3p): D3S3 (3p12-p13), 
D3S30 (3p13), D3S2 (3p14-p21.1), D3S32 (3p21), D3F15S2 (3p21), and THRB (3p24).
Eighty-seven small cell lung cancer (SCLC), 93 non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), 6 extrapulmonary SCLC, 6 mesothelioma, and 23 normal B lymphocyte (BL)
cell lines were analyzed. Low levels of heterozygosity at all six 3p loci were
seen in both the SCLC and NSCLC cells. SCLC cell lines exhibited the lowest
frequencies of heterozygosity at D3S3 (3%), D3S2 (3%), D3F15S2 (10%), and THRB
(6%) when compared with frequencies of 8, 42, 48, and 34% at these same loci in
the normal population. The lowest frequencies of heterozygosities among the NSCLC
cell lines were seen at D3S3 (5%), DF15S2 (17%), and THRB (15%). Adenocarcinoma
(Ad) was the only subtype of NSCLC that exhibited any heterozygosity (7%) at
D3S3. In addition to D3S3, the lowest frequencies of heterozygosity were seen at 
D3F15S2 for Ad (9%), D3S2 for large cell carcinomas (8%), and THRB for
adenosquamous (0%), bronchioloalveolar (0%), and large cell (8%) carcinomas. In
summary, the 3p chromosome region near the D3S3 locus (3p12-p13) appears to be
involved in all forms of lung cancer with additional involvement of regions close
to the D3S2 (3p14-p21.1), D3F15S2 (3p21), and THRB (3p24) loci.

PMID: 8806102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1996;51:1-22.

Genetic analysis of thyroid hormone receptors in development and disease.

Forrest D(1), Golarai G, Connor J, Curran T.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, New York, New
York 10029, USA.

Thyroid hormone (T3) fulfills diverse functions in vertebrate development and
physiology. These functions are thought to be mediated by two genes encoding the 
related T3 receptors. TR alpha and TR beta. The use of homologous recombination
in embryonic stem cells to generate defined, single-gene mutations provides a
powerful means to investigate the individual functions of TR alpha and TR beta in
mice. We have shown that targeted inactivation of the TR beta gene results in
goiter and elevated levels of thyroid hormone. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH),
which is released by pituitary thyrotropes and is normally suppressed by
increased levels of thyroid hormone, was present at elevated levels in homozygous
mutant (Thrb-/-) mice. These findings suggest a unique role for TR beta that
cannot be substituted by TR alpha in the T3-dependent feedback regulation of TSH 
transcription. Thrb-/- mice provide a recessive model for the human syndrome of
resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). Typically, RTH is associated with dominant
mutations in TR beta. It is unknown whether TR alpha, TR beta, or other receptors
are targets for inhibition in dominant RTH; however, the analysis of Thrb-/- mice
suggests that antagonism of TR beta-mediated pathways underlies the disorder of
the pituitary-thyroid axis. Thrb-/- mice also display defective maturation of
auditory function, demonstrating that TR beta is essential for the development of
hearing. Interestingly, hearing defects are generally absent in dominant RTH,
indicating that in the auditory system, a dominant TR beta mutant cannot mimic
the defect caused by loss of TR beta. This suggests the existence of
tissue-specific mechanisms that modulate the activity of TR beta. These results
define in vivo functions for TR beta and indicate that specificity in T3
signaling is conferred by distinct receptor genes.

PMID: 8701076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cancer Res. 1995 Oct 1;55(19):4416-9.

Benign breast disease: absence of genetic alterations at several loci implicated 
in breast cancer malignancy.

Lizard-Nacol S(1), Lidereau R, Collin F, Arnal M, Hahnel L, Roignot P, Cuisenier 
J, Guerrin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon,
France.

Benign breast disease (BBD) is a heterogeneous group of benign breast problems
that has been associated with breast cancer risk by several investigators.
Genetic alterations have been described in breast carcinomas under the headings
of loss of heterozygosity (1p, 3p, 7q, 11p, 17p, 17 and 18q), mutations (p53,
c-H-ras-1), and/or gene amplifications (c-myc, int-2/FGF3, and c-erbB-2/neu). In 
an attempt to determine whether these genetic alterations might also be involved 
in the development of BBD, we have analyzed such alterations in 50 BBD lesions.
The histological types of samples studied were: 37 fibroadenomas; 8 benign
phyllode tumors; and 5 fibrocytic diseases. Cellular DNA was extracted from
tissues and from corresponding blood leukocytes according to standard techniques,
digested with appropriate restriction endonucleases, and analyzed by Southern
blot. The following are informative cases found in a total number of patients
analyzed for each locus: 13 of 26 for L-myc (1p); 9 of 23 for THRB (3p); 11 of 29
for met (7q); 27 of 50 for c-H-ras-1 (11p); 3 of 13 for TP53 (17p); 14 of 50 for 
D17S30 (17p); 20 of 33 for D17S4 (17q); and 13 of 33 for D18S5 (18q). No loss of 
heterozygosity was detected at any of the examined loci. Alternatively, none of
the 50 BBD cases displayed an amplification of the three genes tested (c-myc,
int-2/FGF3, and c-erbB-2/neu). Our results show that molecular alterations, which
are more frequently involved in malignant breast carcinomas, do not occur in BBD 
lesions. These results indicate that these molecular alterations could constitute
late events in the pathogenesis of breast carcinomas.

PMID: 7671254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1995 Jul;43(3):482-8.

Production of isoleucine by overexpression of ilvA in a Corynebacterium
lactofermentum threonine producer.

Colón GE(1), Nguyen TT, Jetten MS, Sinskey AJ, Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Overproduction of isoleucine, an essential amino acid, was achieved by
amplification of the gene encoding threonine dehydratase, the first enzyme in the
threonine to isoleucine pathway, in a Corynebacterium lactofermentum threonine
producer. Threonine overproduction was previously achieved with C. lactofermentum
ATCC 21799, a lysine-hyperproducing strain, by introduction of plasmid pGC42
containing the Corynebacterium homdr and thrB genes (encoding homoserine
dehydrogenase and homoserine kinase respectively) under separate promoters. The
pGC42 derivative, pGC77, also contains ilvA, which encodes threonine dehydratase.
In a shake-flask fermentation, strain 21799(pGC77) produced 15 g/l isoleucine,
along with small amounts of lysine and glycine. A molar carbon balance indicates 
that most of the carbon previously converted to threonine, lysine, glycine and
isolecine was incorporated into isoleucine by the new strain. Thus, in our
system, simple overexpression of wild-type ilvA sufficed to overcome the effects 
of feedback inhibition of threonine dehydratase by the end-product, isoleucine.

PMID: 7632398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Proc Natl Sci Counc Repub China B. 1995 Apr;19(2):113-22.

Construction of lysine-producing strains by gene disruption and replacement in
Brevibacterium divaricatum.

Su YC(1), Jane ST.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Agricultural Chemistry, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Republic of China.

Gene disruption and replacement techniques were applied to block the biosynthesis
of threonine and methionine and thus to construct genetically stable lysine
producers in a glutamate-producing bacteria, Brevibacterium divaricatum. The
homoserine dehydrogenase gene (hom), homoserine kinase gene (thrB) and hom-thrB
operon were amplified as 1.8, 1.25 and 2.8 kb fragments from B. divaricatum by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and cloned in an E. coli-coryneform bacteria
shuttle vector, pSUMN18. These genes were disrupted by inserting a kanamycin
resistant gene (kan) from pUC4-KISS into the structural genes. Integrative
plasmids were constructed and transformed into B. divaricatum. Integrative
transformants could be obtained only when the integrative plasmids were
constructed from the plasmids which had escaped from the restriction barrier of
the hosts. The resulting integrative transformants showed kanamycin resistance
and contained no plasmids. About 1-10% of the transformants were auxotrophs. By
checking the nutritional requirement, it was found that all of these
transformants required threonine and/or homoserine as expected. Southern blot
analysis confirmed the integrations, and both single and double crossover
homologous recombination mechanisms were proposed to explain the integration and 
replacement. These auxotrophic integrative transformants which were derived from 
double crossover events accumulated 1-3% lysine in culture broth only when the
added threonine was limited. Integrative transformants which were
site-specifically inactivated in hom or hom-thrB genes produced more lysine than 
did those only inactivated at the thrB gene. These transformants were extremely
stable, and the reversion frequency was below 10(-9) per generation. It is
suggested that this technique will be useful in the construction of stable
auxotrophic mutants.

PMID: 7624444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 1995;40(6):595-606.

Molecular cloning of the hom-thrC-thrB cluster from Bacillus sp. ULM1: expression
of the thrC gene in Escherichia coli and corynebacteria, and evolutionary
relationships of the threonine genes.

Malumbres M(1), Mateos LM, Guerrero C, Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Biology,
University of León, Spain.

A 6.5 kb DNA fragment containing the gene (thrC) encoding threonine synthase, the
last enzyme of the threonine biosynthetic pathway, has been cloned from the DNA
of Bacillus sp. ULM1 by complementation of Escherichia coli and Brevibacterium
lactofermentum thrC auxotrophs. Complementation studies showed that the thrB gene
(encoding homoserine kinase) is found downstream from the thrC gene, and analysis
of nucleotide sequences indicated that the hom gene (encoding homoserine
dehydrogenase) is located upstream of the thrC gene. The organization of this
cluster of genes is similar to the Bacillus subtilis threonine operon
(hom-thrC-thrB). An 1.9 kb BclI fragment from the Bacillus sp. ULM1 DNA insert
351 amino acids was found corresponding to a protein of 37462 Da. The thrC gene
showed a low G + C content (39.4%) and the encoded threonine synthase is very
similar to the B. subtilis enzyme. Expression of the 1.9 kb BcI DNA fragment in
E. coli minicells resulted in the formation of a 37 kDa protein. The upstream
region of this gene shows promoter activity in E. coli but not in corynebacteria.
A peptide sequence, including a lysine that is known to bind the pyridoxal
phosphate cofactor, is conserved in all threonine synthase sequences and also in 
the threonine and serine dehydratase genes. Amino acid comparison of nine
threonine synthases revealed evolutionary relationships between different groups 
of bacteria.

PMID: 8768250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1995 Jan;61(1):74-8.

Effect of inducible thrB expression on amino acid production in Corynebacterium
lactofermentum ATCC 21799.

Colón GE(1), Jetten MS, Nguyen TT, Gubler ME, Follettie MT, Sinskey AJ,
Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge 02139.

Amplification of the operon homdr-thrB encoding a feedback-insensitive homoserine
dehydrogenase and a wild-type homoserine kinase in a Corynebacterium
lactofermentum lysine-producing strain resulted in both homoserine and threonine 
accumulation, with some residual lysine production. A plasmid enabling separate
transcriptional control of each gene was constructed to determine the effect of
various enzyme activity ratios on metabolite accumulation. By increasing the
activity of homoserine kinase relative to homoserine dehydrogenase activity,
homoserine accumulation in the medium was essentially eliminated and the final
threonine titer was increased by about 120%. Furthermore, a fortuitous result of 
the cloning strategy was an unexplained increase in homoserine dehydrogenase
activity. This resulted in a further decrease in lysine production along with a
concomitant increase in threonine accumulation.

PMCID: PMC167261
PMID: 7887627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Bacteriol. 1994 Dec;176(23):7362-71.

Transcriptional analysis and regulatory signals of the hom-thrB cluster of
Brevibacterium lactofermentum.

Mateos LM(1), Pisabarro A, Pátek M, Malumbres M, Guerrero C, Eikmanns BJ, Sahm H,
Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Genetics and Microbiology, University of León, Spain.

Two genes, hom (encoding homoserine dehydrogenase) and thrB (encoding homoserine 
kinase), of the threonine biosynthetic pathway are clustered in the chromosome of
Brevibacterium lactofermentum in the order 5' hom-thrB 3', separated by only 10
bp. The Brevibacterium thrB gene is expressed in Escherichia coli, in
Brevibacterium lactofermentum, and in Corynebacterium glutamicum and complements 
auxotrophs of all three organisms deficient in homoserine kinase, whereas the
Brevibacterium hom gene did not complement two different E. coli auxotrophs
lacking homoserine dehydrogenase. However, complementation was obtained when the 
homoserine dehydrogenase was expressed as a fusion protein in E. coli. Northern
(RNA) analysis showed that the hom-thrB cluster is transcribed, giving two
different transcripts of 2.5 and 1.1 kb. The 2.5-kb transcript corresponds to the
entire cluster hom-thrB (i.e., they form a bicistronic operon), and the short
transcript (1.1 kb) originates from the thrB gene. The promoter in front of hom
and the hom-internal promoter in front of thrB were subcloned in promoter-probe
vectors of E. coli and corynebacteria. The thrB promoter is efficiently
recognized both in E. coli and corynebacteria, whereas the hom promoter is
functional in corynebacteria but not in E. coli. The transcription start points
of both promoters have been identified by primer extension and S1 mapping
analysis. The thrB promoter was located in an 87-bp fragment that overlaps with
the end of the hom gene. A functional transcriptional terminator located
downstream from the cluster was subcloned in terminator-probe vectors.

PMCID: PMC197126
PMID: 7961509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Dec;11(4):237-45.

Nonrandom loss of human chromosome 3 fragments from mouse-human microcell hybrids
following progressive growth in SCID mice.

Imreh S(1), Kholodnyuk I, Allikmetts R, Stanbridge EJ, Zabarovsky ER, Klein G.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Microcell hybrid lines of A9 mouse fibrosarcoma containing complete or partially 
deleted human chromosomes 3 (chr. 3) were inoculated into SCID mice. Cell lines
derived from the tumors were examined by fluorescent in situ hybridization for
the status of the transferred human chromosome and by PCR for marker loss. The
SCID tumors arising after the inoculation of 10(5) cells were passaged serially
in vivo and regularly showed loss of four markers; D3S1029 (3p21.3-21.2), AP20R
(3p22-21.3, D3S32 (3p21.3-p21.2), and THRB (3p24). This regularly deleted region 
is bordered by markers GNA12 (3p21.1-p21.3) and VHL (3p25) that were maintained
in a fraction of tumors. Fragments derived from the long arm of chromosome 3 and 
corresponding markers in the 3q26-q28 region were retained in all tumors. Our
findings may be related to the postulated presence of tumor suppressor genes in
the 3p24-p21 region as indicated by the frequent deletion of this region in renal
and small cell lung carcinomas and other solid tumors. The technically cumbersome
identification of suppressor genes may be supplemented by an "elimination test"
based on analogous principles.

PMID: 7533527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1994 Oct;42(1):67-72.

Effects of the amplification of the genes coding for the L-threonine biosynthetic
enzymes on the L-threonine production from methanol by a gram-negative obligate
methylotroph, Methylobacillus glycogenes.

Motoyama H(1), Yano H, Ishino S, Anazawa H, Teshiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Research Laboratory, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co. Ltd., Japan.

We constructed recombinant plasmids carrying the genes coding for the L-threonine
biosynthetic enzymes, the hom gene, the hom-thrC genes, and the thrB genes, of a 
gram-negative obligate methylotroph, Methylobacillus glycogenes, and examined the
effects of them on the production of L-threonine from methanol. The hom gene,
which encodes the homoserine dehydrogenase, and the hom-thrC genes, containing
the gene coding for threonine synthase together with the hom gene, were cloned
from a wild-type strain, and the thrB gene encoding the desensitized homoserine
kinase was cloned from an L-threonine-producing mutant, ATR80. The recombinant
plasmids were transferred into ATR80 and its L-isoleucine auxotroph, A513, by
conjugation. Amplification of the genes coding for the L-threonine biosynthetic
enzymes elevated the activities of the L-threonine biosynthetic enzymes of the
transconjugants 10- to 30-fold over those of the strains containing only vectors.
The L-threonine production from methanol in test-tube cultivation was increased
about 30% and 40% by the amplification of the hom gene and the hom-thrC gene
respectively, and it was slightly increased by that of the thrB gene. The effects
of gene amplification were confirmed by the cultivation in 5-1 jar fermentors.
The best producer, an A513 transconjugant containing the plasmid carrying the
hom-thrC genes, produced 16.3 g/l L-threonine for 72 h.

PMID: 7765821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Sep;11(1):15-20.

Loss of heterozygosity on the short arm of chromosome 3 in mesothelioma cell
lines and solid tumors.

Zeiger MA(1), Gnarra JR, Zbar B, Linehan WM, Pass HI.

Author information: 
(1)Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Cytogenetic analysis of mesothelioma cell lines and solid tumors has documented
non-random chromosomal abnormalities on the short arm of chromosome 3 from 3p14
to 3p25. We therefore examined nine mesothelioma cell lines, their corresponding 
tumors, and 15 additional mesothelioma tumors for loss of heterozygosity on 3p
from 3p13 to 3p25.5 by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analysis at 8 loci: D3S3, D3S30, D3S6, D3S2, D3S32, D3F15S2, THRB,
and VHL. Loss of heterozygosity was documented by loss of one of two alleles in
the tumor DNA whose corresponding normal DNA was heterozygous and was documented 
in four of nine mesothelioma cell lines and six of 15 mesothelioma tumors or a
total of 42% of the mesotheliomas evaluated. This study suggests the involvement 
of a gene on the short arm of chromosome 3 in the development of mesotheliomas.

PMID: 7529042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1994 Aug;10(4):256-61.

Submicroscopic deletions of 3p sequences in pleomorphic adenomas with
t(3;8)(p21;q12).

Sahlin P(1), Mark J, Stenman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Göteborg, Sahlgren's Hospital, Sweden.

A subgroup of benign pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary glands is characterized
by translocations, or on rare occasions deletions, with breakpoints at 3p21. We
have applied restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis to assess
the frequency of allelic losses at four different loci located within 3p21-->p25 
in 35 pleomorphic adenomas, 18 of which were also karyotyped. Parallel analysis
of constitutional and tumor DNAs in informative tumors revealed that all patients
retained heterozygosity in their tumor DNA at the D3S2 and RAF1 loci. Among the
29 tumors informative for THRB three showed loss of heterozygosity (LOH). All
three tumors had a t(3;8)(p21;q12). Of the 23 tumors informative for D3F15S2, one
showed LOH. This tumor also had a t(3;8)(p21;q12). To further map the deletions
in relation to the 3p21 translocation breakpoint, we also sublocalized the THRB
locus. Using in situ hybridization we assigned the gene to 3p24.1-3. The fact
that none of the tumors with loss of 3p alleles showed cytogenetic evidence of
deletions indicates that the losses are submicroscopic, probably interstitial,
and in most cases distal to the 3p21 breakpoint. This was confirmed in one case
with loss of a THRB allele where both proximal (D3F15S2) and distal (RAF1)
markers retained heterozygosity. Our results suggest that deletion of 3p
sequences might be of progressional importance in a subset of pleomorphic
adenomas with t(3;8)(p21;q12).

PMID: 7522539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Gene. 1994 Jul 22;145(1):69-73.

Small mobilizable multi-purpose cloning vectors derived from the Escherichia coli
plasmids pK18 and pK19: selection of defined deletions in the chromosome of
Corynebacterium glutamicum.

Schäfer A(1), Tauch A, Jäger W, Kalinowski J, Thierbach G, Pühler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Bielefeld, Germany.

Here we describe small mobilizable vectors based on the Escherichia coli plasmids
pK18 and pK19. We combined the useful properties of the pK plasmids (e.g.,
multiple cloning site, lacZ alpha fragment, sequencing with M13 primers) with the
broad-host-range transfer machinery of plasmid RP4 and a modified sacB gene from 
Bacillus subtilis. The new pK derivatives can be transferred by RP4-mediated
conjugation into a wide range of Gram- and Gram+ bacteria, and should facilitate 
gene disruption and allelic exchange by homologous recombination. As an
application example, the generation of a defined deletion of the hom-thrB genes
in the chromosome of the Gram+ bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum is presented.

PMID: 8045426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem J. 1994 May 1;299 ( Pt 3):637-44.

Threonine synthesis from homoserine as a selectable marker in mammalian cells.

Rees WD(1), Grant SD, Hay SM, Saqib KM.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen, Scotland, U.K.

The plasmid pSVthrBC expresses the Escherichia coli thrB (homoserine kinase) and 
thrC (threonine synthase) genes in mouse cells and enables them to synthesize
threonine from homoserine. After transfection with pSVthrBC and culture in medium
containing homoserine, only cells that have incorporated pSVthrBC survive.
Homoserine at concentrations greater than 1 mM is toxic to mammalian cells. Mouse
cells selected from medium containing 5 mM homoserine had incorporated 20-100
copies of the plasmid per cell and had homoserine kinase activities of
0.001-0.012 nmol/min per mg of protein per copy. Cells selected from medium
containing 10 mM homoserine had incorporated one or two copies of the plasmid per
cell and had homoserine kinase activities of 0.06-0.39 nmol/min per mg of protein
per copy. By using high concentrations of homoserine, it is possible to use
pSVthrBC to select and isolate cell lines that have one or two copies of the
plasmid incorporated into an active region of chromatin. CHO and HeLa cells have 
also been successfully transfected with pSVthrBC. COS-7 cells are naturally
resistant to homoserine as they are able to metabolize homoserine.

PMCID: PMC1138068
PMID: 8192652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1994 Apr;58(4):768-70.

Factors improving L-threonine production by a three L-threonine biosynthetic
genes-amplified recombinant strain of Brevibacterium lactofermentum.

Ishida M(1), Kawashima H, Sato K, Hashiguchi K, Ito H, Enei H, Nakamori S.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Laboratories of Ajinomoto Co., Ltd., Kanagawa, Japan.

When a Brevibacterium lactofermentum L-threonine producer that accumulated
L-lysine as well, was transformed with a recombinant plasmid carrying the
indigenous hom, thrB, and thrC genes, delayed growth and plasmid instability were
observed. Addition of organic nutrients, vitamins (thiamine.HCl and d-biotin),
and NaCl under the optimal culture conditions solved these problems and further
increased threonine production in a small jar fermentor.

PMID: 7764868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Bacteriol. 1994 Mar;176(5):1460-7.

The femC locus of Staphylococcus aureus required for methicillin resistance
includes the glutamine synthetase operon.

Gustafson J(1), Strässle A, Hächler H, Kayser FH, Berger-Bächi B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Tn551 insertional inactivation of femC is known to reduce methicillin resistance 
levels in methicillin-resistant and -susceptible Staphylococcus aureus. By use of
cotransductional crosses, femC was mapped close to thrB on the SmaI-A fragment of
the S. aureus NCTC 8325 chromosome. The Tn551 insertion femC::omega 2005 was
found to interrupt an open reading frame coding for a putative protein of 121
amino acids which is highly similar to the glutamine synthetase repressors (GlnR)
of Bacillus spp. Downstream of femC, an open reading frame highly similar to
Bacillus sp. glutamine synthetases (GlnA) was found. Northern (RNA) blots probed 
with putative glnR or glnA fragments revealed that 1.7- and 1.9-kb transcripts
characteristic of wild-type cells were replaced by less abundant 7.0- and 7.2-kb 
transcripts in the femC::omega 2005 mutant. Total glutamine synthetase activity
was also decreased in the mutant strain; the addition of glutamine to defined
media restored the wild-type methicillin resistance phenotype of the femC mutant.
This result suggests that the omega 2005 insertion in glnR has a polar effect on 
glnA and that glnR and glnA are transcribed together as an operon. These results 
suggest that the loss of wild-type levels of glutamine synthetase and the
consequent decrease in glutamine availability cause a decreased level of
methicillin resistance.

PMCID: PMC205213
PMID: 7509336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1994 Jan;60(1):126-32.

Stable Expression of hom-1-thrB in Corynebacterium glutamicum and Its Effect on
the Carbon Flux to Threonine and Related Amino Acids.

Reinscheid DJ(1), Kronemeyer W, Eggeling L, Eikmanns BJ, Sahm H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biotechnologie 1 des Forschungszentrums Jülich, D-52425 Jülich,
Germany.

The hom-1-thrB operon encodes homoserine dehydrogenase resistant to feedback
inhibition by L-threonine and homoserine kinase. Stable expression of this operon
has not yet been attained in different Corynebacterium glutamicum strains. We
studied the use of chromosomal integration and of a low-copy-number vector for
moderate expression of the hom-1-thrB operon to enable an analysis of the
physiological consequences of its expression in C. glutamicum. Strains carrying
one, two, or three copies of hom-1-thrB were obtained. They showed proportionally
increased enzyme activity of feedback-resistant homoserine dehydrogenase and of
homoserine kinase. This phenotype was stably maintained in all recombinants for
more than 70 generations. In a lysine-producing C. glutamicum strain which does
not produce any threonine, expression of one copy of hom-1-thrB resulted in the
secretion of 39 mM threonine. Additional copies resulted in a higher, although
not proportional, accumulation of threonine (up to 69 mM). This indicates further
limitations of threonine production. As the copy number of hom-1-thrB increased, 
increasing amounts of homoserine (up to 23 mM) and isoleucine (up to 34 mM) were 
secreted. Determination of the cytosolic concentration of the respective amino
acids revealed an increase of intracellular threonine from 9 to 100 mM and of
intracellular homoserine from 4 to 74 mM as the copy number of hom-1-thrB
increased. These results suggest that threonine production with C. glutamicum is 
limited by the efflux system for this amino acid. Furthermore, the results show
the successful use of moderate and stable hom-1-thrB expression for directing the
carbon flux from aspartate to threonine.

PMCID: PMC201279
PMID: 16349146  [PubMed]


212. Melanoma Res. 1993 Dec;3(6):457-61.

Loss of heterozygosity of the thyroid hormone receptor B in posterior uveal
melanoma.

Sisley K(1), Curtis D, Rennie IG, Rees RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Sheffield, Medical School, Royal
Hallamshire Hospital, UK.

Cytogenetic investigations of posterior uveal melanomas have identified
non-random changes of chromosomes 3, 6, and 8. Monosomy of chromosome 3 with
additional copies of 8q occur principally in the subgroup of uveal melanomas
arising from the ciliary body. To determine whether ciliary body and choroidal
melanomas maintain submicroscopic differences in their genetic aetiology, studies
of the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of THRB (ERBA beta) on 3p were undertaken.
DNA from the blood and tumours of 19 patients with uveal melanoma were analysed
for LOH of two restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP). Approximately
60% of the uveal melanomas demonstrated allelic loss of THRB. Although the
majority of tumours with allelic loss originated wholly, or in part, from the
ciliary body, choroidal melanomas also demonstrated allelic loss of THRB. These
results suggest that deletions of chromosome 3 occur in the absence of visible
cytogenetic changes and may imply that alterations of chromosome 3 are integral
to the tumourigenesis of both sets of uveal melanomas.

PMID: 7909244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Bacteriol. 1993 Oct;175(20):6505-11.

Threonine formation via the coupled activity of 2-amino-3-ketobutyrate coenzyme A
lyase and threonine dehydrogenase.

Marcus JP(1), Dekker EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
48109-0606.

The enzymes L-threonine dehydrogenase and 2-amino-3-ketobutyrate coenzyme A (CoA)
lyase are known to catalyze the net conversion of L-threonine plus NAD+ plus CoA 
to NADH plus glycine plus acetyl-CoA. When homogeneous preparations of these two 
enzymes from Escherichia coli were incubated together for 40 min at 25 degrees C 
with glycine, acetyl-CoA, and NADH, a 36% decrease in the level of glycine (with 
concomitant NADH oxidation) was matched by formation of an equivalent amount of
threonine, indicating that this coupled sequence of enzyme-catalyzed reactions is
reversible in vitro. Several experimental factors that affect the efficiency of
this conversion in vitro were examined. A constructed strain of E. coli, MD901
(glyA thrB/C tdh), was unable to grow unless both glycine and threonine were
added to defined rich medium. Introduction of the plasmid pDR121 (tdh+kbl+) into 
this strain enabled the cells to grow in the presence of either added glycine or 
threonine, indicating that interconversion of these two amino acids occurred.
Threonine that was isolated from the total pool of cellular protein of
MD901/pDR121 had the same specific radioactivity as the [14C]glycine added to the
medium, establishing that threonine was formed exclusively from glycine in this
strain. Comparative growth rate studies with several strains of E. coli
containing plasmid pDR121, together with the finding that kcat values of pure E. 
coli 2-amino-3-ketobutyrate CoA lyase favor the cleavage of
2-amino-3-ketobutyrate over its formation by a factor of 50, indicate that the
biosynthesis of threonine is less efficient than glycine formation via the
coupled threonine dehydrogenase-2-amino-3-ketobutyrate lyase reactions.

PMCID: PMC206760
PMID: 8407827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cancer. 1993 Aug 1;72(3):881-6.

Polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis
of the short arm of chromosome 3 in primary head and neck squamous carcinoma.

el-Naggar AK(1), Lee MS, Wang G, Luna MA, Goepfert H, Batsakis JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030.

BACKGROUND: Deletion or loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the polymorphic loci on
the short arm of chromosome 3 has been reported in a large number of renal cell, 
small cell lung, non-small cell lung, and cervical carcinomas, suggesting the
presence of one or more putative tumor suppressor genes at chromosome 3p. Similar
studies in primary head and neck carcinoma are lacking.
METHODS: To investigate the possibility of chromosome 3p deletions, the authors
applied a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based, restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis, in conjunction with conventional Southern blot techniques,
to DNA samples of matched normal mucosa and head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas from 18 patients. The authors also assessed the merit of the PCR-based
assay as a rapid screening tool, particularly in assaying limited tissue samples.
RESULTS: Constitutional heterozygosity at the polymorphic loci varied in the 18
normal samples that the authors studied: 12 at the D3F15S2 locus (on telomeric
3p21), 7 at the D3S32 locus (on centromeric 3p21), and 9 at the THRB locus (on
3p24). In 18 matched carcinoma specimens, LOH (deletion) was observed at D3S32 in
0 of 7, at D3F15S2 in 9 of 12 (75%), and at THRB in 3 of 9 cases (33%).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the PCR-based assay and Southern blotting were
completely concordant in all specimens the authors studied. This study indicates 
that deletion at 3p is a frequent abnormality in primary head and neck carcinoma 
and that the most common deletion region is telomeric to D3S32. The authors also 
observed an apparent correlation among poor histologic differentiation, DNA
aneuploidy, and 3p deletions. Most poorly and moderately differentiated and
aneuploid carcinomas manifested the 3p deletion. Therefore, the authors suggest
an association between deletion at 3p and aggressive biologic behavior.

PMID: 8101470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Hum Mol Genet. 1993 Jul;2(7):1083.

A microsatellite polymorphism at the THRB locus.

Brett PM(1), Melmer G, Robertson MM, Gurling HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Psychiatry, University College and Middlesex School of 
Medicine, London, UK.

PMID: 8364560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1825-32.

Deletion mapping of chromosome 3p in human uterine cervical cancer.

Kohno T(1), Takayama H, Hamaguchi M, Takano H, Yamaguchi N, Tsuda H, Hirohashi S,
Vissing H, Shimizu M, Oshimura M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Deletion mapping of chromosome 3p was performed on 47 cases of human uterine
cervical cancer using 24 polymorphic DNA markers including five inter-Alu DNA
markers and two NotI-boundary cosmid markers obtained in our laboratory. The most
likely order of these 24 polymorphic DNA markers was determined as being
cen-[D3S4, H8]-D3S693-D3S659-D3S30-D3S687-[D3S2, UR9,
UR47]-J36-J17-GNAI2B-D3F15S2-D3S643- D3S32-D3S23-D3S686-H35-UR189-D3S685-D3S 11 -
D3S12-THRB-D3S22-pter, based on the data from radiation hybrid mapping genetic
linkage analysis and in situ hybridization. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at one
or more loci on chromosome 3p was detected in 21 of 47 cases (45%). Four tumors
showed partial or interstitial deletions, and the common region of LOH in these
tumors was 3p13-p21.1 between the D3S30 marker and the D3S2 marker. Candidates
for tumor-suppressor genes, APEH, D8, GNA12B, ZNF35, RARB, THRB and RAFI, were
all mapped outside of the common region in uterine cervical cancer. However, this
region is commonly deleted in carcinoma of the lung, breast and kidney, and
encompasses the breakpoint of the (3;8) translocation in hereditary renal cell
carcinoma. This result indicates the presence of a novel tumor-suppressor gene in
the region of 3p13-p21.1, which is involved in the development of several human
cancers.

PMID: 8099726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Rinsho Byori. 1993 May;41(5):527-32.

[Genetic analysis of hormone resistance].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakurai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Matsumoto.

Thyroid hormone resistance is a syndrome defined as impaired tissue response to
thyroid hormone which would be excessive under normal circumstances. Although it 
has long been speculated that this defect was caused by an abnormality at the
site of the nuclear receptor for thyroid hormone, isolation of complementary DNA 
encoding thyroid hormone receptors has only recently enabled us to directly
examine this hypothesis. Thyroid hormone receptors are coded on two separate
genes, THRA and THRB. Both genes give rise to multiple receptor subtypes through 
alternative splicing or different usage of promoters. Tight linkage between THRB 
locus and resistant phenotype was demonstrated in one affected family, and
subsequently, more than 30 genetic abnormalities of the THRB gene were isolated. 
No abnormalities have been demonstrated on the THRA gene. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis was used to screen abnormalities on the THRB gene of affected
families, and the results also strongly supported the hypothesis that thyroid
hormone resistance is caused by an abnormal THRB gene. Molecular analysis of
thyroid hormone resistance will facilitate understanding of the pathophysiology
of this syndrome and the molecular mechanism of thyroid hormone action.

PMID: 8350516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Genetika. 1993 Mar;29(3):539-42.

[Molecular cloning of threonine biosynthesis genes from Propionibacterium
shermanii in Escherichia coli cells].

[Article in Russian]

Pankova SV, Abilev SK.

Cloning the genes for threonine biosynthesis from Propionibacterium shermanii was
performed in Escherichia coli cells using the plasmid vector pVZ361. The cloned
genes were identified via complementation of thrB, thrC, thrA1 and thrA2
mutations of E. coli. The gene complementing thrB of E. coli was located within a
5.1 kb fragment of P. shermanii chromosomal DNA. The cloned DNA fragment
hybridized with a chromosomal fragment of P. shermanii of the same size. The
plasmid pSPt4 (with the thrB gene) was digested with Sau3A and ligated with the
BamHI-restricted pUC19 vector. The 1.8 kb DNA fragment of P. shermanii was shown 
to complement the thrB gene function in E. coli cells.

PMID: 8486274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 1993;38(5):355-9.

Production of threonine by Brevibacterium flavum containing threonine
biosynthesis genes from Escherichia coli.

Pátek M(1), Hochmannová J, Nesvera J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague.

Genes of the threonine operon of Escherichia coli were used for the construction 
of a Brevibacterium flavum strain excreting threonine. Using the shuttle vector
pCEM300 and a newly constructed shuttle vector pEC71 (7.1 kb, Kmr/Nmr), various
plasmids carrying E. coli thr genes were prepared. Mutants resistant to the
threonine analog 2-amino-3-hydroxyvaleric acid (AHV) were isolated after the
ethyl methanesulfonate treatment of B. flavum carrying these recombinant
plasmids. A mutant of B. flavum CCM 351 carrying the cloned genes thrA and thrB
accumulated 12 g/L of threonine after 48 h of cultivation.

PMID: 8262444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Microbiol. 1992 Nov;6(21):3109-19.

Isolation, organization and expression of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa threonine
genes.

Clepet C(1), Borne F, Krishnapillai V, Baird C, Patte JC, Cami B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie Bactérienne, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Marseille, France.

Three genes from Pseudomonas aeruginosa involved in threonine biosynthesis, hom, 
thrB and thrC, encoding homoserine dehydrogenase (HDH), homoserine kinase (HK)
and threonine synthase (TS), respectively, have been cloned and sequenced. The
hom and thrc genes lie at the thr locus of the P. aeruginosa chromosome map (31
min) and are likely to be organized in a bicistronic operon. The encoded proteins
are quite similar to the Hom and TS proteins from other bacterial species. The
thrB gene was located by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis experiments at 10 min
on the chromosome map. The product of this gene does not share any similarity
with other known ThrB proteins. No phenotype could be detected when the
chromosomal thrB gene was inactivated by an insertion. Therefore the existence of
isozymes for this activity is postulated. HDH activity was feedback inhibited by 
threonine; the expression of all three genes was constitutive. The overall
organization of these three genes appears to differ from that in other bacterial 
species.

PMID: 1333566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Genomics. 1992 Jul;13(3):705-12.

Ordering of human chromosome 3p markers by radiation hybrid mapping.

Tamari M(1), Hamaguchi M, Shimizu M, Oshimura M, Takayama H, Kohno T, Yamaguchi
N, Sugimura T, Terada M, Yokota J.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

To construct a panel of radiation hybrids (RHs) for human chromosome 3p mapping, 
mouse microcell hybrid cells, A9(neo3/t)-5, containing a single copy of human
chromosome 3p with pSV2neo plasmid DNA integrated at 3p21-p22 were irradiated and
fused to mouse A9 cells. A panel of 96 RHs that retain several sizes and portions
of human chromosome 3p segments was used to map 25 DNA markers for chromosome 3p.
Eight of them, H28, H29, H32, H33, H35, H38, H48, and H64, were cloned from
Alu-primed PCR products using A9(neo3/t)-5 cell DNA as a template. The most
likely order of the 24 markers, except for H28, based on the statistical ordering
method proposed by Falk, was cen-D3S4-D3S3-D3S30-H29-D3S13-D3S2-+
++H48-D3F15S2-D3S32-D3S23-CCK-H35-H33- D3S11-D3S12-RARB-THRB(ERBA2-pBH302)-
H64-H38-RAF1-D3S18-H32-D3S22-pter. The order and location of these markers were
in good agreement with those previously determined by other mapping methods,
suggesting that a panel of these 96 RHs is a valuable source for a rapid mapping 
of human chromosome 3p markers.

PMID: 1639397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochem J. 1992 Feb 1;281 ( Pt 3):865-70.

Expression of Escherichia coli homoserine kinase in mouse 3T3 cells.

Rees WD(1), Hay SM, Flint HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Scotland, U.K.

The Escherichia coli gene for homoserine kinase (thrB) has been cloned into a
simian-virus-40-based eukaryotic expression vector which also includes a
neomycin-resistance gene. Mouse 3T3 cells transfected with this plasmid were
selected for resistance and screened for homoserine kinase activity. It has thus 
been possible to isolate clones which are capable of accumulating homoserine
O-phosphate when supplied with homoserine. In broken-cell preparations the
kinetic constants for the production of homoserine O-phosphate were similar to
those of the wild-type E. coli enzyme. These experiments demonstrate that E. coli
homoserine kinase can be expressed in an animal cell and that it can successfully
phosphorylate L-homoserine in the intact cell utilizing endogenous ATP.

PMCID: PMC1130769
PMID: 1371387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6661.

Dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the human thyroid hormone receptor beta gene 
(THRB) on chromosome 3.

Sakurai A(1), Bell GI, DeGroot LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Study Unit, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

PMCID: PMC329265
PMID: 1754415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Genomics. 1991 Nov;11(3):537-42.

The region of common allelic losses in sporadic renal cell carcinoma is bordered 
by the loci D3S2 and THRB.

van der Hout AH(1), van der Vlies P, Wijmenga C, Li FP, Oosterhuis JW, Buys CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

Cytogenetic studies and DNA analysis have shown that the short arm of chromosome 
3 is the region in the genome that is commonly deleted in renal cell carcinoma.
By studying loss of heterozygosity in 41 matched tumor/normal kidney tissue
pairs, we could delimit the commonly deleted part of 3p to the region between the
loci THRB (in 3p24) and D3S2 (in 3p21). The regions on 3p suggested to be
involved in the Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and in hereditary renal cell carcinoma
are both outside this smallest region of overlapping deletions. Consequently,
renal cell cancer would be an illustration of the possibility that different
genes cause the same type of tumor.

PMID: 1685475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 25;19(16):4574.

BglI RFLP for the human erb-A beta locus on chromosome 3p22-3p24.1 (THRB).

Kanaka C(1), Eblé A, Mullis PE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bern, Department of Paediatrics, Inselspital, Switzerland.

PMCID: PMC328682
PMID: 1679539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Genomics. 1991 Aug;10(4):957-60.

Mapping of the von Hippel-Lindau disease locus to a small region of chromosome 3p
by genetic linkage analysis.

Maher ER(1), Bentley E, Yates JR, Latif F, Lerman M, Zbar B, Affara NA,
Ferguson-Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Genetic linkage studies were performed in 22 families with von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) disease by using polymorphic DNA markers from distal chromosome 3p. Linkage
was detected between VHL disease and the markers D3S18 (Zmax = 6.6 at theta =
0.0, confidence interval (CI) 0.00-0.06), RAF1 (Zmax = 5.9 at theta = 0.06, CI
0.01-0.16), and THRB (Zmax 3.4 at theta = 0.11). Multipoint linkage analysis
localized the VHL disease gene within a small region (approximately 8 cM) of
3p25-p26 between RAF1 and (D3S191, D3S225) and close to the D3S18 locus. There
was no evidence of locus heterogeneity, and families with and without
pheochromocytoma showed linkage to D3S18. The identification of DNA markers
flanking the VHL disease gene allows reliable presymptomatic and prenatal
diagnosis to be offered to informative families.

PMID: 1680799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Oncogene. 1991 Aug;6(8):1319-24.

Chromosomal assignment of five cancer-associated rat genes: two thyroid hormone
receptor (ERBA) genes, two ERBB genes and the retinoblastoma gene.

Szpirer C(1), Szpirer J, Rivière M, Ingvarsson S, Vennström B, Islam MQ, Levan G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rhode-St-Genèse, Brussels, Belgium.

Using a panel of somatic cell hybrids that segregate rat chromosomes, the
localization of five cancer-related rat genes was determined: (i) two thyroid
receptor genes, THRA1/ERBA1 and THRB/ERBA2 on chromosomes 10 and 15 respectively,
(ii) two ERBB genes, namely the epidermal growth factor gene (EGFR, also called
ERBB1) and the ERBB2 gene (also designated neu) on chromosomes 14 and 10
respectively, and (iii) the retinoblastoma gene, RB1, on chromosome 15. The
THRA1/ERBA1 and ERBB2/neu genes are thus included in a synteny group, conserved
on rat chromosomes 10 and human chromosome arm 17q.

PMID: 1679528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3760.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of MspI and DraI polymorphism at
the THRB gene.

Ganly PS(1), Rabbitts PH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapeutics Unit, Medical
Research Council Centre, Cambridge, UK.

PMCID: PMC328432
PMID: 1712945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3761.

PCR detection of the HindIII polymorphism at the thyroid hormone receptor, beta, 
gene (THRB).

Ganly PS(1), Rabbitts PH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapeutics Unit, Medical
Research Council Centre, Cambridge, UK.

PMCID: PMC328434
PMID: 1649461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3760.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of EcoRI polymorphism at the THRB
gene.

Ganly PS(1), Rabbitts PH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapeutics Unit, Medical
Research Council Centre, Cambridge, UK.

PMCID: PMC328433
PMID: 1649460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3757.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of BamHI polymorphism at the THRB
gene.

Ganly PS(1), Rabbitts PH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapeutics Unit, Medical
Research Council Centre, Cambridge, UK.

PMCID: PMC328427
PMID: 1649459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Gen Mikrobiol Virusol. 1991 Feb;(2):12-5.

[Design of a gene coding encoding a polypeptide, mixing the enzyme activity of
Escherichia coli homoserine kinase and threonine synthetase].

[Article in Russian]

Manucharian KG, Gening LV, Gusiatiner MM, Gazarian KG.

The functioning of Escherichia coli threonine operon isolated genes thrB and thrC
was studied by using the genetic complementation and enzymatic activity
determination techniques. A new gene thrBC was obtained by the genes merging. The
genes thrB and thrC were shown to function in Escherichia coli cells independent 
of the operon and the polipeptide encoded by the thrBC gene combined the
functions to express the products of both genes in bacterial cell. At the same
time the enzyme coded for by the merged genes demonstrates the level of activity 
compared with the ones of the isolated genes.

PMID: 1851535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genomics. 1991 Feb;9(2):398-400.

A pulsed-field gel electrophoresis map locates the polymorphic probes for ERBA2
and ErbA beta within 120 kb of each other, confirming that THRB (formerly ERBA2) 
maps to chromosome 3.

Douglas JB(1), Daly MC, Rabbitts PH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Oncology and Radiotherapeutics Unit, MRC Centre, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.

PMID: 1672299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1991 Feb;34(5):617-22.

Amplification of three threonine biosynthesis genes in Corynebacterium glutamicum
and its influence on carbon flux in different strains.

Eikmanns BJ(1), Metzger M, Reinscheid D, Kircher M, Sahm H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biotechnologie 1, Forschungszentrums Jülich GmbH, Federal
Republic of Germany.

The hom-thrB operon (homoserine dehydrogenase/homoserine kinase) and the thrC
gene (threonine synthase) of Corynebacterium glutamicum ATCC 13,032 and the
homFBR (homoserine dehydrogenase resistant to feedback inhibition by threonine)
alone as well as homFBR-thrB operon of C. glutamicum DM 368-3 were cloned
separately and in combination in the Escherichia coli/C. glutamicum shuttle
vector pEK0 and introduced into different corynebacterial strains. All
recombinant strains showed 8- to 20-fold higher specific activities of homoserine
dehydrogenase, homoserine kinase, and/or threonine synthase compared to the
respective host. In wild-type C. glutamicum, amplification of the threonine genes
did not result in secretion of threonine. In the lysine producer C. glutamicum DG
52-5 and in the lysine-plus-threonine producer C. glutamicum DM 368-3
overexpression of hom-thrB resulted in a notable shift of carbon flux from lysine
to threonine whereas cloning of homFBR-thrB as well as of homFBR in C. glutamicum
DM 368-3 led to a complete shift towards threonine or towards threonine and its
precursor homoserine, respectively. Overexpression of thrC alone or in
combination with that of homFBR and thrB had no effect on threonine or lysine
formation in all recombinant strains tested.

PMID: 1369320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Neurol Sci. 1990 Dec;100(1-2):27-30.

Mapping of von Hippel-Lindau disease to chromosome 3p confirmed by genetic
linkage analysis.

Maher ER(1), Bentley E, Yates JR, Barton D, Jennings A, Fellows IW, Ponder MA,
Ponder BA, Benjamin C, Harris R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cambridge University, U.K.

Genetic linkage studies were performed in 12 British families with von
Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) using RFLPs at three loci (DNF15S2, THRB, RAF1) on
the short arm of chromosome 3. Linkage was detected between the VHL disease locus
and RAF1 with a maximum lod score of 3.88 at a recombination fraction of 0.05
(confidence interval 0.003-0.18). Multipoint linkage analysis suggested that the 
most likely location for the VHL disease locus is telomeric to THRB. These
results confirm earlier reports localizing the VHL gene to the short arm of
chromosome 3, and provide no evidence for genetic heterogeneity.

PMID: 1982450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Microbiol. 1990 Oct;4(10):1693-702.

The molecular structure of the Corynebacterium glutamicum threonine synthase
gene.

Han KS(1), Archer JA, Sinskey AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Seoul Miwon Co. Ltd, Dobong-ku, Korea.

The minimal region encoding the Corynebacterium glutamicum threonine synthase
structural gene and its promoter was mapped by deletion analysis and
complementation of the C. glutamicum thrC allele to a 1.6 kb region of the
recombinant plasmid pFS80. The nucleotide sequence of this and flanking DNA was
determined. The transcription and translation start points were identified by S1 
mapping analysis and amino-terminal protein sequencing, respectively. The thrC
gene encodes a 54481-Dalton polypeptide product. Translation of the thrC mRNA
initiates only six nucleotides downstream from transcription. The length of the
mRNA transcript is consistent with a single gene transcription unit. The C.
glutamicum thrC gene is expressed independently of the other threonine-specific
genes hom and thrB.

PMID: 2127631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Genetika. 1990 Apr;26(4):648-56.

[Development of the vector-host system in Corynebacterium. Cloning and expression
of homoserine dehydrogenase and homoserine kinase genes in Corynebacterium
cells].

[Article in Russian]

Okorokov AL, Bukanov NO, Beskrovnaia OIu, Voroshilova EB, Gusiatiner MM,
Gritsenko VG, Iankovskii NK, Debabov VG.

Novel cloning vectors for glutamic acid producing bacteria have been constructed.
The cryptic plasmid pBO1 (4.4 kb) from Brevibacterium sp. recombined with the
plasmid pACYC184 (4.0 kb) from Escherichia coli was used to produce composite
plasmid named pKA1. The plasmid could propagate and express the Cm-r phenotype in
E. coli and coryneform glutamic acid producing bacteria Br. flavum, C.
glutamicum, Br. lactofermentum. The pKA1 plasmid and its variants deleted within 
non-essential plasmid regions with unique restriction sites HindIII, SalGI, SphI 
were used in cloning experiments. The genes coding for threonine biosynthesis of 
C. glutamicum and Br. flavum were subcloned into shuttle vectors in C. glutamicum
cells. Recombinant plasmids were introduced into protoplasts by
polyethylenglycol-mediated transformation of plasmid DNAs. It was shown that the 
presence of plasmids containing the Br. flavum thrA2 gene in C. glutamicum (thrB)
caused 10-fold increase in homoserine dehydrogenase activity, as compared to that
of wild type strain, and in homoserine production.

PMID: 2165016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Genetika. 1990 Mar;26(3):412-7.

[Cloning and structural-functional analysis in Escherichia coli of genes of
glutamate-producing corynebacteria controlling biosynthesis of amino acids of
aspartic acid series].

[Article in Russian]

Beskrovnaia OIu, Bukanov NO, Fonshtein MIu, Gusiatiner MM, Okorokov AL,
Nashchokina OO, Iankovskii NK.

A library of EcoRI DNA fragments from Brevibacterium flavum was constructed using
plasmid vector. The genes complementing ThrA2 and ThrB mutations in Escherichia
coli were identified in the library. The gene thrA2 of B. flavum codes for mutant
enzyme homoserine dehydrogenase insensitive to inhibition by threonine. The genes
thrA2 and thrB are localized wihtin the EcoRI fragment 4.1 kb long and are
expressed under the control of their own promoters in E. coli cells. Structural
and functional analysis of cloned C. glutamicum gene ilvA was performed. The gene
of C. glutamicum complemented ilvA mutation in E. coli and appeared to be
localized within the EcoRI--SacI DNA fragment 1.6 kb in size. Using E. coli
minicells we have demonstrated that the gene ilvA of C. glutamicum controls the
synthesis of polypeptide of relative molecular mass 50 kD.

PMID: 2191895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Bacteriol. 1989 Jun;171(6):3518-22.

Translational coupling in the threonine operon of Escherichia coli K-12.

Little S(1), Hyde S, Campbell CJ, Lilley RJ, Robinson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Systems, Celltech Gp Ltd., Berkshire, United Kingdom.

In an attempt to express the two distal genes of the Escherichia coli threonine
operon, the majority of the first gene in the operon, thrA, was removed and a
series of transcriptional fusions were constructed placing the thrB and thrC
genes downstream of either the trp or hybrid tac promoter. Analysis of the
proteins produced by cells containing these fusions revealed that although the
distal gene, thrC, was efficiently expressed, the proximal gene, thrB, was not
expressed at a detectable level. A translational fusion was constructed which
fused the cat gene in phase to the last 800 base pairs of thrA followed by thrB
and thrC. Cells containing this fusion produced high levels of both the thrB and 
thrC gene products, showing that translation of thrB requires translation through
thrA; thus, thrA and thrB are translationally coupled. In addition, it was found 
that a sequence between 220 and 57 base pairs before the start of thrB was
necessary to allow translational coupling to occur.

PMCID: PMC210079
PMID: 2542227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genetika. 1989 Jan;25(1):49-56.

[Cloning and study of Corynebacterium glutamicum genes complementing ilvA and
thrA2 mutations in Escherichia coli].

[Article in Russian]

Beskrovnaia OIu, Bukanov NO, Okorokov AL, Fonshtein MIu, Iankovskii NK.

Molecular cloning and expression of Corynebacterium glutamicum genes
complementing Escherichia coli mutations thrA2 and ilvA was performed. It was
demonstrated that the thrA2 gene of C. glutamicum is located close to thrB on
EcoRI DNA fragment 4.1 kb long. The fragment was cloned in pUC18 vector. The
thrA2 gene is expressed in the recombinant plasmid pOBT3 under control of the
vector pUC18 Plac promoter. In E. coli minicells, the genes thrA2 and thrB
determined synthesis of proteins of Mr 43kD and 25 kD, respectively. A gene
complementing ilvA mutation of E. coli was identified in a library of EcoRI C.
glutamicum DNA fragments. This library was constructed using plasmid vector. It
was shown that the ilvA gene of C. glutamicum is located inside the 3.6 kb EcoRI 
fragment and is expressed using its own promoter.

PMID: 2659439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1988 Oct 15;263(29):14654-60.

Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the Bacillus subtilis hom gene coding for
homoserine dehydrogenase. Structural and evolutionary relationships with
Escherichia coli aspartokinases-homoserine dehydrogenases I and II.

Parsot C(1), Cohen GN.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

The Bacillus subtilis hom gene, encoding homoserine dehydrogenase
(L-homoserine:NADP+ oxidoreductase, EC 1.1.1.3) has been cloned and its
nucleotide sequence determined. The B. subtilis enzyme expressed in Escherichia
coli is sensitive by inhibition by threonine and allows complementation of a
strain lacking homoserine dehydrogenases I and II. Nucleotide sequence analysis
indicates that the hom stop codon overlaps the start codon of thrC (threonine
synthase) suggesting that these genes, as well as thrB (homoserine kinase)
located downstream from thrC, belong to the same transcription unit. The deduced 
amino acid sequence of the B. subtilis homoserine dehydrogenase shows extensive
similarity with the C-terminal part of E. coli aspartokinases-homoserine
dehydrogenases I and II; this similarity starts at the exact point where the
similarity between E. coli or B. subtilis aspartokinases and E. coli
aspartokinases-homoserine dehydrogenases stops. These data suggest that the E.
coli bifunctional polypeptide could have resulted from the direct fusion of
ancestral aspartokinase and homoserine dehydrogenase. The B. subtilis homoserine 
dehydrogenase has a C-terminal extension of about 100 residues (relative to the
E. coli enzymes) that could be involved in the regulation of the enzyme activity.

PMID: 3139660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Genetika. 1988 Jul;24(7):1153-8.

[Molecular cloning and the expression of the genes of amino acid biosynthesis of 
Corynebacterium glutamicum in Escherichia coli cells].

[Article in Russian]

Beskrovnaia OIu, Fonshtein MIu, Kolibaba LG, Iankovskii NK, Debabov VG.

Cloning of genes for threonine and lysine biosynthesis from Corynebacterium
glutamicum was performed in Escherichia coli cells using the plasmid vector
lambda pSL5. The cloned genes are identified via complementation of thrB and lysA
mutations. The gene complementing thrB of E. coli is located within a 4.1 kb
EcoRI fragment of C. glutamicum chromosomal DNA. All the recombinant phasmids
complementing the lysA gene of E. coli contain common 2.2 kb and 3.3 kb EcoRI C. 
glutamicum DNA fragments. The cloned DNA fragments hybridize with identical EcoRI
fragments of C. glutamicum chromosomal DNA.

PMID: 3141247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Microbiol. 1988 Jan;2(1):63-72.

Nucleotide sequence and fine structural analysis of the Corynebacterium
glutamicum hom-thrB operon.

Peoples OP(1), Liebl W, Bodis M, Maeng PJ, Follettie MT, Archer JA, Sinskey AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge 02139.

The complete nucleotide sequence of the Corynebacterium glutamicum hom-thrB
operon has been determined and the structural genes and promoter region mapped. A
polypeptide of Mr 46,136 is encoded by hom and a polypeptide of Mr 32,618 is
encoded by thrB. Both predicted protein sequences show amino acid sequence
homology to their counterparts in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. The
promoter region has been mapped by S1-nuclease and deletion analysis. Located
between -88, RNA start site and -219 (smallest deletion clone with complete
activity) are sequence elements similar to those found in E. coli and B. subtilis
promoters. Although there are no obvious attenuator-like structures in the
5'-untranslated region, there is a dyad-symmetry element, which may act as an
operator.

PMID: 2835591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Microbiol. 1988 Jan;2(1):53-62.

Organization and regulation of the Corynebacterium glutamicum hom-thrB and thrC
loci.

Follettie MT(1), Shin HK, Sinskey AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge 02139.

The genes encoding the three terminal enzymes in the threonine biosynthetic
pathway, homoserine dehydrogenase (hom), homoserine kinase (thrB) and threonine
synthase (thrC) have been isolated from Corynebacterium glutamicum. The C.
glutamicum hom and thrB genes were subcloned on a 3.6 kb SalI-generated
chromosomal fragment. The C. glutamicum thrC gene was shown not to be linked to
the hom-thrB locus. L-methionine represses the cloned homoserine dehydrogenase
and homoserine kinase similar to that of the chromosomally encoded hom and thrB
gene products. Northern hybridization analysis demonstrates that this repression 
is mediated at the level of transcription and that hom-thrB represents an operon 
in C. glutamicum.

PMID: 2835590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Microbiol. 1987 Jul;1(1):45-52.

Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the thrB gene from the cyanobacterium
Calothrix PCC 7601.

Parsot C(1), Mazel D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

The cyanobacterium Calothrix PCC 7601 thrB gene, encoding homoserine kinase (EC
2.7.1.39), was cloned via complementation of an Escherichia coli threonine
auxotroph, and its nucleotide sequence was determined. The comparison of the
homoserine kinase amino acid sequences from Calothrix PCC 7601, E. coli K12 and
Bacillus subtilis 168 indicates a closer relationship between cyanobacteria and
bacillaceae than between cyanobacteria and enterobacteriaceae. Sequence analysis 
of the 5' and 3' flanking regions of the Calothrix thrB gene revealed the
existence of a 169-codon-long open reading frame downstream from thrB: this
sequence may be the second gene of a Calothrix thr operon. Two types of tandemly 
repeated sequences, sharing similarities with other prokaryotic transcriptional
regulatory elements, were detected in the region upstream from the thrB gene.

PMID: 2838727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Mar;206(3):361-7.

Cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of the homoserine kinase (thrB) gene
from Brevibacterium lactofermentum.

Mateos LM, del Real G, Aguilar A, Martín JF.

Five DNA fragments carrying the thrB gene (homoserine kinase E.C. 2.7.1.39) of
Brevibacterium lactofermentum were cloned by complementation of Escherichia coli 
thrB mutants using pBR322 as vector. All the cloned fragments contained a common 
3.1 kb DNA sequence. The cloned fragments hybridized among themselves and with a 
9 kb BamHI fragment of the chromosomal DNA of B. lactofermentum but not with the 
DNA of E. coli. None of the cloned fragments were able to complement thrA and
thrC mutations of E. coli. Plasmids pULTH2, pULTH8 and pULTH11 had the cloned DNA
fragments in the same orientation and were very stable. On the contrary, plasmid 
pULTH18 was very unstable and showed the DNA inserted in the opposite direction. 
E. coli minicells transformed with plasmids pULTH8 or pULTH11 (both carrying the 
common 3.1 kb fragment) synthesize a protein with an Mr of 30,000 that is similar
in size to the homoserine kinase of E. coli.

PMID: 3035340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Gene. 1987;57(2-3):151-8.

Cloning and characterization of the mutated threonine operon (thrA(1)5A(2)5BC) of
Serratia marcescens.

Sugita T(1), Komatsubara S, Kisumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Applied Biochemistry, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Osaka, 
Japan.

The entire threonine operon (thrA(1)5A(2)5BC) of Serratia marcescens TLr156,
which lacks threonine-mediated feedback inhibition of both aspartokinase I (AK I)
and homoserine dehydrogenase I (HD I), was cloned on a multicopy plasmid pLG339. 
Hybrid plasmid pSK301 carried a 6.5-kb chromosomal DNA. Several derivatives of
pSK301 with Tn1000 insertions were obtained. By examining the phenotypes and the 
physical maps of these plasmids, we could define the loci of the thrA(1)5A(2)5,
thrB, and thrC genes. The thrA(1)5A(2)5 and thrC gene products were identified by
the maxicell method as proteins with Mrs of 85,000 and 43,000, respectively. The 
thrA(1)5A(2)5 genes encode a single polypeptide similar to the thrA1A2 genes of
Escherichia coli. Plasmid pSK301 was introduced into S. marcescens T-1112, in
which both AK I and HD I are produced constitutively. The resulting transformant 
carried five to six copies of pSK301 per chromosome and produced the AK I and HD 
I enzymes at three to four times higher level than control strain T-1112[pLG339].
Strain T-1112[pSK301] produced four times higher levels of threonine than strain 
T-1112[pLG339], yielding about 35 mg of threonine per ml of a medium containing
sucrose and urea.

PMID: 3121445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Infect Immun. 1986 Nov;54(2):593-6.

Chromosomal map location of the alpha-hemolysin structural gene in Staphylococcus
aureus NCTC 8325.

Pattee PA.

The alpha-hemolysin structural gene, hly+, previously cloned, insertionally
inactivated, and introduced into the chromosome by allele replacement (M.O.
O'Reilly, J.C.S. De Azavedo, S. Kennedy, and T.J. Foster, Microb. Pathog.
1:125-138, 1986), was shown by protoplast fusion and transformation to be in the 
gene order purC-hly-uraB-omega[chr::Tn916]1101-thrB on the chromosome of
Staphylococcus aureus NCTC 8325. This location is clearly distinct from that of
the agr determinant, a regulatory gene affecting several extracellular proteins, 
including alpha-hemolysin, located between tmn and ilv.

PMCID: PMC260204
PMID: 3770955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. EMBO J. 1986 Nov;5(11):3013-9.

Evolution of biosynthetic pathways: a common ancestor for threonine synthase,
threonine dehydratase and D-serine dehydratase.

Parsot C.

The Bacillus subtilis genes encoding threonine synthase (thrC) and homoserine
kinase (thrB) have been cloned via complementation of Escherichia coli thr
mutants. Determination of their nucleotide sequences indicates that the thrC stop
codon overlaps the thrB start codon; this genetic organization suggests that the 
two genes belong to the same operon, as in E. coli. However, the gene order is
thrC-thrB in B. subtilis whereas it is thrB-thrC in the thr operon of E. coli.
This inversion of the thrC and thrB genes between E. coli and B. subtilis is
indicative of a possible independent construction of the thr operon in these two 
organisms. In other respects, comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences of
the B. subtilis and E. coli threonine synthases with that of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae threonine dehydratase and that of E. coli D-serine dehydratase
revealed extensive homologies between these pyridoxal phosphate-dependent
enzymes. This sequence homology, which correlates with similarities in the
catalytic mechanisms of these enzymes, indicates that these proteins, catalyzing 
different reactions in different metabolic pathways, may have evolved from a
common ancestor.

PMCID: PMC1167255
PMID: 3098560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Bacteriol. 1985 Jan;161(1):461-2.

Evidence for an internal promoter in the Escherichia coli threonine operon.

Saint Girons I, Margarita D.

We constructed plasmids carrying the two first genes of the threonine operon from
which the major promoter was deleted in vitro by digestion with BAL 31 nuclease. 
These plasmids continued to express the second gene (thrB) of the operon as
judged by their ability to complement a threonine auxotroph. These data indicate 
that, in addition to the major promoter thrP, there was an internal promoter,
thrBp, which could be used for the transcription of the thrB, the second gene of 
the operon. Additional evidence was given by subcloning a 230-base-pair segment
of the operon in a plasmid suitable for detection of translation initiation
signals and promoters. The thrBp promoter was thus shown to lie within a
61-base-pair fragment at the 3' end of the first gene, thrA, of the threonine
operon.

PMCID: PMC214898
PMID: 3918011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Bacteriol. 1984 Jul;159(1):19-25.

Identification of the phoM gene product and its regulation in Escherichia coli
K-12.

Ludtke D, Bernstein J, Hamilton C, Torriani A.

Plasmids containing the chromosome region of Escherichia coli encoding phoM,
whose product is a positive regulator of alkaline phosphatase expression, were
isolated from the Clarke and Carbon plasmid bank. A 9.9-kilobase EcoRI fragment
of plasmid pLC17-39 (subcloned into pBR322) was able to complement both phoM and 
thrB mutations. Restriction endonuclease analysis and in vitro mutagenesis of the
hybird plasmids enabled the localization of the phoM gene locus to 3 kilobases of
the cloned chromosomal fragment. The phoM gene product was identified, with
maxicell techniques, as a protein with an approximate molecular weight of 55,000.
A phoM-lacZ protein fusion was constructed by using a plasmid carrying the phoM
gene and a derivative of phage lambda, lambda plac Mu2. Restriction endonuclease 
analysis of the plasmid carrying the fusion indicated that phoM is transcribed in
a clockwise direction on the circular E. coli chromosome. Analysis of strains
bearing the fusion on a multiple-copy plasmid or integrated at the lambda
attachment site of the chromosome indicated that the synthesis of the phoM gene
product was unaffected by phosphate limitation of growth. The expression of the
phoM gene was studied in strains with mutations in genes encoding effectors of
the pho regulon. A threefold increase in phoM expression was seen in a phoU
strain in comparison with the wild-type strain.

PMCID: PMC215586
PMID: 6330029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Gen Genet. 1984;195(3):381-90.

Cloning and characterization of the alkaline phosphatase positive regulatory gene
(phoM) of Escherichia coli.

Makino K, Shinagawa H, Nakata A.

The positive regulatory gene (phoM) for alkaline phosphatase of Escherichia coli 
was cloned on a mini-F plasmid pMF3 from the E. coli chromosome by a shotgun
method. The hybrid plasmid pTHR32, which carries 10.8 kb chromosomal DNA,
complemented both phoM and thrB mutations. The restriction map was constructed.
Based upon this information, several PhoM- deletion plasmids and smaller PhoM+
plasmids were constructed in vitro. By examining the phenotypes and the physical 
maps of these plasmids, we could define the phoM gene locus in a 2.5 kb region on
the restriction map of the cloned chromosomal DNA fragment. The PhoM+ plasmid not
only enabled a phoM- -phoR- double mutant to express phoA (the structural gene
for the alkaline phosphatase) but also phoB (another positive regulatory gene for
phoA). These results are consistent with a model for genetic regulation of phoA
expression that proposes that both the phoM and phoR gene products activate phoB 
expression under phosphate starved conditions, and PhoB protein, in turn,
activates phoA expression. The phoM gene product was identified by the maxicell
method as a protein with a molecular weight of 60,000. A hybrid plasmid that
carries a phoM'-'lacZ fused gene on mini-F vector pMF3 was constructed in vitro. 
This plasmid enabled us to study phoM gene expression by measuring the
beta-galactosidase level in the cells. The plasmid was introduced into various
regulatory mutants related to the phosphate regulon, and phoM gene expression in 
these strains was studied under conditions of limited or excess phosphate. It was
found that phoM expression was not regulated by phosphate nor by any of the pho
genes. The transcriptional direction of phoM was found to be clockwise toward the
thr operon on the E. coli genetic map. The fusion gene product interfered with
phoB and phoA expression in the phoR mutants. Overproduction of PhoM protein
increased phoB and phoA expression only in the phoR mutants. The implications of 
these findings are discussed.

PMID: 6381964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Diabetes. 1981 Jun;30(6):519-23.

Immunoreactivity and biologic activity of semisynthetic [LeuB-30]-insulin:
potential value in the treatment of insulin antibody-mediated insulin resistance.

Kobayashi M, Ohgaku S, Iwasaki M, Shigeta Y, Oka T, Morihara K.

Insulin analogues with different amino acids, including threonine, alanine,
L-leucine, D-leucine, L-leucine amide, phenylalanine, tri-alanine, or desalanine,
at the B-30 position were semisynthesized from pork insulin by the new enzymatic 
method. The order of ability of the insulin analogues to bind to anti-insulin
sera was [AlaB-30] greater than desalanine greater than [ThrB-30] greater than
[Ala-Ala-AlaB-30] greater than [D-LeuB-30], [Leu-NH2B-30],[PheB-30] greater than 
desoctapeptide greater than or equal to [LeuB-30]. The ability of insulin
analogues with different amino acids at B-30 to bind to receptors, as well as
their biologic potency tested with glucose uptake in isolated rat adipocytes, was
comparable among the analogues. These results suggest that [LeuB-30]-insulin
demonstrated the least immunoreactivity and has full activity in receptor binding
and biologic effect, and that it may be useful for treatment of anti-insulin
antibody-mediated insulin resistance.

PMID: 7014315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nucleic Acids Res. 1981 Jan 24;9(2):339-47.

Nucleotide sequence of the thrB gene of E. coli, and its two adjacent regions;
the thrAB and thrBC junctions.

Cossart P, Katinka M, Yaniv M.

We have sequenced a DNA fragment containing the Escherichia coli thrA-thrB
junction, the complete thrB gene and the thrB-thrC junction. The intergenic
sequence thrA and thrB is only one base pair. The coding region for homoserine
kinase is 927 base pairs long. It is followed by 114 base pair segment in an open
reading frame predicting that thrC begins just after non-sense codon of thrB. The
presence at the end of thrA and of thrB of sequences that can pair with the 3'
end of the 16 S ribosomal RNA suggests that reinitiation of translation occurs at
the end of the two genes. The deduced aminoacid sequence for homoserine kinase
shows no striking homology with aspartokinase I homoserine dehydrogenase I.

PMCID: PMC326696
PMID: 6259626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Bacteriol. 1981 Jan;145(1):479-88.

Distribution of Tn551 insertion sites responsible for auxotrophy on the
Staphylococcus aureus chromosome.

Pattee PA.

A method was devised to efficiently select isolates of Staphylococcus aureus 8325
in which Tn551, a transposon originating on the pI258 plasmid responsible for
erythromycin resistance (Emr), had translocated to the host chromosome. This
method consisted of selecting for Emr at 43 degrees C with a strain in which the 
pI258 plasmid was unable to replicate at 43 degrees C because of a
temperature-sensitive plasmid mutation. By selecting isolates that were Emr at 43
degrees C and auxotrophic for nutrients not required by the parent strain.
Tn551-induced auxotrophic mutants were readily isolated. The incidence of
auxotrophic classes was not random; 80% of the isolates in one experiment were
Trp-, whereas only a single example of each of some of the other classes was
isolated. Among the Trp- mutants, the distribution of trp genes affected and the 
frequency of precise excision of Tn551 from individual sites varied. When
analyzed by transformation, the Tn551-induced ala, his, ilv, lys, rib, thrA,
thrB, and trp mutations were shown to occupy sites previously defined by
nitrosoguanidine-induced mutations. Tn551-induced mutagenesis provided three
previously unrecognized classes of auxotrophs (tyr, met, and thrC), and the Tn551
integration sites resulting in these mutations have been identified. In addition,
a chromosomal region (uraB) was identified by Tn551 mutagenesis that is distinct 
from uraA (previously defined by chemical mutagenesis). Some Tn551-induced
mutations (most notably pur) could not be linked to the known linkage groups of
the chromosome by transformation. With the exception of two pur mutations, all of
the Tn551-induced auxotrophic mutational sites cotransformed at unity with Tn551 
and, in cases in which they were selected, prototrophic transformants were always
Ems. Thus, the Tn551 and auxotrophic sites are identical.

PMCID: PMC217297
PMID: 6257640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Genetika. 1980;16(1):66-77.

[Cloning of threonine operon genes in Escherichia coli cells].

[Article in Russian]

Kozlov IuI, Kochetova LP, Livshits VA, Mashko SV, Moshentseva VN.

A set of hybrid plasmids carrying Escherichia coli threonine genes was obtained
and cloned. The plasmid pBR322 was used as a vehicle. The genetic and restriction
analyses showed that genes thrA and thrB were placed between SalGI and EcoRI
sites on the 2.6 megadaltons DNA region. The transcription of threonine operon
genes inserted in the hybrid plasmids is under the control of its own promoter.
The copy number of hybrid plasmids was reverse proportional to their molecular
weight and did not depend on the replicon number. Amplification of genes of
threonine operon by hybrid plasmids led to 20-25-fold increase of homoserine
dehydrogenase activity, encoded by thrA gene. The expression of this gene,
incorporated in hybrid plasmids, was repressed by the addition of threonine and
isoleucine in the culture medium.

PMID: 6777249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Gen Genet. 1979 Aug;175(1):39-44.

Construction and expression of a hybrid plasmid containing the Escherichia coli
thrA and thrB genes.

Cossart P, Katinka M, Yaniv M, Saint Girons I, Cohen GN.

In vitro recombination techniques were used to clone the Escherichia coli thrA
and thrB structural genes in the plasmid vector pBR322. The chimeric plasmid was 
analyzed and characterized genetically, by restriction mapping and DNA
sequencing. The limited expression of the threonine biosynthetic enzymes in the
strain carrying the recombinant plasmid is discussed.

PMID: 390305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Bacteriol. 1974 Jun;118(3):990-8.

Threonine locus of Escherichia coli K-12: genetic structure and evidence for an
operon.

Thèze J, Saint-Girons I.

Three genes, thrA, thrB, and thrC, were previously defined and localized in the
threonine locus of Escherichia coli K-12. thrA, thrB, and thrC specify the
enzymes aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I, homoserine kinase, and
threonine synthetase, respectively. A complementation analysis of the threonine
cluster using derivatives of a lambda phage carrying the threonine genes
(lambdadthr(c)) demonstrates that: (i) thrB and thrC each consist of a single
cistron; and (ii) thrA is composed of two cistrons, thrA(1) and thrA(2), although
it specifies a single polypeptide chain. thrA(1) and thrA(2) correspond to
aspartokinase I and homoserine dehydrogenase I, respectively. Their relative
order is established. The demonstration of polar effects of mutations (nonsense
or induced by phage Mu) in thrA and thrB is taken as evidence for the existence
of a thrA thrB thrC operon, transcribed in this order.

PMCID: PMC246849
PMID: 4364333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Bacteriol. 1974 Jan;117(1):133-43.

Mapping of the structural genes of the three aspartokinases and of the two
homoserine dehydrogenases of Escherichia coli K-12.

Thèze J, Margarita D, Cohen GN, Borne F, Patte JC.

Mutants requiring threonine plus methionine (or homoserine), or threonine plus
methionine plus diaminopimelate (or homoserine plus diaminopimelate) have been
isolated from strains possessing only one of the three isofunctional
aspartokinases. They have been classified in several groups according to their
enzymatic defects. Their mapping is described. Several regions of the chromosome 
are concerned: thrA (aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I) is mapped in the
same region as thrB and thrC (0 min). lysC (aspartokinase III) is mapped at 80
min, far from the other genes coding for diaminopimelate synthesis. metLM
(aspartokinase II-homoserine dehydrogenase II) lies at 78 min closely linked to
metB, metJ, and metF.

PMCID: PMC246534
PMID: 4148765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Bacteriol. 1973 Oct;116(1):1-11.

Genetic analysis of thr mutations in Salmonella typhimurium.

Stuttard C.

Previous workers divided threonine-requiring (Thr(-)) strains of Salmonella into 
three phenotypes with mutations in four complementation groups. The mutations
were deemed to define four genes in the order thrD-C-A-B at minute zero on the
Salmonella linkage map. In the present study 12 of these mutants were reexamined 
together with eight new Thr(-) strains. The three phenotypes were:
homoserine-requiring (Hom(-)); Thr(-), feeders of Hom(-) strains; Thr(-),
nonfeeders. Exact correlation between these phenotypic groups and three
complementation groups was confirmed by abortive transduction. No evidence was
found for intergenic complementation between mutations in Hom(-) strains. It is
proposed that thr mutations define three genes rather than four and that these be
renamed thrA (Hom(-)), thrB (Thr(-) feeders), and thrC (Thr(-) nonfeeders) to
correspond with the sequence of reactions in threonine biosynthesis. Double
mutant trpRthr strains were used in reciprocal three-point transduction tests to 
establish the order of thr mutation sites. Although revisions were made in the
classification or location of several mutations, there was an overall correlation
of complementation group, phenotype, and map position. The present data provide a
basis for further correlation of threonine genes and biosynthetic enzymes, and
analysis of cross regulation in aspartate amino acid biosynthesis in Salmonella.

PMCID: PMC246383
PMID: 4583208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


