
1. Neural Dev. 2016 Feb 19;11(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s13064-016-0059-9.

Evx1 and Evx2 specify excitatory neurotransmitter fates and suppress inhibitory
fates through a Pax2-independent mechanism.

Juárez-Morales JL(1), Schulte CJ(2), Pezoa SA(1), Vallejo GK(1), Hilinski
WC(1,)(3), England SJ(1), de Jager S(2), Lewis KE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 107 College Place, Syracuse, NY,
13244, USA. (2)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University
of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK. (3)Department of
Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, 505 Irving Avenue, 
Syracuse, NY, 13210, USA. (4)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, 107
College Place, Syracuse, NY, 13244, USA. kelewi02@syr.edu.

BACKGROUND: For neurons to function correctly in neuronal circuitry they must
utilize appropriate neurotransmitters. However, even though neurotransmitter
specificity is one of the most important and defining properties of a neuron we
still do not fully understand how neurotransmitter fates are specified during
development. Most neuronal properties are determined by the transcription factors
that neurons express as they start to differentiate. While we know a few
transcription factors that specify the neurotransmitter fates of particular
neurons, there are still many spinal neurons for which the transcription factors 
specifying this critical phenotype are unknown. Strikingly, all of the
transcription factors that have been identified so far as specifying inhibitory
fates in the spinal cord act through Pax2. Even Tlx1 and Tlx3, which specify the 
excitatory fates of dI3 and dI5 spinal neurons work at least in part by
down-regulating Pax2.
METHODS: In this paper we use single and double mutant zebrafish embryos to
identify the spinal cord functions of Evx1 and Evx2.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that Evx1 and Evx2 are expressed by spinal cord V0v cells
and we show that these cells develop into excitatory (glutamatergic) Commissural 
Ascending (CoSA) interneurons. In the absence of both Evx1 and Evx2, V0v cells
still form and develop a CoSA morphology. However, they lose their excitatory
fate and instead express markers of a glycinergic fate. Interestingly, they do
not express Pax2, suggesting that they are acquiring their inhibitory fate
through a novel Pax2-independent mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Evx1 and Evx2 are required, partially redundantly, for spinal cord
V0v cells to become excitatory (glutamatergic) interneurons. These results
significantly increase our understanding of the mechanisms of neuronal
specification and the genetic networks involved in these processes.

PMCID: PMC4759709
PMID: 26896392  [PubMed - in process]


2. Leukemia. 2015 Dec;29(12):2317-27. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.162. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Characterization of the genome-wide TLX1 binding profile in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Durinck K(1), Van Loocke W(1), Van der Meulen J(1), Van de Walle I(2), Ongenaert 
M(1), Rondou P(1), Wallaert A(1), de Bock CE(3), Van Roy N(1), Poppe B(1), Cools 
J(3), Soulier J(4), Taghon T(2), Speleman F(1), Van Vlierberghe P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium. (2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (3)Laboratory for the Molecular
Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center for the
Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Genome Rearrangements and Cancer
Laboratory, U944 INSERM, University Paris Diderot and Hematology Laboratory,
Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France.

The TLX1 transcription factor is critically involved in the multi-step
pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and often cooperates 
with NOTCH1 activation during malignant T-cell transformation. However, the exact
molecular mechanism by which these T-cell specific oncogenes cooperate during
transformation remains to be established. Here, we used chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing to establish the genome-wide binding
pattern of TLX1 in human T-ALL. This integrative genomics approach showed that
ectopic TLX1 expression drives repression of T cell-specific enhancers and
mediates an unexpected transcriptional antagonism with NOTCH1 at critical target 
genes, including IL7R and NOTCH3. These phenomena coordinately trigger a
TLX1-driven pre-leukemic phenotype in human thymic precursor cells, reminiscent
of the thymus regression observed in murine TLX1 tumor models, and create a
strong genetic pressure for acquiring activating NOTCH1 mutations as a
prerequisite for full leukemic transformation. In conclusion, our results uncover
a functional antagonism between cooperative oncogenes during the earliest phases 
of tumor development and provide novel insights in the multi-step pathogenesis of
TLX1-driven human leukemia.

PMID: 26108691  [PubMed - in process]


3. Crit Rev Oncog. 2014;19(5):399-404.

Friend or foe: can activating mutations in NOTCH1 contribute to a favorable
treatment outcome in patients with T-ALL?

Goldshtein A(1), Berger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lautenberg Center for Immunology and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical
Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University Medical School of Medicine, Ein
Kerem Campus, Jerusalem, Israe.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive malignancy of
thymocytes. Despite significant improvement in the treatment of T-ALL,
approximately 20% of children and most adults succumb to resistant or relapsed
disease. Transformation events occur during crucial steps of thymocyte
development and have been related to the expression of certain oncogenes such as 
TAL2, TLX1, LYL1, LMO1, and NOTCH1. Mutations that lead to constitutive
activation of NOTCH1 are most commonly found in human patients with T-ALL.
Moreover, overexpression of the intracellular portion of NOTCH1 can lead to the
initiation of T-ALL in mouse models. These findings suggest that NOTCH1 may
promote tumorigenesis through the regulation of differentiation of leukemic
cells, and, potentially, of leukemia-initiating cell identity and function.
Multiple studies and clinical trials aimed at targeting NOTCH1 in T-ALL or using 
NOTCH1 mutations as a prognostic tool are currently underway. Recent studies
unexpectedly found that activating mutations in NOTCH1 are correlated with better
treatment outcome. Here we review these studies and discuss possible explanations
for these findings.

PMID: 25404153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genesis. 2014 Nov;52(11):916-23. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22829. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Generation of a Tlx1(CreER-Venus) knock-in mouse strain for the study of spleen
development.

Nakahara R(1), Kawai Y, Oda A, Nishimura M, Murakami A, Azuma T, Kaifu T,
Goitsuka R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development and Aging, Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences,
Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, Japan.

The spleen is a lymphoid organ that serves as a unique niche for immune
reactions, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and the removal of aged erythrocytes
from the circulation. While much is known about the immunological functions of
the spleen, the mechanisms governing the development and organization of its
stromal microenvironment remain poorly understood. Here we report the generation 
and analysis of a Tlx1(Cre) (ER) (-Venus) knock-in mouse strain engineered to
simultaneously express tamoxifen-inducible CreER(T2) and Venus fluorescent
protein under the control of regulatory elements of the Tlx1 gene, which encodes 
a transcription factor essential for spleen development. We demonstrated that
Venus as well as CreER expression recapitulates endogenous Tlx1 transcription
within the spleen microenvironment. When Tlx1(Cre) (ER) (-Venus) mice were
crossed with the Cre-inducible reporter strain, Tlx1-expressing cells as well as 
their descendants were specifically labeled following tamoxifen administration.
We also showed by cell lineage tracing that asplenia caused by Tlx1 deficiency is
attributable to altered contribution of mesenchymal cells in the spleen anlage to
the pancreatic mesenchyme. Thus, Tlx1(Cre) (ER) (-Venus) mice represent a new
tool for lineage tracing and conditional gene manipulation of spleen mesenchymal 
cells, essential approaches for understanding the molecular mechanisms of spleen 
development.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25283275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Sep;41(9):6291-6. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3511-0. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

ChIP-seq analysis of androgen receptor in LNCaP cell line.

Tao S(1), He H, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, 88 Jiefang Road, Hangzhou, 310009, China,
ttsieng@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    Tao S, He H, Chen Q. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1479.

The aim of this study was to screen target genes and gene functions of androgen
receptor (AR) in LNCaP cell line by ChIP-seq data analysis. We downloaded the
gene expression profile GSE14092 from Gene Expression Omnibus database and
selected ChIP-seq data (GSM353644) of AR stimulated by androgen R1881 (R1881
stimulation group) and the ChIP-seq data (GSM353643) of AR without R1881
stimulation (control group). MACS peak calling software was used to identify the 
AR binding cites. After target genes selection and function analysis, motif
finding analysis was utilized to predict the AR co-located transcription
regulation factors, and we analyzed their functions through GO enrichment
analysis. Total 27202 and 2730 AR binding sites were detected in the R1881
stimulation group and the control group, respectively and 398 and 58 target genes
were identified in R1881 stimulation group and control group, respectively. Based
on GO enrichment analysis, 20 biological processes which AR regulated in the
LNCaP cells were enriched, including xenobiotic metabolic process, positive
regulation of interleukin-2 production and cellular response to sterol etc. We
finally identified 99 transcription factors with high motif enrichment
significant levels, and the enrichment of AR co-located transcription factors was
significantly enriched in the biological process of regulation of cell
proliferation in which 13 transcription factors were involved (FOXJ1, FOXM1, NF1,
SOX2, HOXD13, FOXO1, FOXP3, FOXO4, SOX9, PGR, DBP, JUN and TLX1). The analysis of
AR target genes and gene functions help us to elucidate the mechanism of the
prostate cancer on a molecular level. In addition, it will pave the way to
effective therapies for prostatic cancer. However, further experiments are still 
needed to confirm our results.

PMID: 24985976  [PubMed]


6. J Clin Invest. 2014 May;124(5):2071-5. Epub 2014 Apr 8.

Testicular differentiation factor SF-1 is required for human spleen development.

Zangen D, Kaufman Y, Banne E, Weinberg-Shukron A, Abulibdeh A, Garfinkel BP,
Dweik D, Kanaan M, Camats N, Flück C, Renbaum P, Levy-Lahad E.

The transcription factor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1; also known as NR5A1) is a 
crucial mediator of both steroidogenic and nonsteroidogenic tissue
differentiation. Mutations within SF1 underlie different disorders of sexual
development (DSD), including sex reversal, spermatogenic failure, ovarian
insufficiency, and adrenocortical deficiency. Here, we identified a recessive
mutation within SF1 that resulted in a substitution of arginine to glutamine at
codon 103 (R103Q) in a child with both severe 46,XY-DSD and asplenia. The R103Q
mutation decreased SF-1 transactivation of TLX1, a transcription factor that has 
been shown to be essential for murine spleen development. Additionally, the SF1
R103Q mutation impaired activation of steroidogenic genes, without affecting
synergistic SF-1 and sex-determining region Y (SRY) coactivation of the testis
development gene SOX9. Together, our data provide evidence that SF-1 is required 
for spleen development in humans via transactivation of TLX1 and that mutations
that only impair steroidogenesis, without altering the SF1/SRY transactivation of
SOX9, can lead to 46,XY-DSD.

PMCID: PMC4001552
PMID: 24905461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Jun 2;7:43. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-7-43.

Polymorphisms in microRNA target sites modulate risk of lymphoblastic and myeloid
leukemias and affect microRNA binding.

Dzikiewicz-Krawczyk A(1), Macieja A, Maly E, Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska D, Mosor
M, Fichna M, Strauss E, Nowak J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Strzeszynska 32,
60-479 Poznan, Poland. krawczyk@man.poznan.pl.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA dysregulation is a common event in leukemia. Polymorphisms
in microRNA-binding sites (miRSNPs) in target genes may alter the strength of
microRNA interaction with target transcripts thereby affecting protein levels. In
this study we aimed at identifying miRSNPs associated with leukemia risk and
assessing impact of these miRSNPs on miRNA binding to target transcripts.
METHODS: We analyzed with specialized algorithms the 3' untranslated regions of
137 leukemia-associated genes and identified 111 putative miRSNPs, of which 10
were chosen for further investigation. We genotyped patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>87), chronic myeloid leukemia (CML, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>140), childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>101) and healthy controls (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>471). Association
between SNPs and leukemia risk was calculated by estimating odds ratios in the
multivariate logistic regression analysis. For miRSNPs that were associated with 
leukemia risk we performed luciferase reporter assays to examine whether they
influence miRNA binding.
RESULTS: Here we show that variant alleles of TLX1_rs2742038 and ETV6_rs1573613
were associated with increased risk of childhood ALL (OR (95% CI)<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.97
(1.43-11.02) and 1.9 (1.16-3.11), respectively), while PML_rs9479 was associated 
with decreased ALL risk (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.55 (0.36-0.86). In adult myeloid leukemias we
found significant associations between the variant allele of PML_rs9479 and
decreased AML risk (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.61 (0.38-0.97), and between variant alleles of IRF8_
rs10514611 and ARHGAP26_rs187729 and increased CML risk (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.4 (1.12-5.15) and
1.63 (1.07-2.47), respectively). Moreover, we observed a significant trend for an
increasing ALL and CML risk with the growing number of risk genotypes with
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>13.91 (4.38-44.11) for carriers of =3 risk genotypes in ALL and OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.9
(1.27-18.85) for carriers of 2 risk genotypes in CML. Luciferase reporter assays 
revealed that the C allele of ARHGAP26_rs187729 creates an illegitimate binding
site for miR-18a-3p, while the A allele of PML_rs9479 enhances binding of
miR-510-5p and the C allele of ETV6_rs1573613 weakens binding of miR-34c-5p and
miR-449b-5p.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study implicates that microRNA-binding site polymorphisms
modulate leukemia risk by interfering with the miRNA-mediated regulation. Our
findings underscore the significance of variability in 3' untranslated regions in
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4059877
PMID: 24886876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089649. eCollection
2014.

Ectopic TLX1 expression accelerates malignancies in mice deficient in DNA-PK.

Krutikov K(1), Zheng Y(2), Chesney A(3), Huang X(2), Vaags AK(1), Evdokimova
V(2), Hough MR(4), Chen E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Sunnybrook Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of
Clinical Pathology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada ;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada ; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The noncluster homeobox gene HOX11/TLX1 (TLX1) is detected at the breakpoint of
the t(10;14)(q24;q11) chromosome translocation in patients with T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). This translocation results in the inappropriate
expression of TLX1 in T cells. The oncogenic potential of TLX1 was demonstrated
in IgHµ-TLX1(Tg) mice which develop mature B cell lymphoma after a long latency
period, suggesting the requirement of additional mutations to initiate
malignancy. To determine whether dysregulation of genes involved in the DNA
damage response contributed to tumor progression, we crossed IgHµ-TLX1(Tg) mice
with mice deficient in the DNA repair enzyme DNA-PK (Prkdc(Scid/Scid) mice).
IgHµ-TLX1(Tg)Prkdc(Scid/Scid) mice developed T-ALL and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) with reduced latency relative to control Prkdc(Scid/Scid) mice. Further
analysis of thymi from premalignant mice revealed greater thymic cellularity
concomitant with increased thymocyte proliferation and decreased apoptotic index.
Moreover, premalignant and malignant thymocytes exhibited impaired spindle
checkpoint function, in association with aneuploid karyotypes. Gene expression
profiling of premalignant IgHµ-TLX1(Tg)Prkdc(Scid/Scid) thymocytes revealed
dysregulated expression of cell cycle, apoptotic and mitotic spindle checkpoint
genes in double negative 2 (DN2) and DN3 stage thymocytes. Collectively, these
findings reveal a novel synergy between TLX1 and impaired DNA repair pathway in
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3935916
PMID: 24586935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec 24;93(48):3835-40.

[Hypermethylation of CpG island in promoter region of MEIS1 gene and its
expression in HOX11(+) acute T lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia JS(1), Spicuglia S.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University People's Hospital, Peking University Institute of
Hematology, Beijing 100044, China. Email: jiajinsong@medmail.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the status of methylation in promoter region of MEIS1 gene
and its expression in cell lines and patients with HOX11(+) T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and explore the relationship between the
expression level of MEIS1 gene and methylation of CpG island in promoter region.
METHODS: The methylation pattern in MEIS1 gene was detected with bisulfite
sequencing PCR, DNA methylation immunoprecipitation and promoter oligonucleotide 
microarray. And the expression level of MEIS1 mRNA was detected with reverse
transcription PCR in 3 T-ALL cell lines: sil-ALL, DND41 and RPMI as well as in 75
clinical bone marrow samples including 38 de novo T-ALL patients, 29 complete
remission T-ALL patients and 8 normal samples from January 2009 to December 2011.
RESULTS: The expressions of HOX11 mRNA in the patients were classified into high 
expression (HOX11(+)) groups (n = 14) and low expression (HOX11(-)) groups (n =
24) . There was hypermethylation of CpG island in promoter region of MEIS1 gene
in patients with HOX11(+) T-ALL. The methylation rate of promoter CpG islands of 
MEIS1 gene in HOX11(+) T-ALL (76.8%) was significantly higher than that of
HOX11(-) T-ALL (29.5%) (P < 0.01). The expression MEIS1 in complete remission
T-ALL patients and normal samples was significantly lower than that in de novo
T-ALL patients (both P < 0.05) . The expression MEIS1 in HOX11(+) cell lines was 
significantly lower than that in HOX11(-) cell lines (0.392 ± 0.226,0.378 ± 0.317
vs 1.059 ± 0.533, both P < 0.05) and the expression level of MEIS1 in HOX11(+)
T-ALL patients (0.462 ± 0.281) significantly lower than that in HOX11(-) T-ALL
patients (0.916 ± 0.437) (P < 0.01). The relationship between MEIS1 and HOX11
mRNA expression level had a negative correlation (rs = -0.416, P < 0.01) . The
expression level of MEIS1 gene was negatively correlated with the methylation of 
CpG island in promoter region in T-ALL (rs = -0.383, P < 0.01) .
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of MEIS1 becomes down-regulated or even lost by
promoter methylation in T-ALL. HOX11 maybe a negative regulator of MEIS1 gene.

PMID: 24548444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Turk J Haematol. 2012 Dec;29(4):325-33. doi: 10.5505/tjh.2012.13540. Epub 2012
Dec 5.

Upregulation of T-Cell-Specific Transcription Factor Expression in Pediatric
T-Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (T-ALL).

Sayitoglu M(1), Erbilgin Y(1), Hatirnaz Ng O(1), Yildiz I(2), Celkan T(2), Anak
S(3), Devecioglu O(3), Aydogan G(4), Karaman S(5), Sarper N(6), Timur C(7), Ure
U(8), Ozbek U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul University, Department of Genetics, Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa School of
Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Istanbul
University, Istanbul School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology,
Istanbul, Turkey. (4)Bakirköy Maternity and Children's Hospital, Department of
Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey. (5)Ministry of Health Sisli Etfal Teaching
Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey. (6)Kocaeli School
of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Kocaeli, Turkey. (7)Ministry of 
Health Göztepe Teaching Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology, Istanbul,
Turkey. (8)Ministry of Health Bakirköy Sadi Konuk Teaching Hospital, Department
of Hematology, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is associated with
recurrent chromosomal aberrations andabnormal ectopic gene expression during
T-cell development. In order to gain insight into the pathogenesis of T-ALLthis
study aimed to measure the level of expression of 7 T-cell oncogenes (LMO2, LYL1,
TAL1, TLX1, TLX3, BMI1, andCALM-AF10) in pediatric T-ALL patients Material and
Methods: LMO2, LYL1, TLX1, TLX3, BMI1, TAL1, and CALM-AF10 expression was
measured usingquantitative real-time PCR in 43 pediatric T-ALL patients.
RESULTS: A high level of expression of LMO2, LYL1, TAL1, and BMI1 genes was
observed in a large group of T-ALL.Several gene expression signatures indicative 
of leukemic arrest at specific stages of normal thymocyte development(LYL1 and
LMO2) were highly expressed during the cortical and mature stages of T-cell
development. Furthermore,upregulated TAL1 and BMI1 expression was observed in all
phenotypic subgroups. In all, 6 of the patients had TLX1and TLX3 proto-oncogene
expression, which does not occur in normal cells, and none of the patients had
CALM-AF10fusion gene transcription. Expression of LYL1 alone and LMO2-LYL1
co-expression were associated with mediastinalinvolvement; however, high-level
oncogene expression was not predictive of outcome in the present pediatric
T-ALLpatient group, but there was a trend towards a poor prognostic impact of
TAL1 and/or LMO2 and/or LYL1 protooncogeneexpression.
CONCLUSION: Poor prognostic impact of TAL1 and/or LMO2 and/or LYL1 proto-oncogene
expression indicate the needfor extensive study on oncogenic rearrangement and
immunophenotypic markers in T-ALL, and their relationship totreatment outcome.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3781625
PMID: 24385720  [PubMed]


11. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003997. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Comprehensive analysis of transcriptome variation uncovers known and novel driver
events in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Atak ZK(1), Gianfelici V(2), Hulselmans G(1), De Keersmaecker K(3), Devasia
AG(4), Geerdens E(3), Mentens N(3), Chiaretti S(5), Durinck K(6), Uyttebroeck
A(7), Vandenberghe P(3), Wlodarska I(3), Cloos J(8), Foà R(5), Speleman F(6),
Cools J(3), Aerts S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium. (2)Laboratory for the Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for 
Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven,
Belgium ; Division of Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and
Hematology, 'Sapienza' University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (3)Laboratory for the
Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Center
for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Computational 
Biology, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium ; Laboratory for
the Molecular Biology of Leukemia, Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven and
Center for the Biology of Disease, VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Division of
Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, 'Sapienza'
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (6)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium. (7)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (8)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology and Hematology, VU
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

RNA-seq is a promising technology to re-sequence protein coding genes for the
identification of single nucleotide variants (SNV), while simultaneously
obtaining information on structural variations and gene expression perturbations.
We asked whether RNA-seq is suitable for the detection of driver mutations in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). These leukemias are caused by a
combination of gene fusions, over-expression of transcription factors and
cooperative point mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. We analyzed 
31 T-ALL patient samples and 18 T-ALL cell lines by high-coverage paired-end
RNA-seq. First, we optimized the detection of SNVs in RNA-seq data by comparing
the results with exome re-sequencing data. We identified known driver genes with 
recurrent protein altering variations, as well as several new candidates
including H3F3A, PTK2B, and STAT5B. Next, we determined accurate gene expression 
levels from the RNA-seq data through normalizations and batch effect removal, and
used these to classify patients into T-ALL subtypes. Finally, we detected gene
fusions, of which several can explain the over-expression of key driver genes
such as TLX1, PLAG1, LMO1, or NKX2-1; and others result in novel fusion
transcripts encoding activated kinases (SSBP2-FER and TPM3-JAK2) or involving
MLLT10. In conclusion, we present novel analysis pipelines for variant calling,
variant filtering, and expression normalization on RNA-seq data, and successfully
applied these for the detection of translocations, point mutations, INDELs,
exon-skipping events, and expression perturbations in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3868543
PMID: 24367274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Genes Immun. 2014 Mar;15(2):72-81. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.63. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

Genetic and epigenetic determinants mediate proneness of oncogene breakpoint
sites for involvement in TCR translocations.

Larmonie NS(1), van der Spek A(1), Bogers AJ(2), van Dongen JJ(1), Langerak
AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Cardio-thoracic Surgery, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

T-cell receptor (TCR) translocations are a genetic hallmark of T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and lead to juxtaposition of oncogene and TCR loci.
Oncogene loci become involved in translocations because they are accessible to
the V(D)J recombination machinery. Such accessibility is predicted at cryptic
recombination signal sequence (cRSS) sites ('Type 1') as well as other sites that
are subject to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) ('Type 2') during early stages of 
thymocyte development. As chromatin accessibility markers have not been analyzed 
in the context of TCR-associated translocations, various genetic and epigenetic
determinants of LMO2, TAL1 and TLX1 translocation breakpoint (BP) sites and BP
cluster regions (BCRs) were examined in human thymocytes to establish DSB
proneness and heterogeneity of BP site involvement in TCR translocations. Our
data show that DSBs in BCRs are primarily induced in the presence of a genetic
element of sequence vulnerability (cRSSs, transposable elements), whereas breaks 
at single BP sites lacking such elements are more likely induced by chance or
perhaps because of patient-specific genetic vulnerability. Vulnerability to
obtain DSBs is increased by features that determine chromatin organization, such 
as methylation status and nucleosome occupancy, although at different levels at
different BP sites.

PMID: 24304972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Development. 2013 Nov;140(22):4574-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.096693. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Hox11 genes are required for regional patterning and integration of muscle,
tendon and bone.

Swinehart IT(1), Schlientz AJ, Quintanilla CA, Mortlock DP, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2200, USA.

Development of the musculoskeletal system requires precise integration of
muscles, tendons and bones. The molecular mechanisms involved in the
differentiation of each of these tissues have been the focus of significant
research; however, much less is known about how these tissues are integrated into
a functional unit appropriate for each body position and role. Previous reports
have demonstrated crucial roles for Hox genes in patterning the axial and limb
skeleton. Loss of Hox11 paralogous gene function results in dramatic malformation
of limb zeugopod skeletal elements, the radius/ulna and tibia/fibula, as well as 
transformation of the sacral region to a lumbar phenotype. Utilizing a Hoxa11eGFP
knock-in allele, we show that Hox11 genes are expressed in the connective tissue 
fibroblasts of the outer perichondrium, tendons and muscle connective tissue of
the zeugopod region throughout all stages of development. Hox11 genes are not
expressed in differentiated cartilage or bone, or in vascular or muscle cells in 
these regions. Loss of Hox11 genes disrupts regional muscle and tendon patterning
of the limb in addition to affecting skeletal patterning. The tendon and muscle
defects in Hox11 mutants are independent of skeletal patterning events as
disruption of tendon and muscle patterning is observed in Hox11 compound mutants 
that do not have a skeletal phenotype. Thus, Hox genes are not simply regulators 
of skeletal morphology as previously thought, but are key factors that regulate
regional patterning and integration of the musculoskeletal system.

PMCID: PMC3817943
PMID: 24154528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(21):4266-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00540-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
3.

G-quadruplex structures formed at the HOX11 breakpoint region contribute to its
fragility during t(10;14) translocation in T-cell leukemia.

Nambiar M(1), Srivastava M, Gopalakrishnan V, Sankaran SK, Raghavan SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

The t(10;14) translocation involving the HOX11 gene is found in several T-cell
leukemia patients. Previous efforts to determine the causes of HOX11 fragility
were not successful. The role of non-B DNA structures is increasingly becoming an
important cause of genomic instability. In the present study, bioinformatics
analysis revealed two G-quadruplex-forming motifs at the HOX11 breakpoint
cluster. Gel shift assays showed formation of both intra- and intermolecular
G-quadruplexes, the latter being more predominant. The structure formation was
dependent on four stretches of guanines, as revealed by mutagenesis. Circular
dichroism analysis identified parallel conformations for both quadruplexes. The
non-B DNA structure could block polymerization during replication on a plasmid,
resulting in consistent K(+)-dependent pause sites, which were abolished upon
mutation of G-motifs, thereby demonstrating the role of the stretches of guanines
even on double-stranded DNA. Extrachromosomal assays showed that the G-quadruplex
motifs could block transcription, leading to reduced expression of green
fluorescent protein (GFP) within cells. More importantly, sodium bisulfite
modification assay showed the single-stranded character at regions I and II of
HOX11 in the genome. Thus, our findings suggest the occurrence of G-quadruplex
structures at the HOX11 breakpoint region, which could explain its fragility
during the t(10;14) translocation.

PMCID: PMC3811900
PMID: 24001773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Leuk Res. 2013 Aug;37(8):928-35. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.04.005. Epub 2013
Jun 2.

Linking genomic lesions with minimal residual disease improves prognostic
stratification in children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

La Starza R(1), Lettieri A, Pierini V, Nofrini V, Gorello P, Songia S, Crescenzi 
B, Te Kronnie G, Giordan M, Leszl A, Valsecchi MG, Aversa F, Basso G, Biondi A,
Conter V, Cazzaniga G, Mecucci C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Unit, University of Perugia, Polo Unico S.M. Misericordia, Perugia,
Italy.

Multiple lesions in genes that are involved in cell cycle control, proliferation,
survival and differentiation underlie T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(T-ALL). We translated these biological insights into clinical practice to
improve diagnostic work-ups and patient management. Combined interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization (CI-FISH), single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP), and gene expression profiles (GEP) were applied in 51 children with T-ALL 
who were stratified according to minimal residual disease (MRD) risk categories
(AIEOP-BFM ALL2000). CI-FISH identified type A abnormalities in 90% of patients. 
Distribution of each was in line with the estimated incidence in childhood T-ALL:
37.5% TAL/LMO, 22.5% HOXA, 20% TLX3, 7.5% TLX1, and 2.5% NKX2-1. GEP predictions 
concurred. SNP detected type B abnormalities in all cases, thus linking type A
and B lesions. This approach provided an accurate, comprehensive genomic
diagnosis and a complementary GEP-based classification of T-ALL in children.
Dissecting primary and secondary lesions within MRD categories could improve
prognostic criteria for the majority of patients and be a step towards
personalized diagnosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23735857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dev Cell. 2013 Apr 29;25(2):182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.02.015.

Prdm13 mediates the balance of inhibitory and excitatory neurons in somatosensory
circuits.

Chang JC(1), Meredith DM, Mayer PR, Borromeo MD, Lai HC, Ou YH, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Generating a balanced network of inhibitory and excitatory neurons during
development requires precise transcriptional control. In the dorsal spinal cord, 
Ptf1a, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription activator, maintains this
delicate balance by inducing homeodomain (HD) transcription factors such as Pax2 
to specify the inhibitory lineage while suppressing HD factors such as Tlx1/3
that specify the excitatory lineage. We uncover the mechanism by which Ptf1a
represses excitatory cell fate in the inhibitory lineage. We identify Prdm13 as a
direct target of Ptf1a and reveal that Prdm13 actively represses excitatory cell 
fate by binding to regulatory sequences near the Tlx1 and Tlx3 genes to silence
their expression. Prdm13 acts through multiple mechanisms, including interactions
with the bHLH factor Ascl1, to repress Ascl1 activation of Tlx3. Thus, Prdm13 is 
a key component of a highly coordinated transcriptional network that determines
the balance of inhibitory versus excitatory neurons in the dorsal spinal cord.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3644180
PMID: 23639443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 29;8(4):e61447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061447. Print 2013.

Ectopic expression of homeobox gene NKX2-1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is
mediated by aberrant chromatin modifications.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Tomasch J, Quentmeier H, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler
HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(6). doi:10.1371/annotation/3989404d-132f-4f07-a39e-c060d9094611.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors ubiquitously involved in basic
developmental processes, deregulation of which promotes cell transformation in
multiple cancers including hematopoietic malignancies. In particular, NKL-family 
homeobox genes TLX1, TLX3 and NKX2-5 are ectopically activated by chromosomal
rearrangements in T-cell neoplasias. Here, using transcriptional microarray
profiling and RQ-PCR we identified ectopic expression of NKL-family member
NKX2-1, in a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell line SU-DHL-5. Moreover, 
in silico analysis demonstrated NKX2-1 overexpression in 5% of examined DLBCL
patient samples. NKX2-1 is physiologically expressed in lung and thyroid tissues 
where it regulates differentiation. Chromosomal and genomic analyses excluded
rearrangements at the NKX2-1 locus in SU-DHL-5, implying alternative activation. 
Comparative expression profiling implicated several candidate genes in NKX2-1
regulation, variously encoding transcription factors, chromatin modifiers and
signaling components. Accordingly, siRNA-mediated knockdown and overexpression
studies confirmed involvement of transcription factor HEY1, histone
methyltransferase MLL and ubiquitinated histone H2B in NKX2-1 deregulation.
Chromosomal aberrations targeting MLL at 11q23 and the histone gene cluster HIST1
at 6p22 which we observed in SU-DHL-5 may, therefore, represent fundamental
mutations mediating an aberrant chromatin structure at NKX2-1. Taken together, we
identified ectopic expression of NKX2-1 in DLBCL cells, representing the central 
player in an oncogenic regulative network compromising B-cell differentiation.
Thus, our data extend the paradigm of NKL homeobox gene deregulation in lymphoid 
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3639244
PMID: 23637834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;21(2):273-8. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.02.003.

[Methylation of CpG island in promoter region of RUNX2 gene and its expression in
HOX11(+) acute T lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia JS(1), Salvatore S.

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Institute of Hematology, Beijing, China.
jiajinsong@medmail.com.cn

This study was purposed to detect the methylation status in promoter region of
RUNX2 gene and its expression in cell lines and patients with HOX11(+) T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and to explore the relationship between the 
expression level of RUNX2 gene and methylation of CpG island in its promoter
region. The methylation pattem in promoter region of RUNX2 gene was detected with
bisulfite sequencing PCR, DNA methylation immunoprecipitation technique and
promoter oligonucleotide microarray analysis and the expression levels of RUNX2
mRNA was detected with RT-PCR in 3 T-ALL cell lines (sil-ALL, DND41 and RPMI), as
well as in 75 clinic bone marrow samples including 38 de novo T-ALL patients, 29 
complete remission T-ALL patients and 8 normal samples. The results showed that
there were hypermethylation of CpG island in promoter region of RUNX2 gene in
patients with highly expressing HOX11(+) T-ALL. The methylation rate of the
promoter CpG islands of RUNX2 gene in HOX11(+) T-ALL (78.9%) was significantly
higher than that in HOX11(-) T-ALL (36.8%) (P < 0.01). The expression of RUNX2 in
HOX11(+) cell lines was significantly lower than that in HOX11(-) cell lines, and
the expression level of RUNX2 in the HOX11(+) T-ALL patients (0.581 ± 0.257) was 
significantly lower than that in HOX11(-) T-ALL patients (0.835 ± 0.317). The
relationship between RUNX2 and HOX11 mRNA expression level showed a negative
correlation (rs = -0.378, P < 0.01). The expression levels of RUNX2 gene
negatively correlated with the methylation of CpG island in its promoter region
(rs = -0.419, P < 0.01). It is concluded that HOX11 is a negative regulator of
RUNX2 gene and the expression of RUNX2 is down regulated or even lost by promoter
methylation in T-ALL, which demonstrate a better event-free survival and a marked
trend for longer overall survival for HOX11-high T-ALLs. The expression and
methylation level of RUNX2 gene may have some significance in evaluating the
curative effect of T-ALL. The abnormal expression of RUNX2 may be a prognostic
marker in T-ALL patients.

PMID: 23628015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Bone Marrow Res. 2013 Feb 20;1. pii: 105.

The DN2 Myeloid-T (DN2mt) Progenitor is a Target Cell for Leukemic Transformation
by the TLX1 Oncogene.

Zweier-Renn LA(1), Riz I(2), Hawley TS(3), Hawley RG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, USA. (2)Graduate Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, 
George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (3)Flow Cytometry Core
Facility, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (4)Sino-US Joint
Laboratory of Translational Medicine, Jining Medical University Affiliated
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, China.

INTRODUCTION: Inappropriate activation of the TLX1 (T-cell leukemia homeobox 1)
gene by chromosomal translocation is a recurrent event in human T-cell Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia (T-ALL). Ectopic expression of TLX1 in murine bone marrow 
progenitor cells using a conventional retroviral vector efficiently yields
immortalized cell lines and induces T-ALL-like tumors in mice after long latency.
METHODS: To eliminate a potential contribution of retroviral insertional
mutagenesis to TLX1 immortalizing and transforming function, we incorporated the 
TLX1 gene into an insulated self-inactivating retroviral vector.
RESULTS: Retrovirally transduced TLX1-expressing murine bone marrow progenitor
cells had a growth/survival advantage and readily gave rise to immortalized cell 
lines. Extensive characterization of 15 newly established cell lines failed to
reveal a common retroviral integration site. This comprehensive analysis greatly 
extends our previous study involving a limited number of cell lines, providing
additional support for the view that constitutive TLX1 expression is sufficient
to initiate the series of events culminating in hematopoietic progenitor cell
immortalization. When TLX1-immortalized cells were co-cultured on OP9-DL1
monolayers under conditions permissive for T-cell differentiation, a latent
T-lineage potential was revealed. However, the cells were unable to transit the
DN2 myeloid-T (DN2mt)-DN2 T-lineage determined (DN2t) commitment step. The
differentiation block coincided with failure to upregulate the zinc finger
transcription factor gene Bcl11b, the human ortholog of which was shown to be a
direct transcriptional target of TLX1 downregulated in the TLX1(+) T-ALL cell
line ALL-SIL. Other studies have described the ability of TLX1 to promote bypass 
of mitotic checkpoint arrest, leading to aneuploidy. We likewise found that
diploid TLX1-expressing DN2mt cells treated with the mitotic inhibitor paclitaxel
bypassed the mitotic checkpoint and displayed chromosomal instability. This was
associated with elevated expression of TLX1 transcriptional targets involved in
DNA replication and mitosis, including Ccna2 (cyclin A2), Ccnb1 (cyclin B1),
Ccnb2 (cyclin B2) and Top2a (topoisomerase IIa). Notably, enforced expression of 
BCL11B in ALL-SIL T-ALL cells conferred resistance to the topoisomerase IIa
poison etoposide.
CONCLUSION: Taken together with previous findings, the data reinforce a mechanism
of TLX1 oncogenic activity linked to chromosomal instability resulting from
dysregulated expression of target genes involved in mitotic processes. We
speculate that repression of BCL11B expression may provide part of the
explanation for the observation that aneuploid DNA content in TLX1(+) leukemic T 
cells does not necessarily portend an unfavorable prognosis. This TLX1
hematopoietic progenitor cell immortalization/T-cell differentiation assay should
help further our understanding of the mechanisms of TLX1-mediated evolution to
malignancy and has the potential to be a useful predictor of disease response to 
novel therapeutic agents in TLX1(+) T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC4191823
PMID: 25309961  [PubMed]


20. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Aug-Sep;28(8-9):708-10. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012288012.
Epub 2012 Aug 22.

[Deciphering functional activity of TLX homeodomain oncogenes in T-ALL: a clue
for a differentiating therapy?].

[Article in French]

Asnafi V, Ferrier P.

PMID: 22920872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 20;32(25):8509-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6301-11.2012.

Tlx1/3 and Ptf1a control the expression of distinct sets of transmitter and
peptide receptor genes in the developing dorsal spinal cord.

Guo Z(1), Zhao C, Huang M, Huang T, Fan M, Xie Z, Chen Y, Zhao X, Xia G, Geng J, 
Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Establishing the pattern of expression of transmitters and peptides as well as
their receptors in different neuronal types is crucial for understanding the
circuitry in various regions of the brain. Previous studies have demonstrated
that the transmitter and peptide phenotypes in mouse dorsal spinal cord neurons
are determined by the transcription factors Tlx1/3 and Ptf1a. Here we show that
these transcription factors also determine the expression of two distinct sets of
transmitter and peptide receptor genes in this region. We have screened the
expression of 78 receptor genes in the spinal dorsal horn by in situ
hybridization. We found that receptor genes Gabra1, Gabra5, Gabrb2, Gria3,
Grin3a, Grin3b, Galr1, and Npy1r were preferentially expressed in Tlx3-expressing
glutamatergic neurons and their derivatives, and deletion of Tlx1 and Tlx3
resulted in the loss of expression of these receptor genes. Furthermore, we
obtained genetic evidence that Tlx3 uses distinct pathways to control the
expression of receptor genes. We also found that receptor genes Grm3, Grm4, Grm5,
Grik1, Grik2, Grik3, and Sstr2 were mainly expressed in Pax2-expressing GABAergic
neurons in the spinal dorsal horn, and their expression in this region was
abolished or markedly reduced in Ptf1a and Pax2 deletion mutant mice. Together,
our studies indicate that Tlx1/3 and Ptf1a, the key transcription factors for
fate determination of glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in the dorsal spinal
cord, are also responsible for controlling the expression of two distinct sets of
transmitter and peptide receptor genes.

PMID: 22723691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Haematologica. 2012 Jun;97(6):795. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.070227.

Novel insights on TLX1 function in T-ALL pave the way towards differentiation
therapy.

De Keersmaecker K.

PMCID: PMC3366640
PMID: 22665526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):563-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.02.013.

TLX homeodomain oncogenes mediate T cell maturation arrest in T-ALL via
interaction with ETS1 and suppression of TCRa gene expression.

Dadi S(1), Le Noir S, Payet-Bornet D, Lhermitte L, Zacarias-Cabeza J, Bergeron J,
Villarèse P, Vachez E, Dik WA, Millien C, Radford I, Verhoeyen E, Cosset FL,
Petit A, Ifrah N, Dombret H, Hermine O, Spicuglia S, Langerak AW, Macintyre EA,
Nadel B, Ferrier P, Asnafi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematologye, Université de Médecine Paris Descartes Sorbonne
Cité, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), France.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):453-5.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) are characterized by multistep oncogenic
processes leading to cell-differentiation arrest and proliferation. Specific
abrogation of maturation blockage constitutes a promising therapeutic option in
cancer, which requires precise understanding of the underlying molecular
mechanisms. We show that the cortical thymic maturation arrest in T-lineage ALLs 
that overexpress TLX1 or TLX3 is due to binding of TLX1/TLX3 to ETS1, leading to 
repression of T cell receptor (TCR) a enhanceosome activity and blocked TCR-Ja
rearrangement. TLX1/TLX3 abrogation or enforced TCRaß expression leads to TCRa
rearrangement and apoptosis. Importantly, the autoextinction of clones carrying
TCRa-driven TLX1 expression supports TLX "addiction" in TLX-positive leukemias
and provides further rationale for targeted therapy based on disruption of
TLX1/TLX3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22516263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):453-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.026.

Hijacking T cell differentiation: new insights in TLX function in T-ALL.

King B(1), Ntziachristos P, Aifantis I.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, NYU School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Apr 17;21(4):563-76.

TLX1 and TLX3 are two closely-related homeobox transcriptional repressors
frequently misexpressed and translocated in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). In this issue of Cancer Cell, Dadi et al. provide new insights into how 
these factors are recruited by ETS-1 to the TCRa enhancer and actively repress
differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3902167
PMID: 22516255  [PubMed]


26. J Neurosci. 2012 Apr 18;32(16):5362-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6239-11.2012.

c-Maf is required for the development of dorsal horn laminae III/IV neurons and
mechanoreceptive DRG axon projections.

Hu J(1), Huang T, Li T, Guo Z, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China.

Establishment of proper connectivity between peripheral sensory neurons and their
central targets is required for an animal to sense and respond to various
external stimuli. Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons convey sensory signals of
different modalities via their axon projections to distinct laminae in the dorsal
horn of the spinal cord. In this study, we found that c-Maf was expressed
predominantly in the interneurons of laminae III/IV, which primarily receive
inputs from mechanoreceptive DRG neurons. In the DRG, c-Maf<U+207A> neurons also
coexpressed neurofilament-200, a marker for the medium- and large-diameter
myelinated afferents that transmit non-noxious information. Furthermore, mouse
embryos deficient in c-Maf displayed abnormal development of dorsal horn laminae 
III/IV neurons, as revealed by the marked reduction in the expression of several 
marker genes for these neurons, including those for transcription factors MafA
and Rora, GABA(A) receptor subunit a5, and neuropeptide cholecystokinin. In
addition, among the four major subpopulations of DRG neurons marked by expression
of TrkA, TrkB, TrkC, and MafA/GFRa2/Ret, c-Maf was required selectively for the
proper differentiation of MafA<U+207A>/Ret<U+207A>/GFRa2<U+207A> low-threshold mechanoreceptors
(LTMs). Last, we found that the central and peripheral projections of
mechanoreceptive DRG neurons were compromised in c-Maf deletion mice. Together,
our results indicate that c-Maf is required for the proper development of
MafA<U+207A>/Ret<U+207A>/GFRa2<U+207A> LTMs in the DRG, their afferent projections in the dorsal horn 
and Pacinian corpuscles, as well as neurons in laminae III/IV of the spinal cord.

PMID: 22514301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nat Med. 2012 Feb 26;18(3):436-40. doi: 10.1038/nm.2610.

Reverse engineering of TLX oncogenic transcriptional networks identifies RUNX1 as
tumor suppressor in T-ALL.

Della Gatta G(1), Palomero T, Perez-Garcia A, Ambesi-Impiombato A, Bansal M,
Carpenter ZW, De Keersmaecker K, Sole X, Xu L, Paietta E, Racevskis J, Wiernik
PH, Rowe JM, Meijerink JP, Califano A, Ferrando AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

The TLX1 and TLX3 transcription factor oncogenes have a key role in the
pathogenesis of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here we used reverse
engineering of global transcriptional networks to decipher the oncogenic
regulatory circuit controlled by TLX1 and TLX3. This systems biology analysis
defined T cell leukemia homeobox 1 (TLX1) and TLX3 as master regulators of an
oncogenic transcriptional circuit governing T-ALL. Notably, a network structure
analysis of this hierarchical network identified RUNX1 as a key mediator of the
T-ALL induced by TLX1 and TLX3 and predicted a tumor-suppressor role for RUNX1 in
T cell transformation. Consistent with these results, we identified recurrent
somatic loss-of-function mutations in RUNX1 in human T-ALL. Overall, these
results place TLX1 and TLX3 at the top of an oncogenic transcriptional network
controlling leukemia development, show the power of network analyses to identify 
key elements in the regulatory circuits governing human cancer and identify RUNX1
as a tumor-suppressor gene in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3298036
PMID: 22366949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):814-28. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0551. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Positional identity of murine mesenchymal stem cells resident in different organs
is determined in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

Sági B(1), Maraghechi P, Urbán VS, Hegyi B, Szigeti A, Fajka-Boja R, Kudlik G,
Német K, Monostori E, Gócza E, Uher F.

Author information: 
(1)National Blood Service, Stem Cell Biology Unit, Budapest, Hungary.

Although mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of distinct tissue origin have a large
number of similarities and differences, it has not been determined so far whether
tissue-resident MSCs are the progenies of one ancestor cell lineage or the
results of parallel cell developmental events. Here we compared the expression
levels of 177 genes in murine MSCs derived from adult and juvenile bone marrow
and adult adipose tissue, as well as juvenile spleen, thymus, and aorta wall by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and the results were partially
validated at protein level. All MSC lines uniformly expressed a large set of
genes including well-known mesenchymal markers, such as a-smooth muscle actin,
collagen type I a-chain, GATA6, Mohawk, and vimentin. In contrast, pluripotency
genes and the early mesodermal marker T-gene were not expressed. On the other
hand, different MSC lines consistently expressed distinct patterns of Hox genes
determining the positional identity of a given cell population. Moreover, MSCs of
different origin expressed a few other transcription factors also reflecting
their topological identity and so the body segment or organ to which they
normally contributed in vivo: (1) thymus-derived cells specifically expressed
Tbx5 and Pitx2; (2) spleen-derived MSCs were characterized with Tlx1 and Nkx2.5; 
(3) Pitx1 designated femoral bone marrow cells and (4) En2 appeared in aorta
wall-derived MSCs. Thus, MSCs exhibited topographic identity and memory even
after long-term cultivation in vitro. On the basis of these results, we suggest
that postnatal MSCs isolated from different anatomical sites descend from
precursor cells developing in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

PMID: 22149974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Leukemia. 2012 Apr;26(4):572-81. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.330. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

NKL homeobox genes in leukemia.

Homminga I(1), Pieters R, Meijerink JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

NK-like (NKL) homeobox genes code for transcription factors, which can act as key
regulators in fundamental cellular processes. NKL genes have been implicated in
divergent types of cancer. In this review, we summarize the involvement of NKL
genes in cancer and leukemia in particular. NKL genes can act as tumor-suppressor
genes and as oncogenes, depending on tissue type. Aberrant expression of NKL
genes is especially common in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). In
T-ALL, 8 NKL genes have been reported to be highly expressed in specific T-ALL
subgroups, and in ~30% of cases, high expression is caused by chromosomal
rearrangement of 1 of 5 NKL genes. Most of these NKL genes are normally not
expressed in T-cell development. We hypothesize that the NKL genes might share a 
similar downstream effect that promotes leukemogenesis, possibly due to mimicking
a NKL gene that has a physiological role in early hematopoietic development, such
as HHEX. All eight NKL genes posses a conserved Eh1 repressor motif, which has an
important role in regulating downstream targets in hematopoiesis and possibly in 
leukemogenesis as well. Identification of a potential common leukemogenic NKL
downstream pathway will provide a promising subject for future studies.

PMID: 22094586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;17(20):6381-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-3037.
Epub 2011 Jun 24.

TLX1-induced T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

De Keersmaecker K(1), Ferrando AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Center for Human
Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The TLX1 transcription factor oncogene is frequently activated by chromosomal
translocations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and defines a
distinct molecular group of tumors characterized by differentiation arrest at the
early cortical stage of thymocyte differentiation and excellent response to
therapy. Recent developments from the analysis of genomic data on TLX1-specific
transcriptional targets and analysis of the molecular mechanisms of TLX1
transformation in human- and mouse-induced leukemias have shown novel insight
into the activity of this transcription factor oncogene. Aberrant expression of
TLX1 in T-cell progenitors disrupts normal T-cell development and triggers the
development of aneuploidy during T-cell transformation. Importantly, the
disruption of the mitotic checkpoint in TLX1-induced tumors may be linked not
only to the acquisition of secondary genetic alterations in T-ALL but also to
increased sensitivity of these tumors to chemotherapy with drugs targeting the
formation of the mitotic spindle.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21705452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7090-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-314286. Epub 2011
May 6.

PTPN2 negatively regulates oncogenic JAK1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kleppe M(1), Soulier J, Asnafi V, Mentens N, Hornakova T, Knoops L,
Constantinescu S, Sigaux F, Meijerink JP, Vandenberghe P, Tartaglia M, Foa R,
Macintyre E, Haferlach T, Cools J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

We have recently reported inactivation of the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN2 (also
known as TC-PTP) through deletion of the entire gene locus in ~ 6% of T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cases. T-ALL is an aggressive disease of the
thymocytes characterized by the stepwise accumulation of chromosomal
abnormalities and gene mutations. In the present study, we confirmed the strong
association of the PTPN2 deletion with TLX1 and NUP214-ABL1 expression. In
addition, we found cooperation between PTPN2 deletion and activating JAK1 gene
mutations. Activating mutations in JAK1 kinase occur in ~ 10% of human T-ALL
cases, and aberrant kinase activity has been shown to confer proliferation and
survival advantages. Our results reveal that some JAK1 mutation-positive T-ALLs
harbor deletions of the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN2, a known negative regulator of
the JAK/STAT pathway. We provide evidence that down-regulation of Ptpn2
sensitizes lymphoid cells to JAK1-mediated transformation and reduces their
sensitivity to JAK inhibition.

PMID: 21551237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Hematol. 2011 Apr;93(4):465-73. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0796-9. Epub 2011
Mar 9.

Identification of copy number alterations by array comparative genomic
hybridization in patients with late chronic or accelerated phase chronic myeloid 
leukemia treated with imatinib mesylate.

Nadarajan VS(1), Phan CL, Ang CH, Liang KL, Gan GG, Bee PC, Zakaria Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, Lembah
Pantai, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. veera@um.edu.my

The outcome of treating chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) with imatinib mesylate
(IM) is inferior when therapy is commenced in late chronic or accelerated phase
as compared to early chronic phase. This may be attributed to additional genomic 
alterations that accumulate during disease progression. We sought to identify
such lesions in patients showing suboptimal response to IM by performing
array-CGH analysis on 39 sequential samples from 15 CML patients. Seventy-four
cumulative copy number alterations (CNAs) consisting of 35 losses and 39 gains
were identified. Alterations flanking the ABL1 and BCR genes on chromosomes 9 and
22, respectively, were the most common identified lesions with 5 patients losing 
variable portions of 9q34.11 proximal to ABL1. Losses involving 1p36, 5q31,
17q25, Y and gains of 3q21, 8q24, 22q11, Xp11 were among other recurrent lesions 
identified. Aberrations were also observed in individual patients, involving
regions containing known leukemia-associated genes; CDKN2A/2B, IKZF1, RB1, TLX1, 
AFF4. CML patients in late stages of their disease, harbor pre-existing and
evolving sub-microscopic CNAs that may influence disease progression and IM
response.

PMID: 21387093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 4;6(2):e16761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016761.

Transient responses to NOTCH and TLX1/HOX11 inhibition in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Rakowski LA(1), Lehotzky EA, Chiang MY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

To improve the treatment strategies of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL), further efforts are needed to identify therapeutic
targets. Dysregulated expression of HOX-type transcription factors occurs in
30-40% of cases of T-ALL. TLX1/HOX11 is the prototypical HOX-type transcription
factor. TLX1 may be an attractive therapeutic target because mice that are
deficient in TLX1 are healthy. To test this possibility, we developed a
conditional doxycycline-regulated mouse model of TLX1-initiated T-ALL. TLX1
induced T-ALL after ~5-7 months with penetrance of 15-60%. Similar to human
TLX1-type T-ALLs, the TLX1-induced tumors were arrested at the cortical stage of 
T-cell development and acquired activating NOTCH1 mutations. Inhibition of NOTCH 
signaling abrogated growth of cell lines derived from the TLX1-induced tumors.
NOTCH inhibition also transiently delayed leukemia progression in vivo.
Suppression of TLX1 expression slowed the growth of TLX1 tumor cell lines.
Suppression of TLX1 in vivo also transiently delayed leukemia progression. We
have shown that TLX1 functions as a T-cell oncogene that is active during both
the induction and the maintenance phases of leukemia. However, the effect of
suppressing NOTCH or TLX1 was transient. The tumors eventually "escaped" from
inhibition. These data imply that the biological pathways and gene sets impacted 
by TLX1 and NOTCH have largely lost their importance in the fully established
tumor. They have been supplanted by stronger oncogenic pathways. Although TLX1 or
NOTCH inhibitors may not be effective as single agents, they may still contribute
to combination therapy for TLX1-driven acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3033898
PMID: 21326611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Autoimmun. 2011 Mar;36(2):125-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.12.002. Epub 2011
Jan 7.

Development of autoimmune nephritis in genetically asplenic and splenectomized
BAFF transgenic mice.

Fletcher CA(1), Groom JR, Woehl B, Leung H, Mackay C, Mackay F.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmunity Research Unit, Immunology and Inflammation Research Program, The 
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

B cell activating factor belonging to the TNF family (BAFF or BLyS) is a critical
B cell survival factor essential for B cell maturation. BAFF transgenic (Tg) mice
develop autoimmunity resembling Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) in a T
cell-independent but toll-like receptor (TLR) signalling-dependent manner,
requiring TLR-induced innate B cell-derived pro-inflammatory autoantibody
deposition in the kidneys. Importantly, neutralizing BAFF in the clinic shows
efficacy in patients with SLE, confirming its critical role in the progression of
this disease in both humans and mouse models. The specific B cell types that
produce autoantibodies in BAFF Tg mice are TLR-activated innate marginal zone
(MZ) B cells and B1 cells, but not follicular B cells. Interestingly, in BAFF Tg 
mice MZ-like B cells infiltrate salivary glands whereas B1 B cells infiltrate the
kidneys. To ascertain the relevance of B1 and MZ-like B cells in the development 
of nephritis in BAFF Tg mice, we generated genetically asplenic as well as
splenectomized BAFF Tg animals. BAFF Tg mice born without a spleen lack MZ B
cells, have very reduced B1a B cell numbers but a normal B1b B cell compartment. 
Loss of these B cell subsets failed to protect BAFF Tg mice against nephritis
indicating that B1b B cells are an important subset for the development of
autoimmune nephritis in BAFF Tg mice. Thus the spleen is dispensable for the
development of autoimmune nephritis in BAFF Tg mice and points toward a
pathogenic role for innate B1 B cells. Identifying similar innate B cells in
humans may offer the possibility of more targeted B cell therapies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;699:431-47. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61737-950-5_21.

Lentiviral fluorescent protein expression vectors for biotinylation proteomics.

Riz I(1), Hawley TS, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

In vivo biotinylation tagging, based on a method in which a protein of interest
is tagged with a peptide that is biotinylated in vivo by coexpression of
Escherichia coli BirA biotin ligase, has been successfully used for the isolation
of protein-protein and protein-DNA complexes in mammalian cells. We describe a
modification of this methodology in which cells stably expressing the tagged gene
of interest and the BirA gene can be selected by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS). We recently implemented this approach to isolate and characterize
proteins associated with TLX1, a homeodomain transcription factor with
leukemogenic function. The modified technique utilizes two components: a
lentiviral vector coexpressing the gene of interest containing a biotinylation
tag on a bicistronic transcript together with a downstream yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP) gene; and a second lentiviral vector encoding a fusion protein
composed of bacterial BirA linked to the green fluorescent protein (GFP). This
FACS-based binary in vivo biotinylation tagging system allows precise control
over the levels of BirA-mediated biotinylation as well as the expression of the
gene of interest, which is especially important if high-level expression
negatively impacts cell growth or viability.

PMCID: PMC3279158
PMID: 21116996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2010 Sep;23(3):307-18. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2010.08.002. Epub 2010 Oct 30.

Genetic rearrangements in relation to immunophenotype and outcome in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Meijerink JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus MC Rotterdam-Sophia Children's Hospital, Dr. Molewaterplein 60, 3015
GJ, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. meijerink@erasmusmc.nl

Mutually exclusive oncogenic rearrangements may delineate specific T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) subgroups, and so far at least 4
molecular-cytogenetic subgroups have been identified, i.e. the TAL/LMO, the
TLX1/HOX11, the TLX3/HOX11L2 and the HOXA subgroups. A fifth group with an
immature immunophenotype that can be predicted by an early T-cell precursor
signature has also been identified, and has been associated with poor outcome.
The association of these subgroups with the expression of specific
immunophenotypic markers reflecting arrest at specific T-cell developmental
stages will be reviewed. These strong associations urge the need to extensively
study oncogenic rearrangements and immunophenotypic markers in relation to
outcome for future treatment protocols, both for paediatric as well as adult
T-ALL patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21112032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Med. 2010 Nov;16(11):1185-6. doi: 10.1038/nm1110-1185.

The T-ALL paradox in cancer.

Hoang T, Hoang T.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2010 Nov;16(11):1321-7.

PMID: 21052064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Med. 2010 Nov;16(11):1321-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.2246. Epub 2010 Oct 24.

The TLX1 oncogene drives aneuploidy in T cell transformation.

De Keersmaecker K(1), Real PJ, Gatta GD, Palomero T, Sulis ML, Tosello V, Van
Vlierberghe P, Barnes K, Castillo M, Sole X, Hadler M, Lenz J, Aplan PD, Kelliher
M, Kee BL, Pandolfi PP, Kappes D, Gounari F, Petrie H, Van der Meulen J, Speleman
F, Paietta E, Racevskis J, Wiernik PH, Rowe JM, Soulier J, Avran D, Cavé H,
Dastugue N, Raimondi S, Meijerink JP, Cordon-Cardo C, Califano A, Ferrando AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 Nov;16(11):1185-6.

The TLX1 oncogene (encoding the transcription factor T cell leukemia homeobox
protein-1) has a major role in the pathogenesis of T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). However, the specific mechanisms of T cell transformation
downstream of TLX1 remain to be elucidated. Here we show that transgenic
expression of human TLX1 in mice induces T-ALL with frequent deletions and
mutations in Bcl11b (encoding B cell leukemia/lymphoma-11B) and identify the
presence of recurrent mutations and deletions in BCL11B in 16% of human T-ALLs.
Most notably, mouse TLX1 tumors were typically aneuploid and showed a marked
defect in the activation of the mitotic checkpoint. Mechanistically, TLX1
directly downregulates the expression of CHEK1 (encoding CHK1 checkpoint homolog)
and additional mitotic control genes and induces loss of the mitotic checkpoint
in nontransformed preleukemic thymocytes. These results identify a previously
unrecognized mechanism contributing to chromosomal missegregation and aneuploidy 
active at the earliest stages of tumor development in the pathogenesis of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2974790
PMID: 20972433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cancer. 2010 Sep 16;9:246. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-246.

Phosphorylation of HOX11/TLX1 on Threonine-247 during mitosis modulates
expression of cyclin B1.

Chen E(1), Huang X, Zheng Y, Li YJ, Chesney A, Ben-David Y, Yang E, Hough MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S1A8, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The HOX11/TLX1 (hereafter referred to as HOX11) homeobox gene was
originally identified at a t(10;14)(q24;q11) translocation breakpoint, a
chromosomal abnormality observed in 5-7% of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias 
(T-ALLs). We previously reported a predisposition to aberrant spindle assembly
checkpoint arrest and heightened incidences of chromosome missegregation in
HOX11-overexpressing B lymphocytes following exposure to spindle poisons. The
purpose of the current study was to evaluate cell cycle specific expression of
HOX11.
RESULTS: Cell cycle specific expression studies revealed a phosphorylated form of
HOX11 detectable only in the mitotic fraction of cells after treatment with
inhibitors to arrest cells at different stages of the cell cycle. Mutational
analyses revealed phosphorylation on threonine-247 (Thr247), a conserved amino
acid that defines the HOX11 gene family and is integral for the association with 
DNA binding elements. The effect of HOX11 phosphorylation on its ability to
modulate expression of the downstream target, cyclin B1, was tested. A HOX11
mutant in which Thr247 was substituted with glutamic acid (HOX11 T247E), thereby 
mimicking a constitutively phosphorylated HOX11 isoform, was unable to bind the
cyclin B1 promoter or enhance levels of the cyclin B1 protein. Expression of the 
wildtype HOX11 was associated with accelerated progression through the G2/M phase
of the cell cycle, impaired synchronization in prometaphase and reduced apoptosis
whereas expression of the HOX11 T247E mutant restored cell cycle kinetics, the
spindle checkpoint and apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the transcriptional activity of HOX11
is regulated by phosphorylation of Thr247 in a cell cycle-specific manner and
that this phosphorylation modulates the expression of the target gene, cyclin B1.
Since it is likely that Thr247 phosphorylation regulates DNA binding activity to 
multiple HOX11 target sequences, it is conceivable that phosphorylation functions
to regulate the expression of HOX11 target genes involved in the control of the
mitotic spindle checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC2949800
PMID: 20846384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec 15;111(6):1437-44. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22871.

Expression of homeobox genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma cell lines treated
with all-trans retinoic acid.

Acquafreda T(1), Nunes FD, Soprano DR, Soprano KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) may arise from potentially malignant oral
lesions. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA), which plays a role in cell growth and
differentiation, has been studied as a possible chemotherapeutic agent in the
prevention of this progression. While the mechanism by which atRA suppresses cell
growth has not been completely elucidated, it is known that homeobox genes are
atRA targets. To determine if these genes are involved in the atRA-mediated OSCC 
growth inhibition, PCR array was performed to evaluate the expression of 84
homeobox genes in atRA-sensitive SCC-25 cells compared to atRA-resistant SCC-9
cells following 7 days with atRA treatment. Results showed that the expression of
8 homeobox genes was downregulated and expression of 4 was upregulated in SCC-25 
cells but not in SCC-9 cells. Gene expression levels were confirmed for seven of 
these genes by RT-qPCR. Expression of three genes that showed threefold
downregulation was evaluated in SCC-25 cells treated with atRA for 3, 5, and 7
days. Three different patterns of atRA-dependent gene expression were observed.
ALX1 showed downregulation only on day 7. DLX3 showed reduced expression on day 3
and further reduced on day 7. TLX1 showed downregulation only on days 5 and 7.
Clearly the expression of homeobox genes is modulated by atRA in OSCC cell lines.
However, the time course of this modulation suggests that these genes are not
direct targets of atRA mediating OSCC growth suppression. Instead they appear to 
act as downstream effectors of atRA signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20830740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jul 9;9:181. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-181.

TLX1 and NOTCH coregulate transcription in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
cells.

Riz I(1), Hawley TS, Luu TV, Lee NH, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The homeobox gene TLX1 (for T-cell leukemia homeobox 1, previously
known as HOX11) is inappropriately expressed in a major subgroup of T cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) where it is strongly associated with activating
NOTCH1 mutations. Despite the recognition that these genetic lesions cooperate in
leukemogenesis, there have been no mechanistic studies addressing how TLX1 and
NOTCH1 functionally interact to promote the leukemic phenotype.
RESULTS: Global gene expression profiling after downregulation of TLX1 and
inhibition of the NOTCH pathway in ALL-SIL cells revealed that TLX1
synergistically regulated more than 60% of the NOTCH-responsive genes.
Structure-function analysis demonstrated that TLX1 binding to Groucho-related TLE
corepressors was necessary for maximal transcriptional regulation of the
NOTCH-responsive genes tested, implicating TLX1 modulation of the NOTCH-TLE
regulatory network. Comparison of the dataset to publicly available biological
databases indicated that the TLX1/NOTCH-coregulated genes are frequently targeted
by MYC. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments confirmed that MYC was an
essential mediator of TLX1/NOTCH transcriptional output and growth promotion in
ALL-SIL cells, with TLX1 contributing to the NOTCH-MYC regulatory axis by
posttranscriptional enhancement of MYC protein levels. Functional classification 
of the TLX1/NOTCH-coregulated targets also showed enrichment for genes associated
with other human cancers as well as those involved in developmental processes. In
particular, we found that TLX1, NOTCH and MYC coregulate CD1B and RAG1,
characteristic markers of early cortical thymocytes, and that concerted
downregulation of the TLX1 and NOTCH pathways resulted in their irreversible
repression.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that TLX1 and NOTCH synergistically regulate transcription 
in T-ALL, at least in part via the sharing of a TLE corepressor and by augmenting
expression of MYC. We conclude that the TLX1/NOTCH/MYC network is a central
determinant promoting the growth and survival of TLX1+ T-ALL cells. In addition, 
the TLX1/NOTCH/MYC transcriptional network coregulates genes involved in T cell
development, such as CD1 and RAG family members, and therefore may prescribe the 
early cortical stage of differentiation arrest characteristic of the TLX1
subgroup of T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC2913983
PMID: 20618946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Neuro Oncol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1126-34. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq074. Epub 2010 Jul
8.

Neuronal differentiation distinguishes supratentorial and infratentorial
childhood ependymomas.

Andreiuolo F(1), Puget S, Peyre M, Dantas-Barbosa C, Boddaert N, Philippe C,
Mauguen A, Grill J, Varlet P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 8203 "Vectorology and Anticancer Therapies," Institut Gustave
Roussy, 39 Rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif 94805, France.
felipe.andreiuolo@igr.fr

Ependymomas are glial neoplasms occurring in any location throughout the central 
nervous system and supposedly are derived from radial glia cells. Recent data
suggest that these tumors may have different biological and clinical behaviors
according to their location. Pediatric supratentorial and infratentorial
ependymoma (SE and IE) were compared with respect to clinical and radiological
parameters and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Neuronal markers were specifically
assessed by IHC and quantitative PCR (qPCR). No single morphological or
radiological characteristic was associated with location or any neuronal marker. 
However, there was a significant overexpression of neuronal markers in SE
compared with IE: neurofilament light polypeptide 70 (NEFL)-positive tumor cells 
were found in 23 of 34 SE and in only 4 of 32 IE (P < .001). Among SE, 10 of 34
exhibited high expression of NEFL, defined as more than 5% positive cells. qPCR
confirmed the upregulation of neuronal markers (NEFL, LHX2, FOXG1, TLX1, and
NPTXR) in SE compared with IE. In addition, strong NEFL expression in SE was
correlated with better progression-free survival (P = .007). Our results support 
the distinction of SE and IE. SEs are characterized by neuronal differentiation, 
which seems to be associated with better prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3098029
PMID: 20615923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;42(10):1576-9. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.06.012. Epub 2010 Jun 18.

Stem cells in the spleen: therapeutic potential for Sjogren's syndrome, type I
diabetes, and other disorders.

Faustman DL(1), Davis M.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. faustman@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The view of the spleen as an unnecessary organ has been shattered. The evidence
shows the spleen to be a source of naturally-occurring multipotent stem cells
with possibly pluripotent potential. The stem cells are sequestered in the spleen
of not only of animals but also of normal human adults. The reservoir of cells is
set for differentiation and they need not be manipulated in vitro or ex vivo
before autologous or heterologous use. Splenic stem cells, of Hox11 lineage, have
been found in disease or injury to differentiate into pancreatic islets, salivary
epithelial cells and osteoblast-like cells, cranial neurons, cochlea,
lymphocytes, and more differentiated immune cells that repair injured heart
cells. Injury or disease in target tissues induces these stem cells, still in the
spleen, to upregulate the same embryonic transcription factors artificially
introduced into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS). Splenic stem cells may have
broad pluripotent potential, but unlike iPS cells, possess low oncogenic risk.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4104595
PMID: 20601088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nat Genet. 2010 Jun;42(6):530-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.587. Epub 2010 May 16.

Deletion of the protein tyrosine phosphatase gene PTPN2 in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kleppe M(1), Lahortiga I, El Chaar T, De Keersmaecker K, Mentens N, Graux C, Van 
Roosbroeck K, Ferrando AA, Langerak AW, Meijerink JP, Sigaux F, Haferlach T,
Wlodarska I, Vandenberghe P, Soulier J, Cools J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.

PTPN2 (protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 2, also known as TC-PTP) is
a cytosolic tyrosine phosphatase that functions as a negative regulator of a
variety of tyrosine kinases and other signaling proteins. In agreement with its
role in the regulation of the immune system, PTPN2 was identified as a
susceptibility locus for autoimmune diseases. In this work, we describe the
identification of focal deletions of PTPN2 in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). Deletion of PTPN2 was specifically found in T-ALLs with
aberrant expression of the TLX1 transcription factor oncogene, including four
cases also expressing the NUP214-ABL1 tyrosine kinase. Knockdown of PTPN2
increased the proliferation and cytokine sensitivity of T-ALL cells. In addition,
PTPN2 was identified as a negative regulator of NUP214-ABL1 kinase activity. Our 
study provides genetic and functional evidence for a tumor suppressor role of
PTPN2 and suggests that expression of PTPN2 may modulate response to treatment.

PMCID: PMC2957655
PMID: 20473312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Mar;1192:307-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05234.x.

Hox11 paralogous genes are required for formation of wrist and ankle joints and
articular surface organization.

Koyama E(1), Yasuda T, Wellik DM, Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
USA.

Limb skeletal elements are connected by distinct synovial joints, but the
mechanisms regulating joint formation, diversity, and organization remain
unclear. Previous studies showed that Hox11 mouse mutants have severe
developmental defects in radius and ulna and tibia and fibula, but wrist and
ankle joint formation and characteristics were not examined in detail. We now
find that E11.5 and E12.5 triple Hox11aaccdd mutants exhibit a significant
reduction in prospective carpal and tarsal mesenchyme. Although the mesenchyme
became segmented into individual carpal and tarsal skeletal elements with further
development, the elements were ill defined and the more proximal elements
(radiale, ulnare, talus, and calcaneous) actually underwent involution and/or
fusion. Wild-type carpal and tarsal elements displayed a thick articulating
superficial zone at their outer perimeter that expressed genes typical of
developing joint interzones and articulating cells, including Gdf5, Erg, Gli3,
collagen IIA, and lubricin, and defined each element anatomically. In mutant
wrists and ankles, the superficial zone around each element was thin and ill
defined, and expression of several of those genes was low and often interrupted. 
These and other data provide novel and clear evidence that Hox11 paralogous genes
regulate wrist and ankle joint organization and are essential for establishing
carpal and tarsal element boundary and maintaining their articulating surface
tissue.

PMID: 20392252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):338-42. doi: 10.1038/ng.542. Epub 2010 Mar 14.

PHF6 mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Van Vlierberghe P(1), Palomero T, Khiabanian H, Van der Meulen J, Castillo M, Van
Roy N, De Moerloose B, Philippé J, González-García S, Toribio ML, Taghon T,
Zuurbier L, Cauwelier B, Harrison CJ, Schwab C, Pisecker M, Strehl S, Langerak
AW, Gecz J, Sonneveld E, Pieters R, Paietta E, Rowe JM, Wiernik PH, Benoit Y,
Soulier J, Poppe B, Yao X, Cordon-Cardo C, Meijerink J, Rabadan R, Speleman F,
Ferrando A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
New York, USA.

Tumor suppressor genes on the X chromosome may skew the gender distribution of
specific types of cancer. T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an
aggressive hematological malignancy with an increased incidence in males. In this
study, we report the identification of inactivating mutations and deletions in
the X-linked plant homeodomain finger 6 (PHF6) gene in 16% of pediatric and 38%
of adult primary T-ALL samples. Notably, PHF6 mutations are almost exclusively
found in T-ALL samples from male subjects. Mutational loss of PHF6 is importantly
associated with leukemias driven by aberrant expression of the homeobox
transcription factor oncogenes TLX1 and TLX3. Overall, these results identify
PHF6 as a new X-linked tumor suppressor in T-ALL and point to a strong genetic
interaction between PHF6 loss and aberrant expression of TLX transcription
factors in the pathogenesis of this disease.

PMCID: PMC2847364
PMID: 20228800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Genes Evol. 2009 Oct;219(9-10):481-96.

Conservation of gene linkage in dispersed vertebrate NK homeobox clusters.

Wotton KR(1), Weierud FK, Juárez-Morales JL, Alvares LE, Dietrich S, Lewis KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Floor 27 Guy's 
Tower, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Nk homeobox genes are important regulators of many different developmental
processes including muscle, heart, central nervous system and sensory organ
development. They are thought to have arisen as part of the ANTP megacluster,
which also gave rise to Hox and ParaHox genes, and at least some NK genes remain 
tightly linked in all animals examined so far. The protostome-deuterostome
ancestor probably contained a cluster of nine Nk genes:
(Msx)-(Nk4/tinman)-(Nk3/bagpipe)-(Lbx/ladybird)-(Tlx/c15)-(Nk7)-(Nk6/hgtx)-(Nk1/s
louch)-(Nk5/Hmx). Of these genes, only NKX2.6-NKX3.1, LBX1-TLX1 and LBX2-TLX2
remain tightly linked in humans. However, it is currently unclear whether this is
unique to the human genome as we do not know which of these Nk genes are
clustered in other vertebrates. This makes it difficult to assess whether the
remaining linkages are due to selective pressures or because chance
rearrangements have "missed" certain genes. In this paper, we identify all of the
paralogs of these ancestrally clustered NK genes in several distinct vertebrates.
We demonstrate that tight linkages of Lbx1-Tlx1, Lbx2-Tlx2 and Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6 have
been widely maintained in both the ray-finned and lobe-finned fish lineages.
Moreover, the recently duplicated Hmx2-Hmx3 genes are also tightly linked.
Finally, we show that Lbx1-Tlx1 and Hmx2-Hmx3 are flanked by highly conserved
noncoding elements, suggesting that shared regulatory regions may have resulted
in evolutionary pressure to maintain these linkages. Consistent with this, these 
pairs of genes have overlapping expression domains. In contrast, Lbx2-Tlx2 and
Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6, which do not seem to be coexpressed, are also not associated with 
conserved noncoding sequences, suggesting that an alternative mechanism may be
responsible for the continued clustering of these genes.

PMID: 20112453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Apr;49(4):299-308. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20743.

ABL1 rearrangements in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Hagemeijer A(1), Graux C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Anne.Hagemeijer@med.kuleuven.be

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is the result of multiple oncogenic
insults of thymocytes. Recently, new ABL1 fusion genes have been identified that 
provide proliferation and survival advantage to lymphoblasts. These are the
NUP214-ABL1 fusion gene, on amplified episomes, the unique case of EML1-ABL1
fusion due to a cryptic t(9;14)(q34;q32) and the seldom reported BCR-ABL1 and
ETV6-ABL1 chimeric genes. The most frequent and strictly associated with T-ALL is
the NUP214-ABL1 fusion identified in 6% of cases, in both children and adults.
Patients present with classical T-ALL features. Cytogenetically, the fusion is
cryptic but seen by FISH on amplified episomes or more rarely as a small hsr. The
ABL1 fusion is a late event associated with other genetic alterations like NOTCH1
activating mutation, deletion of CDKN2A locus, and ectopic expression of TLX1 or 
TLX3. The mechanism of activation of the NUP214-ABL1 protein is unique and
requires localization at the nucleopore complex and interaction with other
nuclear pore proteins for crossphosphorylation and constitutive kinase activity. 
The ABL1 fusion proteins are sensitive to tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which can
be included in future treatment strategy.

PMID: 20073070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;42(10):1651-60. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.12.001. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

Proteomics identifies multipotent and low oncogenic risk stem cells of the
spleen.

Dieguez-Acuña F(1), Kodama S, Okubo Y, Paz AC, Gygi SP, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The adult spleen harbors a population of naturally occurring multipotent stem
cells of non-lymphoid lineage (CD45-). In animal models, these splenic stem cells
can directly or indirectly contribute to regeneration of bone, inner ear, cranial
nerves, islets, hearts and salivary glands. Here we characterize the CD45- stem
cell proteome to determine its potential broader multipotency versus its
protection from malignant transformation. Using state-of-the-art proteomics and
in vivo testing, we performed functional analyses of unique proteins of CD45-
(non-lymphoid) splenic stem cells, as compared with CD45+ (lymphoid) cells. CD45-
stem cell-specific proteins were identical to those in iPS, including OCT3/4,
SOX2, KLF4, c-MYC and NANOG. They also expressed Hox11, Gli3, Wnt2, and Adam12,
the benchmark transcription factors of embryonic stem cells. These transcription 
factors were functional because their mRNA was upregulated in the spleen in
association with ongoing damage to the pancreas and salivary glands, organs to
which they normally contribute stem cells. We also show low likelihood of
malignant transformation. Our proteomic and functional analyses reveals that
naturally occurring CD45- stem cells of the spleen are the first-ever candidates 
for naturally occurring population of embryonic and iPS cells with low oncogenic 
risk. Given their presence in normal humans and mice, splenic stem cells are
poised for translational research.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2891339
PMID: 20005973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Feb;49(2):119-31. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20725.

Hematopoietic immortalizing function of the NKL-subclass homeobox gene TLX1.

Zweier-Renn LA(1), Hawley TS, Burkett S, Ramezani A, Riz I, Adler RL, Hickstein
DD, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Translocations resulting in ectopic expression of the TLX1 homeobox gene
(previously known as HOX11) are recurrent events in human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Transduction of primary murine hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells with retroviral vectors expressing TLX1 readily yields
immortalized hematopoietic progenitor cell lines. Understanding the processes
involved in TLX1-mediated cellular immortalization should yield insights into the
growth and differentiation pathways altered by TLX1 during the development of
T-ALL. In recent clinical gene therapy trials, hematopoietic clonal dominance or 
T-ALL-like diseases have occurred as a direct consequence of insertional
activation of the EVI1, PRDM16 or LMO2 proto-oncogenes by the retroviral vectors 
used to deliver the therapeutic genes. Additionally, the generation of murine
hematopoietic progenitor cell lines due to retroviral integrations into Evi1 or
Prdm16 has also been recently reported. Here, we determined by linker-mediated
nested polymerase chain reaction the integration sites in eight TLX1-immortalized
hematopoietic cell lines. Notably, no common integration site was observed among 
the cell lines. Moreover, no insertions into the Evi1 or Prdm16 genes were
identified although insertion near Lmo2 was observed in one instance. However,
neither Lmo2 nor any of the other genes examined surrounding the integration
sites showed differential vector-influenced expression compared to the cell lines
lacking such insertions. While we cannot exclude the possibility that insertional
side effects transiently provided a selective growth/survival advantage to the
hematopoietic progenitor populations, our results unequivocally rule out
insertions into Evi1 and Prdm16 as being integral to the TLX1-initiated
immortalization process.

PMCID: PMC2795049
PMID: 19862821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2009 Nov;64(11):760-8. doi: 10.1097/OGX.0b013e3181bea203.

The role of genes in the development of Mullerian anomalies: where are we today?

Christopoulos P(1), Gazouli M, Fotopoulou G, Creatsas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, Aretaieion
Hospital, Athens, Greece. dr_christopoulos@yahoo.gr

Recent studies claim that researchers are challenged to find out the pathogenesis
of the congenital anomalies of the female reproductive tract. Their frequency is 
estimated to be between 0.1% and 3% of live births in humans. During the
experiments a number of genes were detected to contribute to the formation and
development of the female reproductive tract. This review article aims to report 
these genes, as they probably play a significant role in the pathology of the
reproductive tract in females.TARGET AUDIENCE: Obstetricians & Gynecologists,
Family Physicians.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: After completion of this educational activity, the
participant should be better able to explain the genetic basis of Mullerian
abnormalities, give examples of the complexity of the genetic basis behind a
variety of mechanisms of disease, and recall the embryology of the female
reproductive tract.

PMID: 19849868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 19;9:371. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-371.

NK-like homeodomain proteins activate NOTCH3-signaling in leukemic T-cells.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Przybylski GK, Grabarczyk P, Meyer C, Kaufmann M,
Battmer K, Schmidt CA, Drexler HG, Scherr M, Macleod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr, 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

BACKGROUND: Homeodomain proteins control fundamental cellular processes in
development and in cancer if deregulated. Three members of the NK-like subfamily 
of homeobox genes (NKLs), TLX1, TLX3 and NKX2-5, are implicated in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). They are activated by particular chromosomal
aberrations. However, their precise function in leukemogenesis is still unclear. 
Here we screened further NKLs in 24 T-ALL cell lines and identified the common
expression of MSX2. The subsequent aim of this study was to analyze the role of
MSX2 in T-cell differentiation which may be disturbed by oncogenic NKLs.
METHODS: Specific gene activity was examined by quantitative real-time PCR, and
globally by expression profiling. Proteins were analyzed by western blot,
immuno-cytology and immuno-precipitation. For overexpression studies cell lines
were transduced by lentiviruses.
RESULTS: Quantification of MSX2 mRNA in primary hematopoietic cells demonstrated 
higher levels in CD34+ stem cells as compared to peripheral blood cells and
mature CD3+ T-cells. Furthermore, analysis of MSX2 expression levels in T-cell
lines after treatment with core thymic factors confirmed their involvement in
regulation. These results indicated that MSX2 represents an hematopoietic NKL
family member which is downregulated during T-cell development and may
functionally substituted by oncogenic NKLs. For functional analysis JURKAT cells 
were lentivirally transduced, overexpressing either MSX2 or oncogenic TLX1 and
NKX2-5, respectively. These cells displayed transcriptional activation of
NOTCH3-signaling, including NOTCH3 and HEY1 as analyzed by gene expression
profiling and quantitative RT-PCR, and consistently attenuated sensitivity to
gamma-secretase inhibitor as analyzed by MTT-assays. Furthermore, in addition to 
MSX2, both TLX1 and NKX2-5 proteins interacted with NOTCH-pathway repressors,
SPEN/MINT/SHARP and TLE1/GRG1, representing a potential mechanism for
(de)regulation. Finally, elevated expression of NOTCH3 and HEY1 was detected in
primary TLX1/3 positive T-ALL cells corresponding to the cell line data.
CONCLUSION: Identification and analysis of MSX2 in hematopoietic cells implicates
a modulatory role via NOTCH3-signaling in early T-cell differentiation. Our data 
suggest that reduction of NOTCH3-signaling by physiological downregulation of
MSX2 expression during T-cell development is abrogated by ectopic expression of
oncogenic NKLs, substituting MSX2 function.

PMCID: PMC2770077
PMID: 19835636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Leuk Res. 2010 Mar;34(3):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.003. Epub 2009
Jun 25.

MEIS proteins as partners of the TLX1/HOX11 oncoprotein.

Milech N(1), Gottardo NG, Ford J, D'Souza D, Greene WK, Kees UR, Watt PM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, University of Western
Australia, Perth, WA 6008, Australia.

Aberrant expression of the TLX1/HOX11 proto-oncogene is associated with a
significant subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). Yet the
manner in which TLX1 contributes to oncogenesis is not fully understood. Since,
typically, interactions of HOX and TALE homeodomain proteins are determinant of
HOX function, and HOX/MEIS co-expression has been shown to accelerate some
leukemias, we systematically examined whether TLX1 interacts with MEIS and PBX
proteins. Here, we report that TLX1 and MEIS proteins both interact and are
co-expressed in T-ALL, and suggest that co-operation between TLX1 and MEIS
proteins may have a significant role in T-cell leukemogenesis.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19559479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 2009 Jul 30;114(5):1038-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-192039. Epub 2009
Jun 3.

WT1 mutations in T-ALL.

Tosello V(1), Mansour MR, Barnes K, Paganin M, Sulis ML, Jenkinson S, Allen CG,
Gale RE, Linch DC, Palomero T, Real P, Murty V, Yao X, Richards SM, Goldstone A, 
Rowe J, Basso G, Wiernik PH, Paietta E, Pieters R, Horstmann M, Meijerink JP,
Ferrando AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in disease progression and relapse in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) are poorly understood. We used single
nucleotide polymorphism array analysis to analyze paired diagnostic and relapsed 
T-ALL samples to identify recurrent genetic alterations in T-ALL. This analysis
showed that diagnosis and relapsed cases have common genetic alterations, but
also that relapsed samples frequently lose chromosomal markers present at
diagnosis, suggesting that relapsed T-ALL emerges from an ancestral clone
different from the major leukemic population at diagnosis. In addition, we
identified deletions and associated mutations in the WT1 tumor suppressor gene in
2 of 9 samples. Subsequent analysis showed WT1 mutations in 28 of 211 (13.2%) of 
pediatric and 10 of 85 (11.7%) of adult T-ALL cases. WT1 mutations present in
T-ALL are predominantly heterozygous frameshift mutations resulting in truncation
of the C-terminal zinc finger domains of this transcription factor. WT1 mutations
are most prominently found in T-ALL cases with aberrant rearrangements of the
oncogenic TLX1, TLX3, and HOXA transcription factor oncogenes. Survival analysis 
demonstrated that WT1 mutations do not confer adverse prognosis in pediatric and 
adult T-ALL. Overall, these results identify the presence of WT1 mutations as a
recurrent genetic alteration in T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC2721784
PMID: 19494353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Aug;48(8):725-36. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20677.

V(D)J targeting mistakes occur at low frequency in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Vanura K(1), Vrsalovic MM, Le T, Marculescu R, Kusec R, Jäger U, Nadel B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, Department of Medicine I, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. katrina.vanura@meduniwien.ac.at

Translocations of proto-oncogenes to the B-cell or T-cell antigen receptor loci
in acute T- or B-cell leukemia and lymphoma have been, in most cases, accredited 
to V(D)J or switch recombination depending on the location of the breakpoint at
the receptor locus. Only in rare instances, the reports take into account
mechanistic characteristics of the translocation mechanism. To assess the
functional ability of several sites implicated in supposedly V(D)J-mediated
translocations, we tested five sites at four proto-oncogene loci in an ex vivo
recombination substrate assay for their potential to act as direct target for
V(D)J recombination. Our results show that the LMO2/RBTN2/TTG2 site and one
LCK/P56 site readily engage in recombination with a genuine TCR element with the 
majority of breakpoint junctions showing the characteristics of V(D)J
recombination, which strongly supports the involvement of this mechanism in the
pathogenesis of the corresponding translocations in vivo. The site at the
TLX1/HOX11 locus yielded 0.8% V(D)J-specific junctions. Sites at the LCK/P56 and 
TCF3/E2A proto-oncogenes resulted in exclusively unspecific breakpoints scattered
over part of or the entire proto-oncogene region tested, marking them as unlikely
V(D)J recombination targets. Our data suggest that, while being a potentially
dangerous mechanism due to the introduction of DNA breaks, V(D)J recombination is
a tightly controlled mechanism allowing for only few direct mistakes.

PMID: 19455608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Mar 6;380(2):361-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.099. Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Transcriptional activation by TLX1/HOX11 involves Gro/TLE corepressors.

Riz I(1), Lee HJ, Baxter KK, Behnam R, Hawley TS, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 I Street NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The role of Groucho/transducin-like Enhancer of split (Gro/TLE) family members as
corepressors of transcription is well documented. TLX1 is a homeodomain
transcription factor involved in splenogenesis and neuron formation, and its
aberrant expression gives rise to T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. We
demonstrate by glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays, in vivo biotinylation 
tagging and confocal laser microscopy that TLX1 interacts with TLE1 via an
Eh1-like motif. Paradoxically, we found that this motif is essential for optimal 
transcriptional activation of two TLX1 target genes, Aldh1a1 and Fhl1. Using a
well characterized target of the Hairy/Enhancer of split 1 (HES1).TLE1 repressor 
complex, the ASCL1 gene, we show that TLX1 counteraction of ASCL1 repression by
HES1 in SK-N-BE(2) neuroblastoma cells is associated with dismissal of TLE1 from 
the ASCL1 promoter and requires the Eh1-like motif for maximal effect.
Collectively, these results indicate that TLX1-mediated target gene activation
can occur in part via derepression strategies involving Gro/TLE corepressors.

PMCID: PMC2654413
PMID: 19250647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(1):R14. doi: 10.1186/bcr2233. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Methylation of homeobox genes is a frequent and early epigenetic event in breast 
cancer.

Tommasi S(1), Karm DL, Wu X, Yen Y, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. stommasi@coh.org

INTRODUCTION: Aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and
occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. However, its impact on tumor
development is not fully determined, and its potential as a diagnostic biomarker 
remains to be validated. Methylation profiling of invasive breast carcinoma has
been largely explored. Conversely, very little and sparse information is
available on early-stage breast cancer. To gain insight into the epigenetic
switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events
during breast carcinogenesis, we have analyzed the DNA methylation profile of
ductal carcinoma in situ, a premalignant breast lesion with a great potential to 
progress toward invasive carcinoma.
METHODS: We have utilized a comprehensive and sensitive array-based DNA mapping
technique, the methylated-CpG island recovery assay, to profile the DNA
methylation pattern in ductal carcinoma in situ. Differential methylation of CpG 
islands was compared genome-wide in tumor DNA versus normal DNA utilizing a
statistical linear model in the LIMMA software package.
RESULTS: Using this approach, we have identified 108 significant CpG islands that
undergo aberrant DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and stage I breast
tumors, with methylation frequencies greater than or comparable with those of
more advanced invasive carcinoma (50% to 93%). A substantial fraction of these
hypermethylated CpG islands (32% of the annotated CpG islands) is associated with
several homeobox genes, such as the TLX1, HOXB13, and HNF1B genes. Fifty-three
percent of the genes hypermethylated in early-stage breast cancer overlap with
known Polycomb targets and include homeobox genes and other developmental
transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a series of new potential methylation biomarkers 
that may help elucidate the underlying mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. More
specifically, our results are suggestive of a critical role of homeobox gene
methylation in the insurgence and/or progression of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2687719
PMID: 19250546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Jan;50(1):101-8. doi: 10.1080/10428190802626632.

Activation of miR-17-92 by NK-like homeodomain proteins suppresses apoptosis via 
reduction of E2F1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Przybylski GK, Grabarczyk P, Schmidt CA, Meyer C,
Drexler HG, Macleod RA, Scherr M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Cultures, DSMZ, German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

The NK-like family of homeobox genes includes TLX1, TLX3 and NKX2-5, which are
ectopically activated in distinct subsets of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(T-ALL) cells. Here we analysed their effect on the miR-17-92 cluster
overexpressed in several types of cancer, including T-ALL. The pri-miR-17-92
polycistron encodes micro-RNAs (miRNAs), which decrease E2F1 protein expression, 
regulating proliferation and/or apoptosis. Quantification of pri-miR-17-92 in
T-ALL cell lines suggested an implication of the NK-like homeodomain proteins in 
transcriptional regulation. Lentiviral-mediated overexpression of NKX2-5 in the
T-ALL cell line MOLT-4 consistently resulted in increased miR-17-92 pri-miRNA
levels and decreased amounts of E2F1 protein. Induction of apoptosis by treating 
miR17-92 or E2F1 transduced T-ALL cells with etoposide led to reduced or enhanced
cell viability, respectively. Furthermore, analysis of pri-miR-17-92 in T-ALL
patients indicated elevated expression in those bearing TLX1/3 positive cells.
These data support an activatory effect of NK-like homeodomain proteins on
pri-miR-17-92 expression and concomitantly reduced E2F1 protein levels, thereby
enhancing survival of leukemic T-cells.

PMID: 19148830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Br J Haematol. 2009 Apr;145(1):140-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07556.x. Epub
2009 Jan 3.

Role of TLX1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia pathogenesis.

Riz I, Hawley TS, Johnston H, Hawley RG.

PMCID: PMC2657812
PMID: 19133982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;Chapter 1:Unit 1F.7. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc01f07s7.

TLX1 (HOX11) immortalization of embryonic stem cell-derived and primary murine
hematopoietic progenitors.

Hawley RG(1), Hawley TS, Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)The George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

The ability to generate genetically engineered cell lines is of great
experimental value. They provide a renewable source of material that may be
suitable for biochemical analyses, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
structure-function studies, gene function assignment, and transcription factor
target gene identification. This unit describes protocols for TLX1
(HOX11)-mediated immortalization of murine hematopoietic progenitors derived from
in vitro differentiated murine embryonic stem cells, or from primary mouse fetal 
liver or bone marrow. A wide variety of hematopoietic cell types have been
immortalized using these procedures including erythroid, megakaryocytic,
monocytic, myelocytic, and multipotential cell types. These lines are typically
cytokine dependent for their survival and growth.

Copyright 2008 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2633409
PMID: 19085976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2008:366-73. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2008.1.366.

Molecular determinants of treatment response in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Campana D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, and Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38105, 
USA. dario.campana@stjude.org

Treatment response in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is best
assessed using assays for minimal residual disease (MRD). The degree of leukemia 
cytoreduction and MRD clearance is determined by the collective influence of
multiple factors. Some of these variables are features of the leukemic cells,
such as expression of genes that regulate their susceptibility to cytotoxic drugs
and their propensity to undergo apoptosis. Gene profiles depend, in turn, on the 
cell of origin for leukemic transformation, the type of underlying genetic
abnormalities and/or epigenetic regulatory mechanisms. Another set of variables
is related to the host, such as age and polymorphisms in genes that metabolize
drugs, which together with pharmacologic variables, such as drug pharmacodynamics
and drug interactions, influence treatment response. Finally, the bone marrow
microenvironment where leukemic cells reside can participate in the generation of
drug resistance. Altogether, these variables determine treatment outcome in each 
patient. Full knowledge of the molecular features associated with treatment
response is required for precise leukemia prognostication and monitoring, and can
provide clues to useful targets for novel therapies.

PMID: 19074112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Leukemia. 2009 Jan;23(1):125-33. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.278. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Heterogeneous patterns of amplification of the NUP214-ABL1 fusion gene in T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Graux C(1), Stevens-Kroef M, Lafage M, Dastugue N, Harrison CJ, Mugneret F,
Bahloula K, Struski S, Grégoire MJ, Nadal N, Lippert E, Taviaux S, Simons A,
Kuiper RP, Moorman AV, Barber K, Bosly A, Michaux L, Vandenberghe P, Lahortiga I,
De Keersmaecker K, Wlodarska I, Cools J, Hagemeijer A, Poirel HA; Groupe
Francophone de Cytogénétique Hématologique; Belgian Cytogenetic Group for
Hematology and Oncology.

Collaborators: Barin C, Berger R, Bilhou-Nabera C, Cabrol C, Callet-Bauchu E,
Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Laï JL, Lefebvre C, Luquet I, Perot C, Radford-Weiss I,
Speleman F, Cauwelier B, Talmant P, Terré C, Tigaud I, Van DenAkker J, Viguié F.

Author information: 
(1)Hematologic Section of the Human Genetics Centre, Cliniques universitaires UCL
Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. carlos.graux@uclouvain.be

Episomes with the NUP214-ABL1 fusion gene have been observed in 6% of T-ALL. In
this multicentric study we collected 27 cases of NUP214-ABL1-positive T-ALL.
Median age was 15 years with male predominance. Outcome was poor in 12 patients. 
An associated abnormality involving TLX1 or TLX3 was found in all investigated
cases. Fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed a heterogeneous pattern of
NUP214-ABL1 amplification. Multiple episomes carrying the fusion were detected in
24 patients. Episomes were observed in a significant number of nuclei in 18
cases, but in only 1-5% of nuclei in 6. In addition, intrachromosomal
amplification (small hsr) was identified either as the only change or in
association with episomes in four cases and two T-ALL cell lines (PEER and
ALL-SIL). One case showed insertion of apparently non-amplified NUP214-ABL1
sequences at 14q12. The amplified sequences were analyzed using array-based
CGH.These findings confirm that the NUP214-ABL1 gene requires amplification for
oncogenicity; it is part of a multistep process of leukemogenesis; and it can be 
a late event present only in subpopulations. Data also provide in vivo evidence
for a model of episome formation, amplification and optional reintegration into
the genome. Implications for the use of kinase inhibitors are discussed.

PMID: 18923437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Blood. 2009 Jan 1;113(1):100-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-166801. Epub 2008 Oct 
6.

A comprehensive analysis of the CDKN2A gene in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia reveals genomic deletion, copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity,
and association with specific cytogenetic subgroups.

Sulong S(1), Moorman AV, Irving JA, Strefford JC, Konn ZJ, Case MC, Minto L,
Barber KE, Parker H, Wright SL, Stewart AR, Bailey S, Bown NP, Hall AG, Harrison 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Queen Victoria
Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene, CDKN2A, can occur by deletion,
methylation, or mutation. We assessed the principal mode of inactivation in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and frequency in biologically
relevant subgroups. Mutation or methylation was rare, whereas genomic deletion
occurred in 21% of B-cell precursor ALL and 50% of T-ALL patients. Single
nucleotide polymorphism arrays revealed copy number neutral (CNN) loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) in 8% of patients. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization demonstrated that the mean size of deletions was 14.8 Mb and
biallelic deletions composed a large and small deletion (mean sizes, 23.3 Mb and 
1.4 Mb). Among 86 patients, only 2 small deletions were below the resolution of
detection by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Patients with high
hyperdiploidy, ETV6-RUNX1, or 11q23/MLL rearrangements had low rates of deletion 
(11%, 15%, 13%), whereas patients with t(9;22), t(1;19), TLX3, or TLX1
rearrangements had higher frequencies (61%, 42%, 78%, and 89%). In conclusion,
CDKN2A deletion is a significant secondary abnormality in childhood ALL strongly 
correlated with phenotype and genotype. The variation in the incidence of CDKN2A 
deletions by cytogenetic subgroup may explain its inconsistent association with
outcome. CNN LOH without apparent CDKN2A inactivation suggests the presence of
other relevant genes in this region.

PMID: 18838613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Haematologica. 2008 Nov;93(11):1658-65. doi: 10.3324/haematol.13291. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

Impact of genotype on survival of children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia treated according to the French protocol FRALLE-93: the effect of
TLX3/HOX11L2 gene expression on outcome.

Ballerini P(1), Landman-Parker J, Cayuela JM, Asnafi V, Labopin M, Gandemer V,
Perel Y, Michel G, Leblanc T, Schmitt C, Fasola S, Hagemejier A, Sigaux F,
Auclerc MF, Douay L, Leverger G, Baruchel A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, Hôpital A. Trousseau, INSERM E0210.
paola.ballerini@trs.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: The prognostic value of the ectopic activation of TLX3 gene
expression, a major oncogenetic event associated with pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, is controversial. Likewise, the frequency and the
prognostic significance in pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia of the
newly characterized NUP214-ABL1 fusion transcript is not yet clear.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Two hundred children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
were treated in the French FRALLE-93 study from 1993 to 1999. The expression of
TLX3, TLX1 and SILTAL1 genes was analyzed in samples from 92 patients by
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Most of
these samples were further studied for NUP214-ABL1 and CALM-AF10 fusion
transcripts.
RESULTS: The median follow-up was 7.9 years. At 5 years the overall survival (+/-
standard deviation, %) was 62 (+/-3%) and leukemia-free survival was 58 (+/-3%). 
Patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia positive for TLX3 had a poorer 
survival compared to those with T-ALL negative for TLX3 (overall survival:
45+/-11% vs. 57+/-5%, p=0.049). In multivariate analysis, TLX3 expression was an 
independent adverse risk factor predicting relapse with a hazard ratio of 2.44
(p=0.017) and an overall survival with a hazard ratio of 3.7 (p=0.001).
NUP214-ABL1 was expressed in 16.6% of patients with TLX3-positive T-ALL (3 of
18); all of the patients with this association died before completion of the
treatment. SILTAL expression did not significantly affect the prognosis of
patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Only three of 92 patients
expressed the TLX1 gene and all three are alive.
CONCLUSIONS: TLX3 gene expression is an independent risk factor predicting poor
survival in childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. When co-expressed with
TLX3, NUP214-ABL1 transcripts may increase the risk of poor survival.

PMID: 18835836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Placenta. 2008 Jul;29(7):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Novel homeobox genes are differentially expressed in placental microvascular
endothelial cells compared with macrovascular cells.

Murthi P(1), Hiden U, Rajaraman G, Liu H, Borg AJ, Coombes F, Desoye G, Brennecke
SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development and aberrant
angiogenesis contributes substantially to placental pathologies. The complex
process of angiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors leading to the
formation of endothelial cells that line the microvasculature. Homeobox genes are
important transcription factors that regulate vascular development in embryonic
and adult tissues. We have recently shown that placental homeobox genes HLX,
DLX3, DLX4, MSX2 and GAX are expressed in placental endothelial cells. Hence, the
novel homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2, TGIF, HEX, PHOX1, MEIS2, HOXB7, and LIM6 were
detected that have not been reported in endothelial cells previously.
Importantly, these homeobox genes have not been previously reported in placental 
endothelial cells and, with the exception of HEX, PHOX1 and HOXB7, have not been 
described in any other endothelial cell type. Reverse transcriptase PCR was
performed on cDNA from freshly isolated placental microvascular endothelial cells
(PLEC), and the human placental microvascular endothelial cell line HPEC. cDNAs
prepared from control term placentae, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMVEC) and human umbilical vein macrovascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
used as controls. PCR analyses showed that all novel homeobox genes tested were
expressed by all endothelial cells types. Furthermore, real-time PCR analyses
revealed that homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2 and PHOX1 relative mRNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in HUVEC compared with microvascular endothelial
cells, while the relative mRNA expression levels of MEIS2 and TGIF were
significantly increased in macrovascular cells compared with microvascular
endothelial cells. Thus we have identified novel homeobox genes in microvascular 
endothelial cells and have shown that homeobox genes are differentially expressed
between micro- and macrovascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 18514308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Haematologica. 2008 Jul;93(7):1081-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12595. Epub 2008 May 
19.

Transcriptional activation of the cardiac homeobox gene CSX1/NKX2-5 in a B-cell
chronic lymphoproliferative disorder.

Su X(1), Della-Valle V, Delabesse E, Azgui Z, Berger R, Merle-Béral H, Bernard
OA, Nguyen-Khac F.

Author information: 
(1)1INSERM, E0210, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

Homeobox containing transcription factors are frequently deregulated in human
hematologic malignant diseases either indirectly through an abnormality of an
upstream factor, or directly through rearrangement of the gene itself. Study of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia identified the related non-clustered homeobox
transcription factors, TLX1 and TLX3, as frequently ectopically expressed as a
result of chromosomal translocations. We report the deregulation of a
non-clustered homeobox gene in a new type of t(5;14)(q35;q11) translocation in a 
mature peripheral B-cell leukemia. This translocation results in the ectopic
expression of the CSX1/NKX2-5 gene on chromosome 5q35 due to its juxtaposition to
the TCR delta gene on chromosome 14q11. Expression of the CSX1/NKX2-5 protein
conferred enhanced replating potential to transduced murine bone marrow cells.
Our study establishes that deregulation of homeobox encoding genes is not
restricted to acute leukemic proliferations, but is also observed in chronic
malignant diseases.

PMID: 18492690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 9;28(15):4037-46. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4126-07.2008.

Tlx1 and Tlx3 coordinate specification of dorsal horn pain-modulatory peptidergic
neurons.

Xu Y(1), Lopes C, Qian Y, Liu Y, Cheng L, Goulding M, Turner EE, Lima D, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The dorsal spinal cord synthesizes a variety of neuropeptides that modulate the
transmission of nociceptive sensory information. Here, we used genetic fate
mapping to show that Tlx3(+) spinal cord neurons and their derivatives represent 
a heterogeneous population of neurons, marked by partially overlapping expression
of a set of neuropeptide genes, including those encoding the anti-opioid peptide 
cholecystokinin, pronociceptive Substance P (SP), Neurokinin B, and a late wave
of somatostatin. Mutations of Tlx3 and Tlx1 result in a loss of expression of
these peptide genes. Brn3a, a homeobox transcription factor, the expression of
which is partly dependent on Tlx3, is required specifically for the early wave of
SP expression. These studies suggest that Tlx1 and Tlx3 operate high in the
regulatory hierarchy that coordinates specification of dorsal horn
pain-modulatory peptidergic neurons.

PMCID: PMC2681187
PMID: 18400903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Leukemia. 2008 Jun;22(6):1154-60. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.52. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Thymic adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia stratified in standard- and
high-risk group by aberrant HOX11L2 expression: experience of the German
multicenter ALL study group.

Baak U(1), Gökbuget N, Orawa H, Schwartz S, Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Burmeister T;
German Multicenter ALL Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Medizinische Klinik III, Berlin, Germany.
baaku@mskcc.org

Adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) continues to represent an
unfavorable disease. Molecularly based treatment stratifications could help
improve outcome. The prognostic impact of HOX11 and HOX11L2 expression has been
an area of controversy. We have investigated 286 adult T-ALL patients enrolled
into the German Multicenter ALL (GMALL) therapy protocols by comparative
real-time RT-PCR. High HOX11 expression and HOX11L2 expression were predominantly
seen in thymic T-ALL (P<or=0.031). In a multivariate analysis HOX11L2 expression 
proved to be an independent adverse risk factor for relapse-free survival (RFS)
with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.02 (P=0.023) and an HR for overall survival (OS) of
1.81 (P=0.021), both adjusted for the immunophenotype. HOX11 expression was found
to have a favorable impact on RFS (HR 0.51; P=0.048) but did not exhibit a
significant impact on OS. A subgroup analysis for thymic T-ALL revealed a more
pronounced negative correlation of HOX11L2 expression with RFS (HR 3.26; P=0.002)
and OS (HR 2.38; P=0.009). Although the prognostic impact of HOX11 in T-ALL is
less clear, HOX11L2 expression identifies a small subset of high-risk patients,
who are so far classified as standard-risk group. Thus, patients with aberrant
HOX11L2 expression should be considered early as candidates for intensified
treatment regimes.

PMID: 18368072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Immunol Cell Biol. 2008 May-Jun;86(4):301-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.6. Epub 2008
Feb 26.

Fetal Hox11 expression patterns predict defective target organs: a novel link
between developmental biology and autoimmunity.

Lonyai A(1), Kodama S, Burger D, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, MA 2129, USA.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2008 May-Jun;86(4):295-6.

Developmental biology has long been ignored in the etiology and diverse
manifestations of autoimmune diseases. Yet a role for development is suggested by
intriguing overlaps in particular organs targeted in autoimmune diseases, in this
case type 1 diabetes and Sjogren's syndrome. Patients with type 1 diabetes have
high rates of co-occurring Sjogren's syndrome, and both conditions are associated
with hearing loss and tongue abnormalities. All of these co-occurrences are found
in organs tracing their lineage to the developmental transcription factor Hox11, 
which is expressed in embryonic cells destined for the pancreas, salivary glands,
tongue, cranial nerves and cochlea. To determine whether development contributes 
to autoimmunity, we compared four target organs in NOD mice (an animal model for 
type 1 diabetes and Sjogren's syndrome) with NOD-SCID mice (which lack
lymphocytes) and normal controls. We examined the structure and/or function of
the cochlea, salivary glands, pancreas and tongue at early time points after
birth. Before the usual time of the onset of type 1 diabetes or Sjogren's
syndrome, we show that all four Hox11-derived organs are structurally abnormal in
both NOD mice and NOD-SCID mice versus controls. The most striking functional
defect is near complete hearing loss occurring before the normal time of the
onset of autoimmunity. The hearing loss is associated with severe structural
defects in the cochlea, suggesting that near-deafness occurs independent of
autoimmune attack. The pancreas and salivary glands are also structurally
abnormal in NOD and NOD-SCID mice, but they are functionally normal. This
suggests that autoimmune attack of these two organs is required for functional
failure. We conclude that a developmental lineage of cells contributes to
autoimmunity and predicts which organs may be targeted, either structurally
and/or functionally. Taken together, our findings challenge the orthodoxy that
autoimmunity is solely caused by a defective immune system.

PMCID: PMC4115331
PMID: 18301381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Feb;40(2):137-46. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1022560.

The promise of Hox11+ stem cells of the spleen for treating autoimmune diseases.

Lonyai A(1), Kodama S, Burger D, Davis M, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129, USA.

The spleen of human adults uniquely possesses a reservoir of multilineage adult
stem cells that express the developmental transcription factor HOX11. In contrast
to hematopoietic stem cells, HOX11+ stem cells hold potentially broader
therapeutic applications because they are less lineage restricted. HOX11/TLX1 is 
part of a homeodomain gene family essential for organogenesis of the spleen and
for contributions to development of hindbrain, cochlea, pancreas, salivary
glands, among other organs and tissues. While HOX11/TLX1 displays widespread
patterns of expression during embryogenesis, its expression was thought to cease 
after birth. Recent findings in human post-mortem tissue have shattered this
dogma, finding that HOX11/TLX1 stem cells are uniquely and abundantly expressed
throughout adulthood in the human spleen. While their role in humans is not yet
understood, HOX11/TLX1 stem cells from the spleen of normal mice have been
harvested to assist in both the treatment and cure at least two autoimmune
diseases: type 1 diabetes, Sjogren's syndrome, and possibly their comorbid
hearing loss. The splenic stem cells are infused, with an immune therapy, into
diseased NOD mice, where they can home to the diseased organ, differentiate into 
the appropriate cell type, and assume normal functioning with the endogenous
regeneration of the animal due to disease removal. This review covers HOX11/TLX1+
stem cells' success in an animal model and their potential for treating
autoimmune diseases in organs that mirror their extensive expression patterns
during embryogenesis.

PMID: 18283632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;14(3):692-700. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1927.

T cell receptor genotyping and HOXA/TLX1 expression define three T lymphoblastic 
lymphoma subsets which might affect clinical outcome.

Baleydier F(1), Decouvelaere AV, Bergeron J, Gaulard P, Canioni D, Bertrand Y,
Lepretre S, Petit B, Dombret H, Beldjord K, Molina T, Asnafi V, Macintyre E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM EMI0210, and Université Paris V, Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades,
Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.

PURPOSE: T lymphoblastic lymphomas (T-LBL) are rare disorders of immature T cells
which predominantly involve the mediastinum. Their oncogenic pathways and
prognostic variables are not clear.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We undertook a retrospective study of 41 cytoplasmic CD3+
T-LBL (nine cases aged <16 years) by assessing stage of maturation arrest based
on T cell receptor (TCR) immunogenotyping, immunohistochemistry, and
quantification of the oncogenes thought to be important in immature T cell
malignancies.
RESULTS: Application of a TCR-based immunogenetic classification allowed the
identification of three subcategories: 11 immature IM0/D-LBL showed no TCR or
only incomplete TCRD DJ rearrangement and corresponded to cytoplasmic CD3+
precursors of uncertain lineage. Sixteen mature TCRD(del)-LBL showed biallelic
TCRD deletion and both TCRG and TCRB rearrangement, consistent with TCRalphabeta 
lineage restriction. Fourteen intermediate LBL (Int-LBL) showed complete TCRD VDJ
and TCRG VJ rearrangement, with TCRB VDJ rearrangement in the majority. All
Int-LBL expressed HOX11/TLX1 or HOXA9 transcripts and a proportion of the latter 
were associated with CALM-AF10 or NUP214-ABL fusion transcripts. IM0/D-LBL were
restricted to adults with extrathymic disease and bone marrow involvement,
whereas Int-LBL and TCRD(del)-LBL were found in children and adults with
predominantly thymic disease. In adults, the Int-LBL subgroup was associated with
a significantly superior clinical outcome. This subgroup can be identified either
by TCR immunogenotyping or HOXA9/TLX1 transcript quantification.
CONCLUSION: Application of this molecular classification will allow the
prospective evaluation of prognostic effects within pediatric and adult
protocols.

PMID: 18245528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):6717-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710301200. Epub 2008 
Jan 9.

V(D)J recombinase binding and cleavage of cryptic recombination signal sequences 
identified from lymphoid malignancies.

Zhang M(1), Swanson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Creighton University
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68178, USA.

V(D)J recombination is a process integral to lymphocyte development. However,
this process is not always benign, since certain lymphoid malignancies exhibit
recurrent chromosomal abnormalities, such as translocations and deletions, that
harbor molecular signatures suggesting an origin from aberrant V(D)J
recombination. Translocations involving LMO2, TAL1, Ttg-1, and Hox11, as well as 
a recurrent interstitial deletion at 1p32 involving SIL/SCL, are cited examples
of illegitimate V(D)J recombination. Previous studies using extrachromosomal
substrates reveal that cryptic recombination signal sequences (cRSSs) identified 
near the translocation breakpoint in these examples support V(D)J recombination
with efficiencies ranging from about 30- to 20,000-fold less than bona fide V(D)J
recombination signals. To understand the molecular basis for these large
differences, we investigated the binding and cleavage of these cRSSs by the
RAG1/2 proteins that initiate V(D)J recombination. We find that the RAG proteins 
comparably bind all cRSSs tested, albeit more poorly than a consensus RSS. We
show that four cRSSs that support levels of V(D)J recombination above background 
levels in cell culture (LMO2, TAL1, Ttg-1, and SIL) are also cleaved by the RAG
proteins in vitro with efficiencies ranging from 18 to 70% of a consensus RSS.
Cleavage of LMO2 and Ttg-1 by the RAG proteins can also be detected in cell
culture using ligation-mediated PCR. In contrast, Hox11 and SCL are nicked but
not cleaved efficiently in vitro, and cleavage at other adventitious sites in
plasmid substrates may also limit the ability to detect recombination activity at
these cRSSs in cell culture.

PMID: 18187418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Leuk Res. 2008 Jun;32(6):873-83. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Overexpression of stem cell associated ALDH1A1, a target of the leukemogenic
transcription factor TLX1/HOX11, inhibits lymphopoiesis and promotes myelopoiesis
in murine hematopoietic progenitors.

Rice KL(1), Izon DJ, Ford J, Boodhoo A, Kees UR, Greene WK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences,
Murdoch University, South Street, Murdoch, Perth WA 6150, Australia.

TLX1/HOX11 is an oncogenic transcription factor in human T-cell leukemia,
however, the molecular basis for its transforming activity has remained elusive. 
The ALDH1A1 gene, whose product participates in retinoic acid synthesis, was
previously identified as a TLX1-responsive gene. Here, we confirm regulation of
ALDH1A1 transcription by TLX1 and show that ALDH1A1 can profoundly perturb murine
hematopoiesis by promoting myeloid differentiation at the expense of
lymphopoiesis. Together, these data demonstrate that ALDH1A1 plays a key role in 
normal hematopoiesis, and confirm ALDH1A1 as a TLX1 transcriptional target that
may contribute to the ability of this homeoprotein to alter cell fate and induce 
tumor growth.

PMID: 18082256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 14;367(3):707-13. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Transcriptional regulation of FHL1 by TLX1/HOX11 is dosage, cell-type and
promoter context-dependent.

Rice KL(1), Kees UR, Greene WK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences,
Murdoch University, Perth, WA 6150, Australia.

TLX1/HOX11 encodes an NK-like homeodomain transcription factor that is both
normally required for embryonic development and aberrantly expressed in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Previous studies have shown that TLX1 can regulate 
target genes including ALDH1A1 and FHL1. However, whereas ALDH1A1 is consistently
regulated by TLX1, endogenous FHL1 is only induced in a proportion of fibroblast 
or T-cell clones stably expressing TLX1. Here, we provide an explanation for
these findings by demonstrating that the induction of FHL1, but not ALDH1A1,
requires a high level of TLX1 expression in NIH 3T3 cells. In luciferase reporter
assays, TLX1-mediated repression rather than activation of the FHL1 gene promoter
and the magnitude of this effect was strongly influenced by the cellular
background. Together, these results characterize TLX1 as a dual function
regulator whose activity in respect to FHL1 is critically dependent upon its
cellular concentration, as well as cell type and promoter context.

PMID: 18073142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Leukemia. 2007 Oct;21(10):2192-4. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Splenectomy: a new treatment option for ALL tumors expressing Hox-11 and a means 
to test the stem cell hypothesis of cancer in humans.

Dieguez-Acuna FJ, Gygi SP, Davis M, Faustman DL.

PMID: 17713543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2324-30. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Prognostic and oncogenic relevance of TLX1/HOX11 expression level in T-ALLs.

Bergeron J(1), Clappier E, Radford I, Buzyn A, Millien C, Soler G, Ballerini P,
Thomas X, Soulier J, Dombret H, Macintyre EA, Asnafi V.

Author information: 
(1)The Université Paris V René Descartes, Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale (INSERM) EMI0210 and Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris
(AP-HP) Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.

TLX1 is a homeodomain transcription factor generally associated with a favorable 
outcome in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). However, the molecular
mechanisms of TLX1 deregulation remain unclear and various transcript levels in
the absence of 10q24 abnormalities have been reported. A reproducible and
accurate delineation of TLX1(+) T-ALL will be necessary for proper therapeutic
stratification. We have studied 264 unselected T-ALLs (171 adults and 93
children) and show that T-ALLs expressing high levels of TLX1 (n = 35, 13%),
defined as a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR) level of
TLX1 greater than 1.00 ABL, form a homogeneous oncogenic group, based on their
uniform stage of maturation arrest and oncogenetic and transcriptional profiles. 
Furthermore, TLX1-high T-ALLs harbor molecular TLX1 locus abnormalities in the
majority (31/33), a proportion largely underestimated by standard karyotypic
screening. T-ALLs expressing TLX1 at lower levels (n = 57, 22%) do not share
these characteristics. Prognostic analysis within the adult LALA94 and GRAALL03
prospective protocols demonstrate a better event-free survival (P = .035) and a
marked trend for longer overall survival (P = .059) for TLX1-high T-ALLs, while
the expression of lower levels of TLX1 does not impact on prognosis. We propose
that TLX1(+) T-ALLs be defined as cases expressing TLX1/ABL ratios greater than 1
and/or demonstrating TLX1 rearrangement. Therapeutic modification should be
considered for those patients.

PMID: 17609427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Br J Haematol. 2007 Jul;138(1):54-67.

TLX1/HOX11 transcription factor inhibits differentiation and promotes a
non-haemopoietic phenotype in murine bone marrow cells.

Dixon DN(1), Izon DJ, Dagger S, Callow MJ, Taplin RH, Kees UR, Greene WK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences,
Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia, Australia.

The TLX/HOX11 subfamily of divergent homeobox genes are involved in various
aspects of embryogenesis and, in the case of TLX1/HOX11 and TLX3/HOX11L2, feature
prominently as oncogenes in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. TLX1
possesses immortalising activity in a wide variety of blood cell lineages,
however, the effect of this oncogene on haemopoietic cell differentiation has not
been fully investigated. We therefore constitutively expressed TLX1 in murine
bone marrow or fetal liver cells using retroviral transfer followed by
transplantation and/or in vitro culture. TLX1 was found to dramatically alter
haemopoiesis, promoting the emergence of a non-haemopoietic CD45(-) CD31(+) cell 
population while markedly inhibiting erythroid and granulocytic cell
differentiation. To identify genetic programs perturbed by TLX1, a comparison of 
transcript profiles from J2E erythroid cells with and without enforced TLX1
expression was undertaken. This revealed a pattern of gene expression indicative 
of enhanced proliferation coupled to differentiation arrest. Of the genes
identified, two, KIT and VEGFC, were found to be potential TLX1 targets based on 
transcriptional assays. These results demonstrate that TLX1 can act broadly to
impair haemopoiesis and divert differentiation to an alternative fate. This may
account for its ability to promote the pre-leukaemic state via perturbation of
specific gene expression programs.

PMID: 17555447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Haematologica. 2007 May;92(5):619-26.

Characterization of ABL1 expression in adult T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
by oligonucleotide array analysis.

Chiaretti S(1), Tavolaro S, Ghia EM, Ariola C, Matteucci C, Elia L, Maggio R,
Messina M, Ricciardi MR, Vitale A, Ritz J, Mecucci C, Guarini A, Foà R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology,
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Recent data have highlighted an involvement of ABL1 in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Specifically, the presence of a
fusion gene involving ABL1 and NUP214, both located at 9q34, has been reported.
We sought to evaluate whether T-ALL patients with overexpression of ABL showed a 
peculiar gene expression pattern and were characterized by having specific
rearrangements.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We previously assessed the expression profile of 128 adults
with ALL by oligonucleotide arrays: 33 had T-ALL. In the current study, we
evaluated the expression levels of ABL1 in T-ALL cases and found three patients
who had ABL1 levels comparable to those detected in BCR/ABL (+)cases and one who 
had a significantly higher level of ABL1 expression. In order to establish the
incidence of ABL1 overexpression in T-ALL, we evaluated 17 additional patients by
quantitative (Q)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription
(RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: The three cases with ABL1 expression levels comparable to those found in
BCR/ABL (+)cases had a specific signature characterized by a high expression of
genes involved in regulation of transcription. The fourth case, with the highest 
levels of ABL, harbored the NUP214-ABL1 rearrangement, which was confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Three of the four patients were
refractory to induction chemotherapy. Of the 17 additional patients evaluated by 
Q-PCR and RT-PCR, none showed ABL1 overexpression.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Overall, overexpression of ABL1 was found in 8%
of T-ALL cases. These results underline the value of microarray analyses for the 
identification of specific signatures associated with ABL1 overexpression, as
well as rearrangements, e.g. NUP214-ABL1, in adult T-ALL.

PMID: 17488685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gene. 2007 Apr 15;391(1-2):223-32. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

A promoter with bidirectional activity is located between TLX1/HOX11 and a
divergently transcribed novel human gene.

Greene WK(1), Sontani Y, Sharp MA, Dunn DS, Kees UR, Bellgard MI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences,
Murdoch University, Perth WA 6150, Australia. W.Greene@murdoch.edu.au

The chromosomal region 10q24 is involved in reciprocal translocations with one of
the T-cell receptor loci in a significant proportion of human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias. The breakpoints of these rearrangements cluster
immediately upstream of the TLX1 homeobox gene and lead to its transcriptional
activation. Genomic analysis using sequences located on the opposite side of the 
breakpoint cluster region identified a novel gene composed of three exons that is
oriented in a head-to-head manner with TLX1. The novel gene, named TDI (TLX1
divergent) codes for a 1.9 kb transcript with an atypically long 5' leader
sequence. Although predicted to be a transcriptional regulator of 13.4 kDa, the
TDI protein has no significant sequence similarity to any known protein. The TLX1
and TDI genes are separated by a short spacer of only 161 bp that contains
numerous GC boxes and a centrally located CCAAT box embedded within a CpG island.
Using luciferase as the reporter in transient transfection assays, the intergenic
region was found to be a functional promoter with robust bidirectional activity. 
TLX1 and TDI thus appear to represent another example of a divergently
transcribed gene pair whose expression is regulated by a common promoter. Our
finding that TDI is transcriptionally co-activated in leukemic cells that
aberrantly express TLX1, additionally suggests that it may have the potential to 
act as a co-operating oncogene in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17303350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Bioessays. 2007 Feb;29(2):166-77.

Development and function of the mammalian spleen.

Brendolan A(1), Rosado MM, Carsetti R, Selleri L, Dear TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University, Weill
Medical School, New York, NY, USA.

The vertebrate spleen has important functions in immunity and haematopoiesis,
many of which have been well studied. In contrast, we know much less about the
mechanisms governing its early embryonic development. However, as a result of
work over the past decade-mostly using knockout mice--significant progress has
been made in unravelling the genetic processes governing the spleen's early
development. Key genetic regulators, such as Tlx1 and Pbx1, have been identified,
and we know some of the early transcriptional hierarchies that control the early 
patterning and proliferation of the splenic primordium. In mouse and humans,
asplenia can arise as a result of laterality defects, or the spleen can be absent
with no other discernible abnormalities. Surprisingly, given the spleen's diverse
functions, asplenic individuals suffer no major haematopoietic or immune defects 
apart from a susceptibility to infection with encapsulated bacteria. Recent
evidence has shed light on a previously unknown role of the spleen in the
development and maintenance of specific B cell populations that are involved in
the initial response to infection caused by encapsulated bacteria. The lack of
these populations in asplenic mice and humans may go some way to explaining this 
susceptibility.

Copyright 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 17226804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 14;26(28):4115-23. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

TLX1/HOX11-induced hematopoietic differentiation blockade.

Riz I(1), Akimov SS, Eaker SS, Baxter KK, Lee HJ, Mariño-Ramírez L, Landsman D,
Hawley TS, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Aberrant expression of the human homeobox-containing proto-oncogene TLX1/HOX11
inhibits hematopoietic differentiation programs in a number of murine model
systems. Here, we report the establishment of a murine erythroid progenitor cell 
line, iEBHX1S-4, developmentally arrested by regulatable TLX1 expression.
Extinction of TLX1 expression released the iEBHX1S-4 differentiation block,
allowing erythropoietin-dependent acquisition of erythroid markers and hemoglobin
synthesis. Coordinated activation of erythroid transcriptional networks
integrated by the acetyltransferase co-activator CREB-binding protein (CBP) was
suggested by bioinformatic analysis of the upstream regulatory regions of several
conditionally induced iEBHX1S-4 gene sets. In accord with this notion,
CBP-associated acetylation of GATA-1, an essential regulator of erythroid
differentiation, increased concomitantly with TLX1 downregulation.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays 
revealed that TLX1 directly binds to CBP, and confocal laser microscopy
demonstrated that the two proteins partially colocalize at intranuclear sites in 
iEBHX1S-4 cells. Notably, the distribution of CBP in conditionally blocked
iEBHX1S-4 cells partially overlapped with chromatin marked by a repressive
histone methylation pattern, and downregulation of TLX1 coincided with exit of
CBP from these heterochromatic regions. Thus, we propose that TLX1-mediated
differentiation arrest may be achieved in part through a mechanism that involves 
redirection of CBP and/or its sequestration in repressive chromatin domains.

PMCID: PMC1955382
PMID: 17213805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Haematologica. 2006 Sep;91(9):1212-21.

The outcome of molecular-cytogenetic subgroups in pediatric T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: a retrospective study of patients treated according to
DCOG or COALL protocols.

van Grotel M(1), Meijerink JP, Beverloo HB, Langerak AW, Buys-Gladdines JG,
Schneider P, Poulsen TS, den Boer ML, Horstmann M, Kamps WA, Veerman AJ, van
Wering ER, van Noesel MM, Pieters R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, room Sp2456, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2006 Sep;91(9):1156A.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Subgroups of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL), defined according to recurrent cytogenetic aberrations, may have
different prognoses. The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic
relevance of molecular-cytogenetic abnormalities in pediatric patients using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The patients were assigned to TAL1, HOX11/TLX1, HOX11L2/TLX3,
or CALM-AF10 subgroups. The cytogenetic subgroups were characterized in relation 
to immunophenotype and the expression of aberrantly expressed transcription
factors.
RESULTS: In our cohort study, CALM-AF10 was associated with an immature
immunophenotype and poor outcome (p=0.005). HOX11L2 was associated with both
immunophenotypically immature cases as well as cases committed to the
gammadelta-lineage. HOX11L2 was significantly associated with poor outcome
(p=0.01), independently of the expression of CD1 or the presence of NOTCH1
mutations. TAL1 abnormalities were associated with alphabeta-lineage commitment, 
and tended to be associated with a good outcome. Cells in HOX11 cases resembled
early CD1-positive cortical thymocytes without expression of Cytbeta and TCR
molecules. In relation to the expression of early T-cell transcription factors,
high TAL1 levels were found in immunophenotypically-advanced cases, whereas high 
LYL1 levels were found in immature subgroups.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The reported outcomes for HOX11L2-rearranged
T-ALL cases are conflicting; the prognostic impact may depend on the therapy
given. In our cohort, this cytogenetic aberration was associated with a poor
outcome. Our data on CALM-AF10 rearranged T-ALL, albeit based on only three
patients, suggest that this type of leukemia is associated with a poor outcome.

PMID: 16956820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncogene. 2006 Sep 21;25(42):5752-63. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Loss of Ubr1 promotes aneuploidy and accelerates B-cell lymphomagenesis in
TLX1/HOX11-transgenic mice.

Chen E(1), Kwon YT, Lim MS, Dubé ID, Hough MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The TLX1/HOX11 homeobox gene was originally identified at the recurrent
t(10;14)(q24;q11) translocation breakpoint, a chromosomal abnormality observed in
5-7% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs). Proviral insertional
mutagenesis studies performed on transgenic mice ectopically expressing
TLX1/HOX11 in B lymphocytes (IgHmu-HOX11(Tg) mice) revealed the Ubr1 gene locus
as a frequent site of proviral insertion, concomitant with accelerated
development of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Insertion into this genomic region 
was confirmed by Southern blotting and by the ability to generate a polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplicon across the viral-genome junction. Western
immunoblot and semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis revealed
downregulated expression of the Ubr1 gene product subsequent to viral
integration. Loss or reduced levels of Ubr1 expression was associated with 5/14
spontaneous B-cell lymphomas in IgHmu-HOX11(Tg) mice and one of nine primary
human T-ALLs. To gain mechanistic insight into the cooperativity between
TLX1/HOX11 and Ubr1, IgHmu-HOX11(Tg)/Ubr1(-/-) mice were generated.
IgHmu-HOX11(Tg)/Ubr1(-/-) mice exhibited a modest but statistically significant
acceleration of disease onset relative to IgHmu-HOX11(Tg)/Ubr1(+/-) mice.
Moreover, micronucleus assays to detect for chromosome missegregation were
conducted and revealed increased presence of micronuclei in
IgHmu-HOX11(Tg)/Ubr1(-/-) primary B lymphocyte cultures, and in both
TLX1/HOX11-overexpressing T cell lines and fibroblast cultures following
transfection with short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting Ubr1. Karyotyping of 
primary B lymphocyte cultures revealed increased incidences of hypodiploid
karyotypes. Finally, mitotic figures analysed from Ubr1 siRNA-transfected
fibroblast cultures revealed no defects in chromosome congression to the
metaphase plate, but increased incidences of atypical anaphase figures, including
the development of anaphase bridges and lagging chromosomes. Based on these
findings, we identify a synergistic role between TLX1/HOX11 overexpression and
Ubr1 inactivation in promoting chromosome missegregation, permitting the accrual 
of additional chromosome losses and cytogenic abnormalities en route to
malignancy.

PMID: 16862188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Vet Pathol. 2006 Jul;43(4):401-23.

Abnormal lymphoid organ development in immunodeficient mutant mice.

Seymour R(1), Sundberg JP, Hogenesch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Purdue University, Veterinary Pathology
Building, 725 Harrison Street, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2027 (USA).

Development of the primary and secondary lymphoid organs is a tightly controlled 
process. These tissues are highly organized to maximize efficiency of the immune 
response. Spontaneous and targeted mutations in laboratory mice have led to
better understanding of the molecular interactions and signaling pathways
essential to the development and organization of lymphoid tissues, and the
functional consequences of loss or disruption of the normal structures. On the
basis of studies of mutations in mice and other species, it has been determined
that a wild-type allele of the Foxn1 gene is required for normal thymic
development and function. The Tlx1, Bapx1, Tcf21, Wt1 and Dh genes are essential 
for development of the spleen, while mutations of Nkx2-3, Lta, Ltb, Ltbr,
Map3k14, Relb, Tnf, Tnfrsf1a, Cxcl13, Blr1 (Cxcr5), or cpdm genes result in
disruption of normal splenic microarchitecture. The requirements for organized
lymph nodes vary according to anatomic location, but most rely on Id2 (Idb2) and 
Rorc, in addition to lymphotoxins and Tnfrsf11a, Tnfsf11, Relb, Map3k14, Cxcl13, 
and Blr1 genes. Development of Peyer's patches is dependent on Id2 and Rorc
genes, lymphotoxins, and Relb, Map3k14, Il7r, and cpdm genes. Less is known about
the requirements for nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT), but Id2 is a
requirement. Here we review abnormalities of lymphoid organ development in
immunodeficient mutant mice, including spontaneous and targeted mutations of Id2,
Rorc, Tnf, Tnfrsf1a, Lta, Ltb, Ltbr, Tnfrsf11a, Tnfsf11, Relb, Map3k14, IL7r,
Blr1, and Cxcl13 genes.

PMID: 16846982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Sep;45(9):846-55.

Transforming potential of the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia-associated
homeobox genes HOXA13, TLX1, and TLX3.

Su X(1), Drabkin H, Clappier E, Morgado E, Busson M, Romana S, Soulier J, Berger 
R, Bernard OA, Lavau C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0210, IRNEM, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

The importance of HOXA genes in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) has
recently been recognized. We report a novel chromosomal translocation in a T-ALL 
patient that maps upstream of the HOXA13 gene and downstream of the BCL11B/CTIP2 
locus. Analysis of HOXA gene transcription demonstrated massive expression of
HOXA13, whereas the other HOXA genes were unaffected. A genomic rearrangement of 
the HOXA locus associated with exclusive expression of HOXA13 was observed in a
second patient. This situation resembles chromosomal translocations activating
genes of the TLX/HOX11 family in T-ALLs. To compare the leukemogenic properties
of HOXA13 to that of TLX proteins, cohorts of lethally irradiated mice were
transplanted with bone marrow transduced with a retroviral vector expressing TLX3
or HOXA13. Cells transduced with TLX3 or HOXA13 could not be detected in the
peripheral blood of mice post-transplantation and none of the mice developed
malignancies. Cotransduction of the HOX cofactor MEIS1 with TLX3 or HOXA13 did
not alter this outcome. However, in a myeloid clonogenic assay HOXA13 and TLX3
extended the proliferation of progenitors similarly to what was observed for
TLX1. Altogether, our results strongly suggest the absolute requirement for
cooperative events in association with homeobox gene up-regulation to induce
T-cell leukemogenesis.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16804919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Feb;165(1):36-40.

Translocation (5;10)(q22;q24) in a case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gough SM(1), Benjes SM, McDonald M, Heaton D, Ganly P, Morris CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Research Group, Department of Pathology, Christchurch School
of Medicine & Health Sciences, PO Box 4345, University of Otago, Christchurch,
New Zealand.

The activation of genes important to acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) may be
evidenced by somatically acquired chromosomal translocations found recurrently in
different patient subgroups. It is for this reason that research efforts have
focused on the molecular dissection of recurring chromosomal rearrangements.
However, even though a large number of leukemia-causing genes have been
identified, the genetic basis of many ALL cases remains unknown. We and others
have reasoned that novel translocations found in the leukemic cells of ALL
patients may mark the location of more frequent gene rearrangements that are
otherwise hidden submicroscopically within normal or complex karyotypes. Towards 
this end, we here describe the first reported association of a t(5;10)(q22;q24)
with adult ALL. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and Southern blot
hybridization studies have eliminated likely involvement of the candidate genes
APC and MCC on chromosome 5, and PAX2, TLX1, and NFKB2 on chromosome 10. Results 
further suggest that the breakpoint on chromosome 5 lies centromeric of APC and
the chromosome 10 breakpoint is centromeric of PAX2. The genomic regions
disrupted by this t(5;10)(q22;q24) have not previously been associated with
leukemia.

PMID: 16490595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 27;25(18):2575-87.

Dysregulated expression of mitotic regulators is associated with B-cell
lymphomagenesis in HOX11-transgenic mice.

Chen E(1), Lim MS, Rosic-Kablar S, Liu J, Jolicoeur P, Dubé ID, Hough MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Dysregulated expression of the homeobox gene, HOX11 is a frequent etiologic event
in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias. HOX11-transgenic mice
(IgHmu-HOX11Tg)-expressing HOX11 in the B-cell compartment develop B-cell
lymphomas with extended latency. The latency suggests that additional genetic
events are required prior to the onset of malignant lymphoma. We report the
identification of 17 HOX11 collaborating genes, revealed through their propensity
to be targeted in a proviral insertional mutagenesis screen. Seven integrations
disrupted genes in mitotic spindle checkpoint control, suggesting that cells with
elevated HOX11 expression are especially sensitive to dysregulation of chromosome
segregation during mitosis. IgHmu-HOX11Tg primary B-lymphocyte cultures exposed
to the aneugenic agents, colchicine and colcemid, exhibited increased incidences 
of chromosome missegregation as assessed by cytokinesis-block micronucleus
assays. Additionally, IgHmu-HOX11Tg cultures were shown to exhibit aberrant
bypass of spindle checkpoint arrest, as assessed by the increased presence of
cycling cells determined by assessment of DNA content and by BrdU
immunolabelling. Western immunoblotting revealed elevated expression of the
mitotic effector molecules, cyclin A, cyclin B1 and cdc20 in IgHmu-HOX11Tg
cultures. Moreover, spontaneously arising lymphoid neoplasms in IgHmu-HOX11Tg
mice frequently exhibit aberrant expression of mitotic regulators, concomitant
with increased development of micronuclei, abnormal mitotic checkpoint control
and increased incidences of abnormal karyotypes when expanded in culture.
Collectively, these findings indicate that abnormal regulation of spindle
checkpoint control as a result of HOX11 overexpression leads to a heightened
predisposition for development of aneuploidy, contributing to oncogenesis.

PMID: 16407851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jan;132(2):216-29.

TLX1/HOX11-mediated disruption of primary thymocyte differentiation prior to the 
CD4+CD8+ double-positive stage.

Owens BM(1), Hawley TS, Spain LM, Kerkel KA, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, The George Washington University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20037, USA.

The TLX1/HOX11 homeobox gene is frequently activated in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) by the t(10;14)(q24;q11) and t(7;10)(q35;q24)
chromosomal translocations or by as yet unknown transcriptional mechanisms in the
absence of 10q24 cytogenetic abnormalities. Almost all TLX1(+) T-ALLs exhibit a
CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) phenotype. To investigate the role of TLX1 as
an initiating oncogene in T-ALL pathogenesis, we assessed the consequences of
retroviral vector-directed TLX1 expression during the differentiation of murine
and human thymocytes in fetal thymic organ cultures. Interestingly, enforced
expression of TLX1 disrupted the differentiation of murine fetal liver precursors
and human cord blood CD34(+) stem/progenitor cells prior to the DP thymocyte
stage. Although differentiation arrest was associated with an increased
percentage of apoptotic thymocytes, it could only be partially bypassed by
coexpression of transgenic BCL2. Mutation of the invariant asparagine residue at 
position 51 of the homeodomain - which is required for efficient DNA binding -
released the block, consistent with the notion that TLX1 inhibits thymocyte
differentiation and promotes T-cell oncogenesis by functioning as a transcription
factor. The relevance of these findings is discussed in the context of activating
NOTCH1 mutations and the other genetic lesions implicated in the multistep
transformation process of TLX1(+) T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC2431114
PMID: 16398656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Leukemia. 2006 Feb;20(2):304-12.

The nuclear oncoprotein TLX1/HOX11 associates with pericentromeric satellite 2
DNA in leukemic T-cells.

Heidari M(1), Rice KL, Phillips JK, Kees UR, Greene WK.

Author information: 
(1)1School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Division of Health Sciences,
Murdoch University, Perth, WA, Australia.

TLX1/HOX11, a DNA-binding homeodomain protein, was originally identified by
virtue of its aberrant expression in T-cell leukemia and subsequently found to be
crucial for normal spleen development. The precise mechanism of TLX1 function
remains poorly understood, although it is known that it can act as both a
transcriptional activator and repressor and can downregulate the Aldh1a1 gene in 
embryonic mouse spleen. Using a whole-genome PCR approach, we show here that TLX1
protein directly interacts with pericentromeric human satellite 2 DNA sequences. 
Such DNA is known to localize to heterochromatin, which among other roles has
been implicated in gene silencing. The interaction was confirmed in vitro and in 
vivo by gel retardation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays involving
satellite 2 DNA, which contained sequences resembling TLX1 binding sites. Using
immunofluorescence microscopy, TLX1 demonstrated a punctate pattern of staining
in the nuclei of leukemic T-cells (ALL-SIL). Double labelling indicated that TLX1
colocalized with the centromeric protein CENP-B, demonstrating that the TLX1 foci
corresponded to clusters of centromeric DNA. The novel interaction of TLX1 with
constitutive heterochromatin adds an additional level of complexity to the
intracellular functions of this transcriptional regulator and may have relevance 
to its roles in transcriptional repression and T-cell immortalization.

PMID: 16357834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Nov;8(11):1510-5. Epub 2005 Oct 23.

Lbx1 and Tlx3 are opposing switches in determining GABAergic versus glutamatergic
transmitter phenotypes.

Cheng L(1), Samad OA, Xu Y, Mizuguchi R, Luo P, Shirasawa S, Goulding M, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 1 Jimmy Fund Way,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2005 Dec;8(12):1791.

Most neurons in vertebrates make a developmental choice between two principal
neurotransmitter phenotypes (glutamatergic versus GABAergic). Here we show that
the homeobox gene Lbx1 determines a GABAergic cell fate in the dorsal spinal cord
at early embryonic stages. In Lbx1-/- mice, the presumptive GABAergic neurons are
transformed into glutamatergic cells. Furthermore, overexpression of Lbx1 in the 
chick spinal cord is sufficient to induce GABAergic differentiation.
Paradoxically, Lbx1 is also expressed in glutamatergic neurons. We previously
reported that the homeobox genes Tlx1 and Tlx3 determine glutamatergic cell fate.
Here we show that impaired glutamatergic differentiation, observed in Tlx3-/-
mice, is restored in Tlx3-/-Lbx1-/- mice. These genetic studies suggest that Lbx1
expression defines a basal GABAergic differentiation state, and Tlx3 acts to
antagonize Lbx1 to promote glutamatergic differentiation.

PMID: 16234809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Oct;22(5):551-3.

[Detection of fusion genes resulting from chromosome abnormalities in childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

He J(1), Chen ZX, Xue YQ, Li JQ, He HL, Huang YP, He YX, Chai YH, Zhu LL.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, the First Hospital, Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, PR China. junhe1964@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of the fusion genes resulting from chromosome
abnormalities in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia(ALL) and its conformity
to WHO classification.
METHODS: Sixty-two children with ALL were investigated. The expression of fusion 
genes was determined by multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), karyotyping (R band) and immunophenotyping (by flow cytometry) were
also performed.
RESULTS: Of the 62 patients, 23(37.1%) were found to carry 13 different fusion
genes. The patients with immunophenotype of Pre-B-ALL were found to carry:
TEL/AML1(3 cases); E2A/PBX1, E2A/HLF, TLS/ERG, MLL/AF4, MLL/AF9, MLL/AF10,
MLL/AFX-MLL/AF6-MLL/ELL, MLL/AF6-MLL/ELL, dupMLL (one case for each); and HOX11
(6 cases). The patients with immunophenotype of Pre-T-ALL were found to carry:
TAL1D (4 cases, one is also found to have HOX11 expression); and HOX11 (2 cases).
The multiplex RT-PCR in combination with chromosome analysis revealed genetic
abnormalities in 69.4%(43/62) of childhood ALL.
CONCLUSION: Multiplex RT-PCR combined with chromosome analysis and
immunophenotyping can provide reliable and helpful information for the diagnosis,
therapy evaluation and prognosis prediction in childhood ALL, which may also
serve as a basis on which to implement the criteria of WHO classification.

PMID: 16215946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Jul 31;38(4):500-6.

The existence of a putative regulatory element in 3'-untranslated region of
proto-oncogene HOX11's mRNA.

Li Y(1), Jiang ZZ, Chen HX, Leung WK, Sung JJ, Ma WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Health Science Center, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai, China.

HOX11 encodes a homeodomain-containing transcription factor which directs the
development of the spleen during embryogenesis. While HOX11 expression is
normally silenced through an unknown mechanism in all tissues by adulthood, the
deregulation of HOX11 expression is associated with leukemia, such as T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The elucidation of regulatory elements contributing
to the molecular mechanism underlying the regulation of HOX11 gene expression is 
of great importance. Previous reports of HOX11 regulatory elements mainly focused
on the 5\'-flanking region of HOX11 on the chromosome related to transcriptional 
control. To expand the search of putative cis-elements involved in HOX11
regulation at the post-transcriptional level, we analyzed HOX11 mRNA
3\'-untranslated region (3\'UTR) and found an AU-rich region. To characterize
this AU-rich region, in vitro analysis of HOX11 mRNA 3\'UTR was performed with
human RNAbinding protein HuR, which interacts with AU-rich element (ARE) existing
in the 3\'UTR of many growth factors' and cytokines' mRNAs. Our results showed
that the HOX11 mRNA 3\'UTR can specifically bind with human HuR protein in vitro.
This specific binding could be competed effectively by typical ARE containing
RNA. After the deletion of the AU-rich region present in the HOX11 mRNA 3\'UTR,
the interaction of HOX11 mRNA 3\'UTR with HuR protein was abolished. These
findings suggest that HOX11 mRNA 3\'UTR contains cis-acting element which shares 
similarity in the action pattern with ARE-HuR interactions and may involve in the
posttranscriptional regulation of the HOX11 gene.

PMID: 16053719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3113-26.

A Pbx1-dependent genetic and transcriptional network regulates spleen ontogeny.

Brendolan A(1), Ferretti E, Salsi V, Moses K, Quaggin S, Blasi F, Cleary ML,
Selleri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University, Weill
Medical School, New York, NY, 10021, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3575.

The genetic control of cell fate specification, morphogenesis and expansion of
the spleen, a crucial lymphoid organ, is poorly understood. Recent studies of
mutant mice implicate various transcription factors in spleen development, but
the hierarchical relationships between these factors have not been explored. In
this report, we establish a genetic network that regulates spleen ontogeny, by
analyzing asplenic mice mutant for the transcription factors Pbx1, Hox11 (Tlx1), 
Nkx3.2 (Bapx1) and Pod1 (capsulin, Tcf21). We show that Hox11 and Nkx2.5, among
the earliest known markers for splenic progenitor cells, are absent in the
splenic anlage of Pbx1 homozygous mutant (-/-) embryos, implicating the TALE
homeoprotein Pbx1 in splenic cell specification. Pbx1 and Hox11 genetically
interact in spleen formation and loss of either is associated with a similar
reduction of progenitor cell proliferation and failed expansion of the splenic
anlage. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that Pbx1 binds to the Hox11
promoter in spleen mesenchymal cells, which co-express Pbx1 and Hox11.
Furthermore, Hox11 binds its own promoter in vivo and acts synergistically with
TALE proteins to activate transcription, supporting its role in an
auto-regulatory circuit. These studies establish a Pbx1-Hox11-dependent genetic
and transcriptional pathway in spleen ontogeny. Additionally, we demonstrate that
while Nkx3.2 and Pod1 control spleen development via separate pathways, Pbx1
genetically regulates key players in both pathways, and thus emerges as a central
hierarchical co-regulator in spleen genesis.

PMID: 15944191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 25;24(36):5561-75.

G1/S transcriptional networks modulated by the HOX11/TLX1 oncogene of T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Riz I(1), Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, USA.

The HOX11/TLX1 homeobox gene is aberrantly expressed in a subset of T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Here, we employed oligonucleotide microarrays to 
compare the expression profiles of the K3P and Sil leukemic cell lines
originating from patients with HOX11+ T-ALL to that of Jurkat cells, which
originated from a distinct subtype of T-ALL (TAL1+). To distinguish potential
HOX11 target genes from those characteristic of the stage of HOX11 leukemic
arrest, we also performed gene expression analysis on Jurkat cells, genetically
engineered to express exogenous HOX11. The resulting HOX11 gene expression
signature, which was validated for representative signaling pathways by transient
transfection of reporter constructs, was characterized by elevated expression of 
transcriptional programs involved in cell proliferation, including those
regulated by E2F, c-Myc and cAMP response element-binding protein. We
subsequently showed that ectopic HOX11 expression resulted in
hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (Rb), which correlated with
inhibition of the major Rb serine/threonine phosphatase PP1. HOX11 also inhibited
PP2A serine/threonine phosphatase activity concomitant with stimulation of the
AKT/PKB signaling cascade. These results suggest that transcriptional
deregulation of G1/S growth-control genes, mediated in large part through
blockade of PP1/PP2A phosphatase activity, plays an important role in HOX11
pathobiology.

PMCID: PMC2408753
PMID: 15897879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2005 Jul 1;106(1):274-86. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

HOXA genes are included in genetic and biologic networks defining human acute
T-cell leukemia (T-ALL).

Soulier J(1), Clappier E, Cayuela JM, Regnault A, García-Peydró M, Dombret H,
Baruchel A, Toribio ML, Sigaux F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Lymphocyte et
Cancer, and Molecular Hematology Laboratory, Hôpital Saint Louis, Paris, France.

Using a combination of molecular cytogenetic and large-scale expression analysis 
in human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALLs), we identified and
characterized a new recurrent chromosomal translocation, targeting the major
homeobox gene cluster HOXA and the TCRB locus. Real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (RQ-PCR) analysis showed that the expression of the whole HOXA
gene cluster was dramatically dysregulated in the HOXA-rearranged cases, and also
in MLL and CALM-AF10-related T-ALL cases, strongly suggesting that HOXA genes are
oncogenic in these leukemias. Inclusion of HOXA-translocated cases in a general
molecular portrait of 92 T-ALLs based on large-scale expression analysis shows
that this rearrangement defines a new homogeneous subgroup, which shares common
biologic networks with the TLX1- and TLX3-related cases. Because T-ALLs derive
from T-cell progenitors, expression profiles of the distinct T-ALL subgroups were
analyzed with respect to those of normal human thymic subpopulations.
Inappropriate use or perturbation of specific molecular networks involved in
thymic differentiation was detected. Moreover, we found a significant association
between T-ALL oncogenic subgroups and ectopic expression of a limited set of
genes, including several developmental genes, namely HOXA, TLX1, TLX3, NKX3-1,
SIX6, and TFAP2C. These data strongly support the view that the abnormal
expression of developmental genes, including the prototypical homeobox genes
HOXA, is critical in T-ALL oncogenesis.

PMID: 15774621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2005 Jun 15;105(12):4849-52. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

Fusion of EML1 to ABL1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with cryptic
t(9;14)(q34;q32).

De Keersmaecker K(1), Graux C, Odero MD, Mentens N, Somers R, Maertens J,
Wlodarska I, Vandenberghe P, Hagemeijer A, Marynen P, Cools J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

The BCR-ABL1 fusion kinase is frequently associated with chronic myeloid leukemia
and B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia but is rare in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL). We recently identified NUP214-ABL1 as a variant ABL1 fusion
gene in 6% of T-ALL patients. Here we describe the identification of another ABL1
fusion, EML1-ABL1, in a T-ALL patient with a cryptic t(9;14)(q34;q32) associated 
with deletion of CDKN2A (p16) and expression of TLX1 (HOX11). Echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 1-Abelson 1 (EML1-ABL1) is a constitutively
phosphorylated tyrosine kinase that transforms Ba/F3 cells to growth
factor-independent growth through activation of survival and proliferation
pathways, including extracellular signal-related kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2), signal
transducers and activators of transcription 5 (Stat5), and Lyn kinase. Deletion
of the coiled-coil domain of EML1 abrogated the transforming properties of the
fusion kinase. EML1-ABL1 and breakpoint cluster region (BCR)-ABL1 were equally
sensitive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib. These data further
demonstrate the involvement of ABL1 fusions in the pathogenesis of T-ALL and
identify EML1-ABL1 as a novel therapeutic target of imatinib.

PMID: 15713800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2005 Jan 19;2005(3):pe2.

Diabetes and stem cell researchers turn to the lowly spleen.

Kodama S(1), Davis M, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital-East, Boston, MA
02192, USA.

The spleen gets no respect. Long seen as superfluous, the adult spleen of the
mouse has recently been shown to hold stem cells that, in diabetic mice or
genetically altered mice that lack a pancreas, effectively regenerate
insulin-producing islet cells of the pancreas. Stem cells of the spleen express
Hox11, a highly conserved transcription factor that plays a major role in the
development of organs in vertebrate and invertebrate embryos. Hox11 and other
members of the Hox family of genes may give stem cells of the spleen the capacity
to mature into cell types other than islet cells, including neurons and bone
cells. Multilineage splenic stem cells may trace to the embryogenesis and
possible persistence into adulthood of a fetal stem cell region called the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM). This Perspective calls for reappraisal of the
lowly spleen for treating diabetes and other diseases of aging.

PMID: 15659719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Nov 15;13(22):2829-40. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

The del22q11.2 candidate gene Tbx1 regulates branchiomeric myogenesis.

Kelly RG(1), Jerome-Majewska LA, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. rk2149@columbia.edu

Formation and remodeling of the pharyngeal arches play central roles in
craniofacial development. TBX1, encoding a T-box-containing transcription factor,
is the major candidate gene for del22q11.2 (DiGeorge or velo-cardio-facial)
syndrome, characterized by craniofacial defects, thymic hypoplasia,
cardiovascular anomalies, velopharyngeal insufficiency and skeletal muscle
hypotonia. Tbx1 is expressed in pharyngeal mesoderm, which gives rise to
branchiomeric skeletal muscles of the head and neck. Although the genetic control
of craniofacial muscle development is known to involve pathways distinct from
those operational in the trunk, the regulation of branchiomeric myogenesis has
remained enigmatic. Here we show that branchiomeric muscle development is
severely perturbed in Tbx1 mutant mice. In the absence of Tbx1, the myogenic
determination genes Myf5 and MyoD fail to be normally activated in pharyngeal
mesoderm. Unspecified precursor cells expressing genes encoding the
transcriptional repressors Capsulin and MyoR are present in the mandibular arch
of Tbx1 mutant embryos. Sporadic activation of Myf5 and MyoD in these precursor
cells results in the random presence or absence of hypoplastic mandibular
arch-derived muscles at later developmental stages. Tbx1 is also required for
normal expression of Tlx1 and Fgf10 in pharyngeal mesoderm, in addition to
correct neural crest cell patterning in the mandibular arch. Tbx1 therefore
regulates the onset of branchiomeric myogenesis and controls normal mandibular
arch development, including robust transcriptional activation of myogenic
determination genes. While no abnormalities in branchiomeric myogenesis were
detected in Tbx1(+/-) mice, reduced TBX1 levels may contribute to pharyngeal
hypotonia in del22q11.2 patients.

PMID: 15385444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Dec;41(4):309-20.

A microarray model system identifies potential new target genes of the
proto-oncogene HOX11.

Hoffmann K(1), Dixon DN, Greene WK, Ford J, Taplin R, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, University of Western
Australia, P.O. Box 855, West Perth WA 6872 Australia. katrinh@ichr.uwa.edu.au

Erratum in
    Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Feb;42(2):210.

HOX11 is a homeobox gene originally identified at a chromosomal breakpoint in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). It is one of the most frequently
deregulated genes in T-ALL, although the precise role of HOX11 in leukemogenesis 
as well as in normal development remains obscure. To gain more insight into the
functional role of HOX11, we utilized a microarray model system to characterize
the gene expression network that it directs. Using one of our T-ALL cell lines
that had been stably transfected to express HOX11 and high-density
oligonucleotide HG-U95A arrays, we identified a large number of differentially
expressed genes in response to the enforced expression of HOX11. We focused on
examining genes found to be up-regulated according to the microarray analysis and
selected three putative target genes, NFKB2, SMARCD3, and NR4A3, for further
investigation. We could not only confirm the up-regulation of NR4A3 by an
independent method in all clones expressing HOX11, but luciferase reporter assays
demonstrated that the effect that HOX11 exerted on the proximal promoter of NR4A3
was dependent on the presence of an intact homeodomain, providing support for the
idea that HOX11 manifests its regulatory function via its action as a
transcription factor.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15384172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Nov;41(3):243-9.

Various types of rearrangements target TLX3 locus in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.

Su XY(1), Busson M, Della Valle V, Ballerini P, Dastugue N, Talmant P, Ferrando
AA, Baudry-Bluteau D, Romana S, Berger R, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0210, IRNEM, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

Most chromosomal translocations observed in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL) often produce transcriptional activation of transcription factor
oncogenes. Ectopic expression of the TLX3 (also known as HOX11L2) gene has been
shown to be associated with a cryptic t(5;14)(q35;q32) translocation specific for
a subtype of T-ALL. Here we report several examples of variant and alternative
translocations resulting in expression of TLX3 in T-ALL, and we describe three of
these translocations in detail. In particular, the CDK6 gene was rearranged in
two t(5;7)(q35;q21) translocations. In two additional instances, fusion of the
BCL11B (also known as CTIP2) and RANBP17/TLX3 loci were shown to result from
subtle genomic insertion/deletion within these loci. This study further
underscores that TLX3 expression in T-ALL is strongly associated with the
presence of genomic rearrangements.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15334547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):421-2.

Tlx genes make an exciting choice.

Anderson S.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):510-7.

PMID: 15114349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):510-7. Epub 2004 Apr 4.

Tlx3 and Tlx1 are post-mitotic selector genes determining glutamatergic over
GABAergic cell fates.

Cheng L(1), Arata A, Mizuguchi R, Qian Y, Karunaratne A, Gray PA, Arata S,
Shirasawa S, Bouchard M, Luo P, Chen CL, Busslinger M, Goulding M, Onimaru H, Ma 
Q.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department of Neurobiology, Harvard
Medical School, 1 Jimmy Fund Way, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2004 May;7(5):421-2.

Glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons mediate much of the excitatory and inhibitory
neurotransmission, respectively, in the vertebrate nervous system. The process by
which developing neurons select between these two cell fates is poorly
understood. Here we show that the homeobox genes Tlx3 and Tlx1 determine
excitatory over inhibitory cell fates in the mouse dorsal spinal cord. First, we 
found that Tlx3 was required for specification of, and expressed in,
glutamatergic neurons. Both generic and region-specific glutamatergic markers,
including VGLUT2 and the AMPA receptor Gria2, were absent in Tlx mutant dorsal
horn. Second, spinal GABAergic markers were derepressed in Tlx mutants, including
Pax2 that is necessary for GABAergic differentiation, Gad1/2 and Viaat that
regulate GABA synthesis and transport, and the kainate receptors Grik2/3. Third, 
ectopic expression of Tlx3 was sufficient to suppress GABAergic differentiation
and induce formation of glutamatergic neurons. Finally, excess GABA-mediated
inhibition caused dysfunction of central respiratory circuits in Tlx3 mutant
mice.

PMID: 15064766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Lancet. 2004 Feb 14;363(9408):535-6.

Prognostic importance of TLX1 (HOX11) oncogene expression in adults with T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Neuberg DS, Dodge RK, Paietta E, Larson RA, Wiernik PH, Rowe JM, 
Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard School 
of Public Health, 44 Binney Street, Mayer-630, Boston 02115, MA, USA.

The activation of oncogenic transcription factors defines distinct molecular
subsets of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and has prognostic relevance in
children. We investigated the prognostic effect of the expression levels of eight
oncogenic transcription factors--TLX1 (HOX11), TLX3 (HOX11L2), TAL1, TAL2, LYL1, 
OLIG2 (BHLHB1), LMO1, and LMO2--in 52 adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. The leukaemia-specific survival rate for the 16 TLX1-positive patients
was 88% (90% CI 73-100%), compared with 56% (42-70%) for all other cases
(p=0.019). Only the TLX1 oncogene expression subgroup showed difference in
leukaemia-specific survival. Our results suggest that overexpression of TLX1
confers a good outlook for adults with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Furthermore, our findings lead to questions about whether stem-cell
transplantation in first remission is necessary for effective treatment of
patients in the low-risk subgroup of patients with TLX1 oncogene expression.

PMID: 14975618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nature. 2004 Feb 19;427(6976):749-53.

The cell-cycle regulator geminin inhibits Hox function through direct and
polycomb-mediated interactions.

Luo L(1), Yang X, Takihara Y, Knoetgen H, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Biology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2004 Feb 19;427(6976):687-8.

Embryonic development is tightly controlled. The clustered genes of the Hox
family of homeobox proteins play an important part in regulating this development
and also proliferation. They specify embryonic structures along the body axis,
and are associated with normal and malignant cell growth. The cell-cycle
regulator geminin controls replication by binding to the licensing factor Cdt1,
and is involved in neural differentiation. Here, we show that murine geminin
associates transiently with members of the Hox-repressing polycomb complex, with 
the chromatin of Hox regulatory DNA elements and with Hox proteins. Gain- and
loss-of-function experiments in the chick neural tube demonstrate that geminin
modulates the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 transcription, which suggests a
polycomb-like activity for geminin. The interaction between geminin and Hox
proteins prevents Hox proteins from binding to DNA, inhibits Hox-dependent
transcriptional activation of reporter and endogenous downstream target genes,
and displaces Cdt1 from its complex with geminin. By establishing competitive
regulation, geminin functions as a coordinator of developmental and proliferative
control.

PMID: 14973489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Med Clin (Barc). 2004 Jan 17;122(1):38-9.

[Analysis of HOX11 gene in a patient with asplenia].

[Article in Spanish]

Isidoro-García M(1), Delgado-Romero P, Marhuenda C, González-Sarmiento R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Departamento de Medicina. Facultad de Medicina. 
Universidad de Salamanca. Salamanca. España.

PMID: 14733875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 9;313(2):327-35.

The functional mapping of long-range transcription control elements of the HOX11 
proto-oncogene.

Brake RL(1), Chatterjee PK, Kees UR, Watt PM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, The University of
Western Australia, West Perth, WA 6872, Australia. rachaelb@ichr.uwa.edu.au

Mapping of transcriptional control elements normally depends on the generation of
a series of deletion mutants. The consequences of particular deletions are then
functionally assessed by their ability to alter gene expression. The information 
derived from such investigations provides a general regulatory profile of the
gene of interest, as well as generating a focus for future experiments. Due to
the limitations of conventional DNA cloning methods, it has previously not been
possible to use such an approach to rapidly assess the role of long-range
regulatory elements that frequently lie further than 20 kb away from the coding
region. In order to identify regulatory elements of the proto-oncogene HOX11 that
may be mutated in a subset of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
specimens, we generated nested deletions from a P1 artificial chromosome (PAC).
This clone contained 95 kilobases (kb) of the HOX11 locus at 10q24; including 63 
kb of 5' regulatory DNA. The deletion series was produced by the use of a
recombination based cloning system and clones were subsequently transfected into 
mammalian cells. We have identified several long-range regulatory elements that
mediate transcriptional control of HOX11. This approach is simple, rapid, and
inexpensive. Furthermore, it generates multiple deletion clones in a single
experiment. This novel approach opens up a new avenue for investigating
long-range transcription control. Additionally, by allowing analysis of these
elements in the natural context of large integrants the approach does not require
the use of artificial extrachromosomal elements. This methodology can be applied 
to any gene cloned into a PAC or BAC vector and could also be useful in
identifying appropriately sized deletion mutants for functional testing in
transgenic models.

PMID: 14684164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Gene. 2003 Dec 24;323:89-99.

Specific alternative HOX11 transcripts are expressed in paediatric neural tumours
and T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Watt PM(1), Hoffmann K, Greene WK, Brake RL, Ford J, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, The University of
Western Australia, P O Box 855,Western Australia 6872, West Perth, Australia.

HOX11 is a proto-oncogene, which is silent in normal mature T-cells, while being 
aberrantly activated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) by
translocations t(10;14)(q24;q11) or t(7;10)(q35;q24). Although many oncogenes are
expressed in alternative forms in cancer, thus far, only one form of the human
HOX11 transcript has been reported. We describe here the identification of three 
alternative transcripts of the HOX11 proto-oncogene, expressed in primary T-ALL
specimens. Using rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and targeted RT-PCR, we 
have sequenced 23 individual cDNA clones characterising these novel transcripts. 
Northern hybridisation identified particular novel exons expressed in T-ALL,
which are not expressed in normal T-cells. To date, aberrant expression of HOX11 
has only been associated with leukaemia. Our survey of a range of neuroblastoma
and primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET) cell lines demonstrated the
expression of these novel HOX11 transcripts in tumours of neural origin, while
their expression was not detected in normal brain tissues. Strikingly, the
dominant transcript in these neural tumour cell lines is more than 1 kb larger
than the dominant transcript in T-ALL. These observations, combined with sequence
data from several EST clones derived from medulloblastoma cDNA libraries, support
a new hypothesis that HOX11 may also function as a neural oncogene or brain
tumour marker.

PMID: 14659882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Blood. 2004 Jan 15;103(2):442-50. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Clinical significance of HOX11L2 expression linked to t(5;14)(q35;q32), of HOX11 
expression, and of SIL-TAL fusion in childhood T-cell malignancies: results of
EORTC studies 58881 and 58951.

Cavé H(1), Suciu S, Preudhomme C, Poppe B, Robert A, Uyttebroeck A, Malet M,
Boutard P, Benoit Y, Mauvieux L, Lutz P, Méchinaud F, Grardel N, Mazingue F,
Dupont M, Margueritte G, Pages MP, Bertrand Y, Plouvier E, Brunie G, Bastard C,
Plantaz D, Vande Velde I, Hagemeijer A, Speleman F, Lessard M, Otten J, Vilmer E,
Dastugue N; EORTC-CLG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, 48, Boulevard
Sérurier, 75019 Paris, France. cave@infobiogen.fr

In a series of 153 children with T-cell malignancies enrolled in 2 consecutive
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) trials, we
assessed the HOX11L2 expression and/or the presence of a t(5;14)(q35;q32).
Additionally, in 138 of these patients, HOX11 expression and SIL-TAL
rearrangement were also assessed. These alterations were mutually exclusive, and 
their frequency was 23% (n = 35), 7% (n = 10), and 12% (n = 17), respectively.
HOX11L2/t(5;14) positivity was more frequent in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) with cortical T immunophenotype and in children aged between 6 and 9 years.
In contrast with previously reported data, patients positive and negative for
HOX11L2/t(5;14) were comparable with regard to clinical outcome as well as to the
response to a 7-day prephase treatment or to residual disease at completion of
induction therapy. The 3-year event-free survival (EFS) rate (+/- SE percentage) 
for patients positive and negative for HOX11L2/t(5;14) was 75.5% (+/- 8.1%) and
68.3% (+/- 5.0%), respectively; the hazard ratio was 0.84 (95% confidence
interval, 0.40-1.80). Patients with HOX11-high expression and those with SIL-TAL 
fusion had low levels of residual disease at the end of induction and a favorable
prognosis: the 3-year EFS rate was 83.3% (+/- 8.5%) and 75.3% (+/- 12.6%),
respectively. The results obtained in HOX11L2/t(5;14) patients in this study do
not confirm the unfavorable prognosis reported in previous studies.

PMID: 14504110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Leukemia. 2003 Sep;17(9):1851-7.

t(5;14)/HOX11L2-positive T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A collaborative
study of the Groupe Français de Cytogénétique Hématologique (GFCH).

Berger R(1), Dastugue N, Busson M, Van Den Akker J, Pérot C, Ballerini P,
Hagemeijer A, Michaux L, Charrin C, Pages MP, Mugneret F, Andrieux J, Talmant P, 
Hélias C, Mauvieux L, Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Mozziconacci MJ, Cornillet-Lefebvre
P, Radford I, Asnafi V, Bilhou-Nabera C, Nguyen Khac F, Léonard C, Speleman F,
Poppe B, Bastard C, Taviaux S, Quilichini B, Herens C, Grégoire MJ, Cavé H,
Bernard OA; Groupe Français de Cytogénétique Hématologique (GFCH).

Author information: 
(1)EMI 0210, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

To accurately estimate the incidence of HOX11L2 expression, and determine the
associated cytogenetic features, in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), 
the Groupe Français de Cytogénétique Hématologique (GFCH) carried out a
retrospective study of both childhood and adult patients. In total, 364 patients 
were included (211 children </=15 years and 153 adults), and 67 (18.5%) [47
children (22.4%) and 20 adults (13.1%)] were shown to either harbor the
t(5;14)q35;q32) translocation or express the HOX11L2 gene or both. Most of the
common hematological parameters did not show significant differences within
positive and negative populations, whereas the incidence of CD1a+/CD10+ and
cytoplasmic CD3+ patients was significantly higher in positive than in negative
children. Out of the 63 positive patients investigated by conventional
cytogenetics, 32 exhibited normal karyotype, whereas the others 31 showed clonal 
chromosome abnormalities, which did not include classical T-ALL specific
translocations. Involvement of the RANBP17/HOX11L2 locus was ascertained by
fluorescence in situ hybridization in six variant or alternative (three-way
translocation or cytogenetic partner other than 14q32) translocations out of the 
223 patients. Our results also show that HOX11L2 expression essentially occurs as
a result of a 5q35 rearrangement, but is not associated with another identified
T-ALL specific recurrent genetic abnormality, such as SIL-TAL fusion or HOX11
expression.

PMID: 12970786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 4;22(38):5995-6004.

Catalytic-dependent and -independent roles of SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase in
interleukin-3 signaling.

Yu WM(1), Hawley TS, Hawley RG, Qu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis, Jerome H Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical
Sciences, American Red Cross, 15601 Crabbs Branch Way, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells, however,
the function of SHP-2 in hematopoietic cell signaling is not well understood.
Here we focus on the role of SHP-2 phosphatase in the signal transduction of
interleukin (IL)-3, a cytokine involved in hematopoietic cell survival,
proliferation, and differentiation. We established immortalized SHP-2(-/-)
hematopoietic cell pools and showed that IL-3-induced proliferative response was 
diminished in SHP-2(-/-) cells. Moreover, inhibition of the catalytic activity of
SHP-2 in wild-type (WT) bone marrow hematopoietic progenitor cells and Ba/F3
cells by overexpression of catalytically inactive SHP-2 mutant suppressed their
differentiative and proliferative responses to IL-3, demonstrating an important
positive role for SHP-2 in IL-3 signal transduction. Further biochemical analyses
revealed that IL-3-induced Jak/Stat, Erk, and PI3 kinase pathways in SHP-2(-/-)
cells were impaired and reintroduction of WT SHP-2 into mutant cells partially
restored IL-3 signaling. Interestingly, in catalytically inactive
SHP-2-overexpressing Ba/F3 cells, although IL-3-induced activation of Jak2 and
Erk kinases was reduced and shortened, PI3 kinase activation remained unaltered. 
Taken together, these results suggest that SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase plays
multiple roles in IL-3 signal transduction, functioning in both
catalytic-dependent and -independent manners in the Jak/Stat, Erk, and PI3 kinase
pathways.

PMID: 12955078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Science. 2003 Jul 18;301(5631):363-7.

Hox10 and Hox11 genes are required to globally pattern the mammalian skeleton.

Wellik DM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112, USA.

Mice in which all members of the Hox10 or Hox11 paralogous group are disrupted
provide evidence that these Hox genes are involved in global patterning of the
axial and appendicular skeleton. In the absence of Hox10 function, no lumbar
vertebrae are formed. Instead, ribs project from all posterior vertebrae,
extending caudally from the last thoracic vertebrae to beyond the sacral region. 
In the absence of Hox11 function, sacral vertebrae are not formed and instead
these vertebrae assume a lumbar identity. The redundancy among these paralogous
family members is so great that this global aspect of Hox patterning is not
apparent in mice that are mutant for five of the six paralogous alleles.

PMID: 12869760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Leukemia. 2003 May;17(5):887-93.

Expression of HOX11 in childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukaemia can
occur in the absence of cytogenetic aberration at 10q24: a study from the
Children's Cancer Group (CCG).

Kees UR(1), Heerema NA, Kumar R, Watt PM, Baker DL, La MK, Uckun FM, Sather HN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, The University of
Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

Clonal genetic aberrations in tumour cells provide critical information for the
development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for patients. In
paediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) chromosomal
translocations are present in 30-35% of cases. HOX11 and the closely related
HOX11L2 genes play a key role in T-ALL. HOX11 is aberrantly activated by either
of the two chromosomal translocations, t(7;10) and t(10;14). In this study, HOX11
expression levels were measured by real-time quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction. We show that leukaemic blasts from 15/76 (19.7%)
paediatric T-ALL patients expressed the HOX11 gene at high level and 22/76
(28.9%) at low level, yet the reported frequency for chromosomal rearrangement of
10q24 is 4-7%. Direct cytogenetic analysis revealed that only 2/16 specimens that
showed HOX11 expression exhibited abnor-malities at 10q24. These results confirm 
and extend our previously published findings, and implicate mechanisms other than
gross chromosomal translocations for the deregulation of HOX11. Analysis of
clinical outcome for the whole study group showed a trend for better outcome for 
patients with leukaemic blasts expressing HOX11 at high level. A statistically
significant difference in clinical outcome was found in a subgroup of 20 patients
treated for high-risk disease on CCG-1901 from the Children's Cancer Group, where
HOX11 expression in leukaemic blasts conferred a prognostic advantage (P=0.01).

PMID: 12750702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Genomics. 2003 Mar 3;4(1):9. Epub 2003 Mar 3.

Refined physical map of the human PAX2/HOX11/NFKB2 cancer gene region at 10q24
and relocalization of the HPV6AI1 viral integration site to 14q13.3-q21.1.

Gough SM(1), McDonald M, Chen XN, Korenberg JR, Neri A, Kahn T, Eccles MR, Morris
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Research Group, Christchurch School of Medicine & Health
Sciences, Christchurch, New Zealand. sheryl.gough@chmeds.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: Chromosome band 10q24 is a gene-rich domain and host to a number of
cancer, developmental, and neurological genes. Recurring translocations,
deletions and mutations involving this chromosome band have been observed in
different human cancers and other disease conditions, but the precise
identification of breakpoint sites, and detailed characterization of the genetic 
basis and mechanisms which underlie many of these rearrangements has yet to be
resolved. Towards this end it is vital to establish a definitive genetic map of
this region, which to date has shown considerable volatility through time in
published works of scientific journals, within different builds of the same
international genomic database, and across the differently constructed databases.
RESULTS: Using a combination of chromosome and interphase fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH), BAC end-sequencing and genomic database analysis we present
a physical map showing that the order and chromosomal orientation of selected
genes within 10q24 is CEN-CYP2C9-PAX2-HOX11-NFKB2-TEL. Our analysis has resolved 
the orientation of an otherwise dynamically evolving assembly of larger contigs
upstream of this region, and in so doing verifies the order and orientation of a 
further 9 cancer-related genes and GOT1. This study further shows that the
previously reported human papillomavirus type 6a DNA integration site HPV6AI1
does not map to 10q24, but that it maps at the interface of chromosome bands
14q13.3-q21.1.
CONCLUSIONS: This revised map will allow more precise localization of chromosome 
rearrangements involving chromosome band 10q24, and will serve as a useful
baseline to better understand the molecular aetiology of chromosomal instability 
in this region. In particular, the relocation of HPV6AI1 is important to report
because this HPV6a integration site, originally isolated from a tonsillar
carcinoma, was shown to be rearranged in other HPV6a-related malignancies,
including 2 of 25 genital condylomas, and 2 of 7 head and neck tumors tested. Our
finding shifts the focus of this genomic interest from 10q24 to the chromosome 14
site.

PMCID: PMC153515
PMID: 12697057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mech Dev. 2003 Apr;120(4):429-40.

Early steps in the evolution of multicellularity: deep structural and functional 
homologies among homeobox genes in sponges and higher metazoans.

Coutinho CC(1), Fonseca RN, Mansure JJ, Borojevic R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Embryonic Development, Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro, 21941-970 Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
ccoutinho@hotmail.com

The sponge homeobox gene EmH-3 had not been attributed to any homeobox family.
Comparative promoter and homeodomain sequence analyses suggest that it is related
to the Hox11 gene, which belongs to the Tlx homeobox family. Hox11 is highly
expressed in proliferating progenitor cells, but expression is downregulated
during cell differentiation. Using reporter gene methodology, we monitored
function of the sponge EmH-3 promoter transfected into human erythroleukemia K562
cells. These cells express the Tlx/Hox11 gene constitutively, and downregulate
its expression upon differentiation. The same pattern of expression and
downregulation was observed for the sponge reporter construct. We propose that
Tlx/Hox11 genes have structural and functional homologies conserved in
phylogenetically distant groups, that represent a deep homology in the regulation
of cell proliferation, commitment and differentiation.

PMID: 12676321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 May;37(1):84-91.

Activation of HOX11L2 by juxtaposition with 3'-BCL11B in an acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cell line (HPB-ALL) with t(5;14)(q35;q32.2).

MacLeod RA(1), Nagel S, Kaufmann M, Janssen JW, Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ, German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. rml@dsmz.de

Cytogenetic analysis of a pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
cell line (HPB-ALL) revealed the cryptic t(5;14)(q35;q32.2), recently found in
15-20% pediatric T-ALL patients, with 5q35 and 14q32.2 breakpoints at 5'-HOX11L2 
and 3'-BCL11B, respectively. Expression of both BCL11B, which is hematologically 
restricted to T cells, and HOX11L2 was detected, whereas adjacent genes at 5q35
(RANBP17) and 14q32 (VRK1, HSU88895) were not dysregulated. Apparently,
t(5;14)(q35;q32.2) serves to activate HOX11L2 by juxtaposition with elements
downstream of BCL11B, implying a novel dysregulatory mechanism comparable to
TCRA/D or IGH juxtaposition. As well as providing molecular cytogenetic
documentation of t(5;14) ALL, this report validates HPB-ALL cells for
investigating this important new disease entity in vitro.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12661009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4966-74. Epub 2003 Feb 13.

Specific homeodomain-DNA interactions are required for HOX11-mediated
transformation.

Owens BM(1), Zhu YX, Suen TC, Wang PX, Greenblatt JF, Goss PE, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis, Holland Laboratory, American Red Cross,
Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

HOX11 encodes a homeodomain protein that is aberrantly expressed in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia as a consequence of the t(10;14) and t(7;10) chromosomal
translocations. We previously reported that HOX11 immortalizes murine
hematopoietic progenitors and induces pre-T-cell tumors in mice after long
latency. It has been demonstrated in a number of studies that HOX11, similar to
other homeodomain proteins, binds DNA and transactivates transcription. These
findings suggest that translocation-activated HOX11 functions as an oncogenic
transcription factor. Here we report that HOX11 represses transcription through
both TATA-containing and TATA-less promoters. Interestingly, transcriptional
repression by HOX11 is independent of its DNA binding capability. Moreover, a
systematic mutational analysis indicated that repressor activity was separable
from immortalizing function, which requires certain residues within the HOX11
homeodomain that make base-specific or phosphate-backbone contacts with DNA. We
further showed that the pathologic action of HOX11 involves DNA binding-dependent
transcriptional pathways that are distinct from those controlling expression of a
chromosomal target gene (Aldh-1). We conclude that dysregulated expression of a
particular set of downstream target genes by DNA binding via the homeodomain is
of central importance for leukemia initiation mediated by HOX11.

PMID: 12586625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Feb 15;117A(1):18-20.

Exclusion of RNX as a major gene in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome
(CCHS, Ondine's curse).

Amiel J(1), Pelet A, Trang H, de Pontual L, Simonneau M, Munnich A, Gaultier C,
Lyonnet S.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique et INSERM U-393, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades,
Paris, France. amiel@necker.fr

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a rare condition for which 
segregation analyses have suggested genetic factors. The respiratory phenotype of
Rnx knock-out mice together with the Rnx expression at the brainstem level
prompted us to consider the RNX gene as a candidate for CCHS in human. The
screening of the RNX gene in a series of 25 patients with CCHS did not reveal any
significant nucleotide variation. We therefore conclude that RNX is not a major
gene for CCHS in human.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12548735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Leukemia. 2002 Dec;16(12):2417-22.

High incidence of Hox11L2 expression in children with T-ALL.

Mauvieux L(1), Leymarie V, Helias C, Perrusson N, Falkenrodt A, Lioure B, Lutz P,
Lessard M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
France.

The orphan homeobox gene HOX11L2 was previously found to be transcriptionally
activated as a result of the t(5;14)(q35;q32) translocation in three T-ALL cases.
We now tested by RT-PCR Hox11L2 expression in 23 consecutive cases of T-ALL (15
children aged 0.8-14 years, eight adults aged 17-55 years) and as control 13
B-ALL patients from a single institution. Hox11L2 expression was undetectable in 
all patients with B-ALL, nor in adults with T-ALL. Nine children (60% of the
cases), all boys, expressed Hox11L2. Blast cells from most of the latter patients
carried surface CD1a, CD10 and not CD34 antigens, in contrast to the other
children. FISH, M-FISH and IPM-FISH analysis failed to detect a t(5;14)(q35;q32) 
in one of them, which suggests a possible distinct genetic mechanism in Hox11L2
expression induction. Hence, Hox11L2 expression seems to be the most frequent
abnormality in childhood T-ALL to date, comparable to the t(12;21) in child
B-ALL.

PMID: 12454747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):277-88.

Anteroposterior axis formation in Xenopus limb bud recombinants: a model of
pattern formation during limb regeneration.

Yokoyama H(1), Tamura K, Ide H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aobayama, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.
yokoyama@mail.ac.jp

We previously showed that recombinant limb buds with dissociated and reaggregated
mesenchyme develop more than 30 digits in Xenopus laevis, which exhibits
different capacities for limb regeneration at different developmental stages
(Yokoyama et al. [1998] Dev Biol 196:1-10). Cell-cell contact among anterior- and
posterior-derived mesenchymal cells is required for anteroposterior (AP) axis
formation of recombinant limbs in an intercalary manner. However, whether one-way
induction from posterior cells to anterior cells as proposed by the polarizing
zone model or interactions between anterior and posterior cells evoke the AP axis
formation in recombinant limbs remains unclear. In this study, we found, by a
combination of X-ray irradiation and a recombinant limb technique, that not
one-way induction but interactions between anterior and posterior cells
accompanied by cell contribution are indispensable for AP axis formation in
recombinant limbs. Shh was expressed in posterior-derived not anterior-derived
cells. We propose that the recombinant limb is an excellent model for examining
the axis formation mechanism in regenerating limbs because, as in recombinant
limbs, cell-cell contact among cells derived from different positions of an
amputation plane occurs in the blastema of regenerating limbs.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 22;113(2):178-82.

Mutational analysis of the RNX gene in congenital central hypoventilation
syndrome.

Matera I(1), Bachetti T, Cinti R, Lerone M, Gagliardi L, Morandi F, Motta M,
Mosca F, Ottonello G, Piumelli R, Schober JG, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a rare syndrome
characterized by failure of autonomic respiratory control, often presenting with 
other dysfunctions of the autonomic nervous system. Segregation analysis
suggested a complex model of inheritance with a major locus involved. Disruption 
of the Rnx gene, a member of the Hox11 family of homeobox genes, in embryonic
stem cells produced mice showing a phenotype similar to CCHS. Based on this
observation, we have carried out mutation screening of the RNX gene in a set of
13 patients affected with CCHS, 2 of whom showing association with Hirschsprung
disease. Single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing
of the whole coding portion of the RNX gene and of 1,311 bp of 5' flanking region
were performed. No sequence variant was identified, with the exception of a
private nucleotide change at position -874 bp from the ATG codon in two siblings 
affected with isolated CCHS. A functional test, performed by using the luciferase
gene reporter system, has not shown any significant difference in the activity of
the promoter region carrying this latter nucleotide change with respect to the
wild-type allele. We conclude that RNX, and presumably its expression, are not
altered in our index cases of CCHS.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12407709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Leukemia. 2002 Nov;16(11):2205-12.

Disruption of the RanBP17/Hox11L2 region by recombination with the TCRdelta locus
in acute lymphoblastic leukemias with t(5;14)(q34;q11).

Hansen-Hagge TE(1), Schäfer M, Kiyoi H, Morris SW, Whitlock JA, Koch P, Bohlmann 
I, Mahotka C, Bartram CR, Janssen JW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ulm, Section of Molecular Biology, Department of Pediatrics II, 
Germany.

The t(5;14)(q33-34;q11) translocation constitutes a recurrent rearrangement in
acute lymphoblastic leukemia involving the T cell receptor (TCR) delta locus on
chromosome 14. Breakpoint sequences of the derivative chromosome 5 were isolated 
by application of a ligation-mediated PCR technique using TCR delta-specific
primers to amplify genomic DNA from the leukemic cells of a patient with t(5;14).
Through exon trap analysis, we identified various putative exons of the
chromosome 5 target gene of the translocation; compilation of sequence
information of trapped exons and available expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from
the GenBank database allowed us to assemble 1.2 kb of the cDNA. Full-length cDNAs
were isolated from a human testis cDNA library and sequence analysis predicted a 
putative Ran binding protein, a novel member of the importin-beta superfamily of 
nuclear transport receptors, called RanBP17. The t(5;14) breakpoint maps to the
3' coding region of the gene. The breakpoint of a second t(5;14) positive patient
was mapped about 8 kb downstream of the most 3' RanBP17 exon and 2 kb upstream of
the first exon of the orphan homeobox gene, Hox11L2. In both cases TCR delta
enhancer sequences are juxtaposed downstream of the truncated or intact RanBP17
gene, respectively on the derivative chromosome.

PMID: 12399963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2002 Nov 15;100(10):3828-31. Epub 2002 Jul 5.

Immortalization of yolk sac-derived precursor cells.

Yu WM(1), Hawley TS, Hawley RG, Qu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoiesis and the Flow Cytometry Facility, Jerome H. Holland
Laboratory for the Biomedical Sciences, American Red Cross, Rockville, MD 20855, 
USA.

Hematopoiesis initiates in the extraembryonic yolk sac. To isolate various types 
of precursor cells from this blood cell-forming tissue, yolk sac cells were
immortalized by retroviral-mediated expression of the HOX11 homeobox-containing
gene. Among the cell lines derived, some were able to spontaneously generate
adherent stromal-like cells capable of taking up acetylated low-density
lipoprotein, and they could be induced to form tubelike structures when cultured 
on Matrigel. Although these cell lines were negative for hematopoietic cell
surface markers, they gave rise to hematopoietic colonies--containing cells
belonging to the monocytic, megakaryocytic, and definitive erythroid
lineages--when plated in methylcellulose medium supplemented with hematopoietic
growth factors. Low amounts of Flk-1 mRNA could be detected in these cells, and
they showed significant responsiveness to vascular endothelial growth factor,
stem cell factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, and interleukin 6. They also
expressed the transcription factors SCL, GATA2, GATA1, PU.1, and c-myb. These
yolk sac-derived cell lines may represent a transitional stage of early
hematopoietic development.

PMID: 12393673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):96-107.

Duplication of the Hoxd11 gene causes alterations in the axial and appendicular
skeleton of the mouse.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5331, USA.

The Hox genes encode a group of transcription factors essential for proper
development of the mouse. Targeted mutation of the Hoxd11 gene causes reduced
male fertility, vertebral transformation, carpal bone fusions, and reductions in 
digit length. A duplication of the Hoxd11 gene was created with the expectation
that the consequences of restricted overexpression in the appropriate cells would
provide further insight into the function of the Hoxd11 gene product. Genetic
assays demonstrated that two tandem copies of Hoxd11 were functionally
indistinguishable from the normal two copies of the gene on separate chromosomes 
with respect to formation of the axial and appendicular skeleton. Extra copies of
Hoxd11 caused an increase in the lengths of some bones of the forelimb autopod
and a decrease in the number of lumbar vertebrae. Further, analysis of the Hoxd11
duplication demonstrated that the Hoxd11 protein can perform some functions
supplied by its paralogue Hoxa11. For example, the defects in forelimb bones are 
corrected when extra copies of Hoxd11 are present in the Hoxa11 homozygous mutant
background. Thus, it appears that Hoxd11 can quantitatively compensate for the
absence of Hoxa11 protein, and therefore Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are functionally
equivalent in the zeugopod. However, extra copies of Hoxd11 did not improve male 
or female fertility in Hoxa11 mutants. Interestingly, the insertion of an
additional Hoxd11 locus into the HoxD complex does not appear to affect the
expression patterns of the neighboring Hoxd10, -d12, or -d13 genes.

PMID: 12217321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mech Dev. 2002 Sep;117(1-2):243-8.

Molecular cloning and developmental expression of Tlx (Hox11) genes in zebrafish 
(Danio rerio).

Langenau DM(1), Palomero T, Kanki JP, Ferrando AA, Zhou Y, Zon LI, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tlx (Hox11) genes are orphan homeobox genes that play critical roles in the
regulation of early developmental processes in vertebrates. Here, we report the
identification and expression patterns of three members of the zebrafish Tlx
family. These genes share similar, but not identical, expression patterns with
other vertebrate Tlx-1 and Tlx-3 genes. Tlx-1 is expressed early in the
developing hindbrain and pharyngeal arches, and later in the putative splenic
primordium. However, unlike its orthologues, zebrafish Tlx-1 is not expressed in 
the cranial sensory ganglia or spinal cord. Two homologues of Tlx-3 were
identified: Tlx-3a and Tlx-3b, which are both expressed in discrete regions of
the developing nervous system, including the cranial sensory ganglia and
Rohon-Beard neurons. However, only Tlx-3a is expressed in the statoacoustic
cranial ganglia, enteric neurons and non-neural tissues such as the fin bud and
pharyngeal arches and Tlx-3b is only expressed in the dorsal root ganglia.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12204264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(3):909-17.

Enforced expression of HOX11 is associated with an immature phenotype in J2E
erythroid cells.

Greene WK(1), Ford J, Dixon D, Tilbrook PA, Watt PM, Klinken SP, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, TVW Telethon Institute
for Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health Research, University of
Western Australia, West Perth, Australia. W.Greene@murdoch.edu.au

The HOX11 gene encodes a homeodomain transcription factor that is essential for
spleen development during embryogenesis. HOX11 is also leukaemogenic, both
through its clinical association with childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia, and its ability to immortalize other haematopoietic cell lineages
experimentally. To examine the pathological role of HOX11 in tumorigenesis, we
constitutively expressed HOX11 cDNA in J2E murine erythroleukaemic cells, which
are capable of terminal differentiation. Enforced HOX11 expression was found to
induce a profound alteration in J2E cellular morphology and differentiation
status. Our analyses revealed that HOX11 produced clones with a preponderance of 
less differentiated cells that were highly adherent to plastic. Morphologically, 
the cells overexpressing HOX11 were larger and had decreased globin levels, as
well as a reduction in haemoglobin synthesis in response to erythropoietin (EPO).
Immunocytochemical analysis confirmed the immature erythroid phenotype imposed by
HOX11, with clones transfected with HOX11 demonstrating expression of the c-Kit
stem cell marker, while retaining EPO receptor expression. Taken together, these 
results show that HOX11 alters erythroid differentiation, favouring a less mature
progenitor-like stage. This supports the notion that disrupted haematopoietic
cell differentiation is responsible for pre-leukaemic immortalization by the
HOX11 oncoprotein.

PMID: 12181065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. DNA Seq. 2002 Apr;13(2):77-83.

Phylogenetic analysis of Hoxa 11 sequences reveals absence of transposable
elements, conservation of transcription factor binding sites, and suggests
antisense coding function.

Bodenmiller DM(1), Baxter CS, Hansen DV, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, TCHRF
3007, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Nine thousand and eighty-eight base pairs of the chicken Hoxa 11 gene, including 
8470 bases 5' of the translation start site were sequenced, and the
characteristics of the upstream sequence investigated. Consistent with previous
findings that middle repetitive elements are rare in the HoxA cluster, no
repetitive elements were found other than simple oligonucleotide repeats.
Multiple and pairwise alignments of the chicken upstream sequence with its human 
and mouse orthologs revealed multiple regions of 80% or higher homology across
species. For the chicken, these regions were separated by sequences with no
significant homology to human, mouse, or in most cases any other Genbank
sequences. Selective clustering of transcription factor binding motifs was found 
to occur within the conserved homologous regions, suggesting evolutionary
conservation of critical regulatory sequences. Of particular interest, seven
conserved Cdx binding sites were found in the Hoxa 11 promoter, suggesting
regulation by a non-clustered Caudal homeobox gene. Previous analysis of the
mouse and human Hoxa 11 genes found a conserved antisense transcript, of unknown 
function. The chicken Hoxa 11 antisense strand included a conserved open reading 
frame capable of encoding 168 amino acids. Comparison of this region in mouse and
chicken showed seven insertion/deletions, with each a multiple of three bases,
thereby preserving open reading frame.

PMID: 12180349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Protein Expr Purif. 2002 Jul;25(2):313-8.

Expression and purification of the human homeodomain oncoprotein HOX11.

Heidari M(1), Rice KL, Kees UR, Greene WK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Western Australian Biomedical 
Research Institute, Murdoch University, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia.

HOX11 is a transcription factor belonging to the homeodomain family that is
essential for spleen development during embryogenesis. It is also tumorigenic,
being associated with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. In order
to understand the functional role of HOX11 in both normal development and
malignancy, protein-DNA and protein-protein interaction studies involving this
factor are required. Such investigations would be facilitated by the availability
of significant amounts of purified HOX11 protein. However, expression of
full-length HOX11 in bacteria has been reported to be problematic owing to fusion
protein instability. Here, we report the purification of human HOX11 expressed in
Escherichia coli as a soluble and functional glutathione S-transferase (GST)
fusion protein. In addition, a mutant version of HOX11 was produced (HOX11 Delta 
H3) which lacked the DNA-recognition helix (helix 3) of the homeodomain. Through 
a single purification procedure using glutathione-Sepharose, 2mg of the
recombinant proteins were obtained per liter of bacterial culture. Notably,
recombinant GST-HOX11 fusion proteins had a markedly higher stability when
purified at low temperature (4 degrees C). Purification to near-homogeneity was
achieved as judged by SDS-PAGE and the purified proteins were recognized by
anti-HOX11 antibodies. The biological activity of the recombinant protein was
verified by the specific binding of GST-HOX11, but not GST-HOX11 Delta H3, to DNA
containing consensus HOX11 recognition sites.

PMID: 12135565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Blood. 2002 Aug 1;100(3):991-7.

HOX11L2 expression defines a clinical subtype of pediatric T-ALL associated with 
poor prognosis.

Ballerini P(1), Blaise A, Busson-Le Coniat M, Su XY, Zucman-Rossi J, Adam M, van 
den Akker J, Perot C, Pellegrino B, Landman-Parker J, Douay L, Berger R, Bernard 
OA.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France.
paola.ballerini@trs.ap-hop-paris.fr

The most frequent oncogenic activation events characterized in childhood T acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) result in the transcriptional activation of genes 
coding for transcription factors. The main genes are TAL1/SCL, a member of the
basic region helix-loop-helix gene family, and HOX11L2, a member of the
homeobox-containing protein family. To gain insight into the pathogenesis of this
type of hematologic malignancy, we analyzed 28 T-ALL samples. SIL-TAL1/SCL fusion
was detected in 6 patients; expression of HOX11L2 was observed in 6 patients and 
of HOX11 in 3 patients. With one exception, these activations did not occur
simultaneously in the same patients, and they allowed the subclassification of
50% of the patients. SIL-TAL1 fusion was detected in association with HOX11
expression in one patient and with a t(8;14) (q24;q11) in another. High
expression of LYL1, LMO2, or TAL1 was observed mainly in samples negative for
HOX11L2 expression. HOX11L1 and HOX11 expression were observed in one instance
each, in the absence of detectable chromosomal abnormality of their respective
loci, on chromosomes 2 and 10, respectively. HOX11L2 expression was associated
with a chromosome 5q abnormality, the location of the HOX11L2 locus in each case 
tested. Finally, our data show that HOX11L2 expression was a suitable marker for 
minimal residual disease follow-up and was significantly associated with relapse 
(P =.02).

PMID: 12130513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Cell. 2002 Feb;1(1):75-87.

Gene expression signatures define novel oncogenic pathways in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ferrando AA(1), Neuberg DS, Staunton J, Loh ML, Huard C, Raimondi SC, Behm FG,
Pui CH, Downing JR, Gilliland DG, Lander ES, Golub TR, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2002 Mar;1(2):109-10.

Human T cell leukemias can arise from oncogenes activated by specific chromosomal
translocations involving the T cell receptor genes. Here we show that five
different T cell oncogenes (HOX11, TAL1, LYL1, LMO1, and LMO2) are often
aberrantly expressed in the absence of chromosomal abnormalities. Using
oligonucleotide microarrays, we identified several gene expression signatures
that were indicative of leukemic arrest at specific stages of normal thymocyte
development: LYL1+ signature (pro-T), HOX11+ (early cortical thymocyte), and
TAL1+ (late cortical thymocyte). Hierarchical clustering analysis of gene
expression signatures grouped samples according to their shared oncogenic
pathways and identified HOX11L2 activation as a novel event in T cell
leukemogenesis. These findings have clinical importance, since HOX11 activation
is significantly associated with a favorable prognosis, while expression of TAL1,
LYL1, or, surprisingly, HOX11L2 confers a much worse response to treatment. Our
results illustrate the power of gene expression profiles to elucidate
transformation pathways relevant to human leukemia.

PMID: 12086890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2002 Apr;196(4):241-6.

Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: a novel mutation of the RET gene in 
an isolated case.

Kanai M(1), Numakura C, Sasaki A, Shirahata E, Akaba K, Hashimoto M, Hasegawa H, 
Shirasawa S, Hayasaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Recently, a few genetic abnormalities were identified in congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS or Ondine's curse). CCHS is often associated with 
other neurocristopathies, especially with Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR).
Mutations of the genes involved in the receptor tyrosine kinase RET (REarranged
during Transfection) (RET)-glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
and/or endothelin 3 (EDN3)-endothelin receptor-B (EDNRB) signaling pathway have
been found in some of HSCR patients. In this study, we analyzed candidates for
HSCR, namely the RET, GDNF, EDN3 and EDNRB genes in three isolated CCHS patients 
to confirm the hypothesis that some CCHS patients have a common genetic
abnormality with patients having HSCR or other neurocristopathies. We found a
novel R114H mutation of the RET gene in one patient. The R114H mutation is
unlikely to be a polymorphism and appears to be associated with CCHS. In
addition, we also examined the HOX11L2 (RNX) gene, for which knock-out mice
showed CCHS-like syndrome in these isolated CCHS patients and did not detected
any mutation. Further cases should be analyzed for more candidates to clarify the
pathophysiology of CCHS.

PMID: 12086152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Jul;10(1):101-6.

HOX11L1: a promoter study to evaluate possible expression defects in intestinal
motility disorders.

Fava M(1), Borghini S, Cinti R, Cusano R, Seri M, Lerone M, De Giorgio R,
Stanghellini V, Martucciello G, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

Intestinal Neuronal Dysplasia (IND) is a congenital disorder characterized by
intestinal motility defects associated with hyperplasia of enteric ganglia. A
phenotype resembling human IND has been observed in mice knocked-out for a member
of the Hox11 homeobox gene family, Hox11l1, suggesting that the human homologue
of this gene could be responsible for congenital disorders of intestinal
innervation. However, previous mutation analysis of the coding sequence of the
HOX11L1 gene in patients affected with IND detected neither mutations nor other
nucleotide variants. In the present work, a detailed study of the non coding
promoter region of this gene was undertaken in patients affected with IND, with
Hirschsprung associated IND and with neurogenic chronic intestinal
pseudo-obstruction. No alterations potentially impairing expression of HOX11L1,
such as nucleotide variants, small deletions or cytogenetic alterations, could be
identified thus further excluding the direct involvement of this gene in the
pathogenesis of human intestinal motility disorders.

PMID: 12060859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 11;99(12):8090-5.

Hoxa 11 is upstream of Integrin alpha8 expression in the developing kidney.

Valerius MT(1), Patterson LT, Feng Y, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Mutation of the functionally redundant Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 genes gives absent or
rudimentary kidneys resulting from a dramatic reduction of the growth and
branching of the ureteric bud. To understand better the molecular mechanisms of
Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 function in kidney development, it is necessary to identify the
downstream target genes regulated by their encoded transcription factors. To this
end, we conducted a screen for Hoxa 11-responsive genes in two kidney cell lines.
HEK293 cells, which usually do not express Hoxa 11, were modified to allow
inducible Hoxa 11 expression. The mK10 cells, derived specifically for this study
from Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 double-mutant mice, were also modified to give cell
populations with and without Hoxa 11 expression. Differential display, Gene
Discovery Arrays, and Affymetrix genechip probe arrays were used to screen for
genes up- or down-regulated by Hoxa 11. Nine genes, PDGF A, Cathepsin L, annexin 
A1, Mm.112139, Est2 repressor factor, NrCAM, ZNF192, integrin-associated protein,
and GCM1, showed reproducible 3-fold or smaller changes in gene expression in
response to Hoxa 11. One gene, the Integrin alpha8, was up-regulated
approximately 20-fold after Hoxa 11 expression. The Integrin alpha8 gene is
expressed together with Hoxa 11 in metanephric mesenchyme cells, and mutation of 
Integrin alpha8 gives a bud-branching morphogenesis defect very similar to that
observed in Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 mutant mice. In situ hybridizations showed a dramatic
regional reduction in Integrin alpha8 expression in the developing kidneys of
Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 mutant mice. This work suggests that the Integrin alpha8 gene may
be a major effector of Hoxa 11/Hoxd 11 function in the developing kidney.

PMCID: PMC123025
PMID: 12060755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 May 31;294(1):23-34.

A complex containing PBX2 contributes to activation of the proto-oncogene HOX11.

Brake RL(1), Kees UR, Watt PM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, Telethon Institute for
Child Health Research and Center for Child Health Research, The University of
Western Australia, PO Box 855, West Perth, WA 6872, Australia.
rachaelb@ichr.uwa.edu.au

Ectopic expression of the homeobox gene HOX11 is associated with a significant
proportion of childhood T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemias (T-ALLs). We
hypothesise that one mechanism of gene deregulation involves overcoming the
silencing mechanism(s) of gene expression present in normal cells. Here, we
describe a search for trans-acting factors that control transcriptional activity 
from a distal 5' region of the HOX11 promoter. We have identified a region of
this promoter which contributes significantly to HOX11 activation and two
distinct regulatory elements are involved. First, a PBX2 Regulatory Element
PRE-1048 has been identified which contains a novel DNA-binding sequence and
mediates significant activation of the HOX11 gene in K562 cells. This is the
first report of a homeobox gene being specifically regulated by PBX2 and the
second report of a vertebrate homeobox target gene of a PBX protein. The PREP1
protein was also shown to be part of the PRE-1048-binding complex. The other
regulatory element we describe here RE-1019 contains little sequence conservation
to known transcription control elements. It appears that this element is a novel 
sequence that binds an as yet unidentified factor, mediating significant
activation of the HOX11 gene in K562 cells. This is the first detailed report of 
elements that mediate regulation of the proto-oncogene HOX11.

PMID: 12054735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 1;16(11):1423-32.

Hox11 paralogous genes are essential for metanephric kidney induction.

Wellik DM(1), Hawkes PJ, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331, USA.

The mammalian Hox complex is divided into four linkage groups containing 13 sets 
of paralogous genes. These paralogous genes have retained functional redundancy
during evolution. For this reason, loss of only one or two Hox genes within a
paralogous group often results in incompletely penetrant phenotypes which are
difficult to interpret by molecular analysis. For example, mice individually
mutant for Hoxa11 or Hoxd11 show no discernible kidney abnormalities.
Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants, however, demonstrate hypoplasia of the kidneys. As 
described in this study, removal of the last Hox11 paralogous member, Hoxc11,
results in the complete loss of metanephric kidney induction. In these triple
mutants, the metanephric blastema condenses, and expression of early patterning
genes, Pax2 and Wt1, is unperturbed. Eya1 expression is also intact. Six2
expression, however, is absent, as is expression of the inducing growth factor,
Gdnf. In the absence of Gdnf, ureteric bud formation is not initiated. Molecular 
analysis of this phenotype demonstrates that Hox11 control of early metanephric
induction is accomplished by the interaction of Hox11 genes with the pax-eya-six 
regulatory cascade, a pathway that may be used by Hox genes more generally for
the induction of multiple structures along the anteroposterior axis.

PMCID: PMC186320
PMID: 12050119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Genes Dev. 2002 May 15;16(10):1220-33.

Proper development of relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 interneurons
requires homeobox genes Rnx/Tlx-3 and Tlx-1.

Qian Y(1), Shirasawa S, Chen CL, Cheng L, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Trigeminal nuclei and the dorsal spinal cord are first-order relay stations for
processing somatic sensory information such as touch, pain, and temperature. The 
origins and development of these neurons are poorly understood. Here we show that
relay somatic sensory neurons and D2/D4 dorsal interneurons likely derive from
Mash1-positive neural precursors, and depend on two related homeobox genes, Rnx
and Tlx-1, for proper formation. Rnx and Tlx-1 maintain expression of Drg11, a
homeobox gene critical for the development of pain circuitry, and are essential
for the ingrowth of trkA+ nociceptive/thermoceptive sensory afferents to their
central targets. We showed previously that Rnx is necessary for proper formation 
of the nucleus of solitary tract, the target for visceral sensory afferents.
Together, our studies demonstrate a central role for Rnx and Tlx-1 in the
development of two major classes of relay sensory neurons, somatic and visceral.

PMCID: PMC186282
PMID: 12023301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Comp Neurol. 2002 Jun 24;448(2):138-49.

Onset of Tlx-3 expression in the chick cerebellar cortex correlates with the
morphological development of fissures and delineates a posterior transverse
boundary.

Logan C(1), Millar C, Bharadia V, Rouleau K.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary AB T2N 4N1, Canada.
clogan@ucalgary.ca

Recent studies have shown that the mammalian cerebellar cortex can be subdivided 
into a reproducible array of zones and stripes. In particular, discontinuous
patterns of gene expression together with mutational analysis suggest that there 
are at least four distinct transverse zones along the rostrocaudal axis in mouse:
the anterior zone (lobules I-V), the central zone (lobules VI and VII), the
posterior zone (lobules VIII and IX), and the nodular zone (lobule X). Here we
show that the divergent homeobox-containing transcription factor, Tlx- 3 (also
known as Hox11L2 or Rnx) is transiently expressed in external granule cells in a 
distinct transverse domain of the developing chick cerebellar cortex. Expression 
is first detected at Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stage 35. Interestingly, Tlx-3
mRNA expression is initially confined to, and coincident with, the morphological 
development of fissures. Slightly later, at HH stage 38, expression extends
throughout the developing external granular layer (EGL) of lobules I-IXab.
Notably, no Tlx-3 expression was detected in lobules IXc and X at any
developmental time point examined. Expression is noticeably stronger in
nonproliferating cells located in the deep layer of the EGL. Tlx-3 expression is 
downregulated as granule cells migrate inward to form the internal granule layer 
and is undetectable shortly after birth. These results suggest that Tlx-3 is
expressed as granule cells become postmitotic and suggest that Tlx-3 may play a
role in the differentiation of distinct neuronal populations in the cerebellum.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12012426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 Jan;46(1):185-91.

A nested deletion approach to generate Cre deleter mice with progressive Hox
profiles.

Hérault Y(1), Kmita M, Sawaya CC, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

In mice, the loxP/Cre recombinase-dependent system of recombination offers
powerful possibilities for engineering genetic configurations of interest. This
system can also be advantageously used for conditional mutagenesis in vivo,
whenever such an approach is required due to deleterious effects of either one
mutation, or a combination thereof. Here, we report on the production of an
allelic series of insertions of a Hoxd11/Cre fusion transgene at different
positions within the HoxD complex, in order to produce the CRE recombinase with a
'Hox profile' progressively more extended. We used the R26R (R26R) reporter mouse
line to functionally assess the distribution and efficiency of the CRE enzyme and
discuss the usefulness of these various lines as deleter strains.

PMID: 11902682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Leukemia. 2001 Oct;15(10):1495-504.

A new recurrent and specific cryptic translocation, t(5;14)(q35;q32), is
associated with expression of the Hox11L2 gene in T acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Bernard OA(1), Busson-LeConiat M, Ballerini P, Mauchauffé M, Della Valle V, Monni
R, Nguyen Khac F, Mercher T, Penard-Lacronique V, Pasturaud P, Gressin L, Heilig 
R, Daniel MT, Lessard M, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)U434 INSERM-CEPH and SD401 No. 434 CNRS, Paris, France.

FISH identified a cryptic t(5;14)(q35;q32) in T acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL), whereas it was not observed in B ALL samples. This translocation is
present in five out of 23 (22%) children and adolescents with T ALL tested.
RanBP17, a gene coding for a member of the importin beta protein family, and
Hox11Like2, an orphan homeobox gene were mapped close to the chromosome 5
breakpoints and CTIP2, which is highly expressed during normal T cell
differentiation, was localized in the vicinity of the chromosome 14 breakpoints. 
The Hox11L2 gene was found to be transcriptionally activated as a result of the
translocation, probably under the influence of CTIP2 transcriptional regulation
elements. These data establish the t(5;14)(q35;q32) as a major abnormality, and
Hox11 family member activation as an important pathway in T ALL leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11587205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Genes Dev. 2001 Oct 1;15(19):2533-45.

Formation of brainstem (nor)adrenergic centers and first-order relay visceral
sensory neurons is dependent on homeodomain protein Rnx/Tlx3.

Qian Y(1), Fritzsch B, Shirasawa S, Chen CL, Choi Y, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Brainstem visceral sensory and (nor)adrenergic neurons play crucial roles in
modulating cardiovascular and respiratory functions. The origins and formation of
these neurons are poorly understood. Here we show that these two classes of
neurons are derived from Mash1-positive precursor cells, and can be prospectively
identified by combinatorial expression of two homeobox genes, Rnx and Phox2
(Phox2a or Phox2b). It was previously shown that Rnx-deficient mice die from
respiratory failure. Here we show that Rnx function is required for formation of 
first-order relay visceral sensory neurons in the brainstem. In addition, as in
Phox2b-deficient mice, the development of most (nor)adrenergic centers is
compromised in Rnx mutants. We also provide genetic evidence to show that Rnx and
Phox2 proteins may function independently to specify the (nor)adrenergic
phenotype. Our studies reveal a surprising ontogenetic relationship between relay
visceral sensory and (nor)adrenergic neurons, and suggest that it may be a common
theme in the developing nervous system that the same set of transcriptional
regulators is associated with formation of multiple components within a neuronal 
network.

PMCID: PMC312792
PMID: 11581159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2001 Aug;129(1):80-4.

Detection of translocations involving the HOX11/TCL3-locus in 10q24 by interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Kahl C(1), Gesk S, Harder L, Harbott J, French L, Deloukas P, Grote W,
Schlegelberger B, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Kiel, Schwanenweg 24, D-24105
Kiel, Germany.

The t(10;14)(q24;q11) and its variant t(7;10)(q35;q24), which are recurrent in
acute T-cell leukemia, lead to activation of the HOX11/TCL3-gene in chromosomal
region 10q24 by juxtaposing this gene to one of the T-cell receptor loci. In the 
present study, we established a diagnostic assay for detecting these
translocations by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). BAC
clones flanking the HOX11/TCL3-locus were obtained from a fingerprinted
BAC-contig of chromosomal region 10q24. BAC clones located proximal and distal of
the HOX11/TCL3-locus were differently labeled and applied to interphase-FISH in
seven normal controls and eight T-cell neoplasms with t(10;14)(q24;q11) or
t(7;10)(q35;q24). In over 1600 nuclei of controls, a considerable split defined
as separation of each one signal for the proximal and distal probe by more than
three times the signal diameter was observed in only one cell. In contrast, all
T-cell neoplasms with t(10;14) or t(7;10) contained at least 47% of nuclei with a
signal split indicating a breakpoint in the HOX11/TCL3-locus. Thus, the
established double-color FISH approach provides a new reliable and routinely
applicable tool for diagnosing breakpoints in the HOX11/TCL3-locus.

PMID: 11520572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 Aug;36(8):1293-6.

Intestinal neuronal dysplasia-like pathology in Ncx/Hox11L.1 gene-deficient mice.

Yamataka A(1), Hatano M, Kobayashi H, Wang K, Miyahara K, Sueyoshi N, Miyano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Ncx/Hox11L.1-deficient (Ncx-/-) mice specifically created by 
the authors had mega-ileo-ceco-colon (mega-ICC) with a caliber change in the
proximal colon. The authors studied the nerve distribution in the bowel of these 
Ncx-/- mice to determine the cause of their bowel dysmotility.
METHODS: Four-week-old Ncx-/- mice (n = 10; 5 with mega-ICC, 5 without mega-ICC) 
were killed and the bowel harvested. Half of each specimen was snap frozen for
AchE and NADPH-diaphorase histochemistry, and the other half were fixed with 10% 
formalin for H&E staining and immunohistochemistry using PGP9.5 antibody (a
marker for neurons), C-kit antibody (a marker for intestinal pacemaker cells),
and stem cell factor antibody (a marker for C-kit ligand). Age-matched wild-type 
normal mice (n = 5) served as controls.
RESULTS: In the ileum, cecum, and proximal colon from all Ncx-/- mice
(irrespective of the association of mega-ICC), typical findings of human
intestinal neuronal dysplasia (IND) ie, obvious hyperganglionosis in neuronal
plexuses on PGP9.5 immunohistochemistry, ectopic ganglia in the mucosal and
muscular layers on AchE histochemistry, and ghostlike ganglia on NADPH-diaphorase
histochemistry were found. Likewise, in normal caliber distal colon from these
mice, the distribution of ganglion cells, C-kit, and stem cell factor was normal.
In control specimens, there was no ectopic ganglia or hyperganglionosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the Ncx/Hox11L.1 gene is required for
the proper innervation of the enteric nervous system in mice, and our deficient
strain may be useful as a model for studying IND in humans.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company.

PMID: 11479879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;92(3-4):358.

Assignment of the human homeobox 11-like 2 gene (HOX11L2) to chromosome
5q34-->q35 by radiation hybrid mapping.

Lee-Kirsch MA(1), Engel K, Paditz E, Rösen-Wolff A, Lee YA, Gahr M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinderheilkunde, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany. lkirsch@rcs.urz.tu-dresden.de

PMID: 11435718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;92(3-4):354-5.

Assignment of the HOX11L2 gene to human chromosome band 5q35.1 and of its murine 
homolog to mouse chromosome bands 11A4-A5 by in situ hybridization.

Cinti R(1), Fava M, Sancandi M, Matera I, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
milonga@tin.it

PMID: 11435716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 3;276(31):29126-33. Epub 2001 Jun 4.

Analysis of the V(D)J recombination efficiency at lymphoid chromosomal
translocation breakpoints.

Raghavan SC(1), Kirsch IR, Lieber MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, 
USA.

Chromosomal translocations and deletions are among the major events that initiate
neoplasia. For lymphoid chromosomal translocations, misrecognition by the RAG
(recombination activating gene) complex of V(D)J recombination is one
contributing factor that has long been proposed. The chromosomal translocations
involving LMO2 (t(11;14)(p13;q11)), Ttg-1 (t(11;14)(p15;q11)), and Hox11
(t(10;14)(q24;q11)) are among the clearest examples in which it appears that a D 
or J segment has synapsed with an adventitious heptamer/nonamer at a gene outside
of one of the antigen receptor loci. The interstitial deletion at 1p32 involving 
SIL (SCL-interrupting locus)/SCL (stem cell leukemia) is a case involving two
non-V(D)J sites that have been suggested to be V(D)J recombination mistakes. Here
we have used our human extrachromosomal substrate assay to formally test the
hypothesis that these regions are V(D)J recombination misrecognition sites and,
more importantly, to quantify their efficiency as V(D)J recombination targets
within the cell. We find that the LMO2 fragile site functions as a 12-signal at
an efficiency that is only 27-fold lower than that of a consensus 12-signal. The 
Ttg-1 site functions as a 23-signal at an efficiency 530-fold lower than that of 
a consensus 23-signal. Hox11 failed to undergo recombination as a 12- or
23-signal and was at least 20,000-fold less efficient than consensus signals. SIL
has been predicted to function as a 12-signal and SCL as a 23-signal. However, we
find that SIL actually functions as a 23-signal. These results provide a formal
demonstration that certain chromosomal fragile sites can serve as RAG complex
targets, and they determine whether these sites function as 12- versus
23-signals. These results quantify one of the three major factors that determine 
the frequency of these translocations in T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia.

PMID: 11390401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Biol. 2001 Jun 1;234(1):231-43.

Hox11 acts cell autonomously in spleen development and its absence results in
altered cell fate of mesenchymal spleen precursors.

Kanzler B(1), Dear TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Immunology, Max-Planck Institute for
Immunobiology, Stuebeweg 51, Freiburg, 79108, Germany.

The genetic steps governing development of the spleen are largely unknown.
Absence of Hox11 in mice results in asplenia, but it is unclear how Hox11 exerts 
its effect on spleen development. To more precisely define Hox11's role in spleen
morphogenesis, we have examined the fate of the developing spleen in Hox11(-/-)
mice. Perturbation of spleen development begins between dE13 and dE13.5. Cells of
the spleen anlage persist past this developmental stage as an unorganized
rudiment between the stomach and the pancreas. They fail to proliferate, and
haematopoietic cells do not colonize the rudiment. At later stages of embryonic
development, the cells can be observed in the mesenchyme of the pancreas, also an
expression site of Hox11. In Hox11-/-<-->+/+ chimaeras, spleens were devoid of
Hox11(-/-) cells, indicating that the genetic defect is cell autonomous and not
due to failure of the organ anlage to attract and retain haematopoietic cells. In
-/-<-->+/+ chimaeric embryos, Hox11(-/-) cells were initially present in the
spleen anlage. However, at dE13, a reorganization of the spleen occurred in the
chimaeras and Hox11(-/-) cells were subsequently excluded from the spleen,
suggesting that a change in the affinity for one of the spleen cells had
occurred. These observations demonstrate that spleen development consists of
genetically separable steps and that absence of Hox11 arrests spleen development 
at an early stage. The formation of the spleen primordium before the entry of
haematopoietic cells does not require the activity of Hox11. However, subsequent 
differentiation of spleen precursor cells is dependent on the Hox11 gene.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11356032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Leuk Lymphoma. 2000 Oct;39(3-4):241-56.

TALE homeoproteins as HOX11-interacting partners in T-cell leukemia.

Allen TD(1), Zhu YX, Hawley TS, Hawley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto and Cancer Biology
Division, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Science Centre, 2075 Bayview
Avenue, Toronto Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada.

The mammalian PBX and Meis proteins belong to the TALE (three-amino
acid-loop-extension) superfamily of homeodomain-containing transcription factors.
Members of both the PBX and Meis groups have been implicated in tumorigenesis and
are known to cooperatively bind DNA with Class I (clustered) HOX homeoproteins.
Here we show that PBX and Meis homeoproteins cooperatively bind the
PBX-responsive sequence in vitro with the oncoprotein encoded by the
non-clustered homeobox gene HOX11 activated by the t(10;14)(q24;q11) chromosomal 
translocation in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). An FPWME motif
N-terminal to the homeodomain is required for interaction with PBX proteins,
which appears to confer DNA-binding specificity to HOX11. PBX proteins are highly
expressed in HOX11 immortalized/transformed hematopoietic cells; in particular,
the 10q24 translocation-carrying T-ALL Sil and K3P lines were found to
selectively express PBX2. Ectopic retroviral-directed overexpression of PBX2 in
concert with HOX11 in NIH3T3 cells resulted in decreased contact inhibition of
growth as evidenced by focus formation in confluent cell monolayers. The
accumulated data are thus consistent with a role of TALE homeoproteins in
HOX11-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11342305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):181-5.

Lbx1 marks a subset of interneurons in chick hindbrain and spinal cord.

Schubert FR(1), Dietrich S, Mootoosamy RC, Chapman SC, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor
New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, SE1 9RT, London, UK. frank.schubert@kcl.ac.uk

The putative transcription factor Lbx1 is expressed in the mantle zone of the
hindbrain and spinal cord caudal to rhombomere 1, in a specific domain of the
alar plate. The Lbx1 domain overlaps with the expression domains for Tlx3 and
partially with the domains for Pax2/Lim1. The ventral border of the Lbx1 domain
coincides with the ventral border of the dorsalmost Serrate1 stripe in the
ventricular zone. The latter borders the intermediate stripe of both Delta and
Lunatic fringe expression. The Lbx1 domain contains differentiated interneurons
that project into the lateral longitudinal fasciculus.

PMID: 11231071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 21;97(24):13300-5.

Induction of tolerance to immunogenic tumor antigens associated with
lymphomagenesis in HOX11 transgenic mice.

Rosic-Kablar S(1), Chan K, Reis MD, Dubé ID, Hough MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Sunnybrook Campus, Sunnybrook and Women's
College Health Sciences Centre, and Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Transgenic mice expressing human HOX11 in B lymphocytes die prematurely from
lymphomas that initiate in the spleen and frequently disseminate to distant
sites. Preneoplastic hematopoiesis in these mice is unperturbed. We now report
that expression of the HOX11 transgene does not affect the ability of dendritic
cells (DCs) to process and present foreign peptides and activate antigen-specific
T cell responses. We also show that nontransgenic DCs presenting peptides derived
from the human HOX11 protein are highly efficient stimulators of autologous T
cells, whereas transgenic T cells are nonresponsive to peptides derived from the 
HOX11 transgene and the murine Meis1 protein. HOX11 transgenic mice thus show
normal development of tolerance to immunogenic antigens expressed throughout B
cell maturation. DCs pulsed with cell lysates prepared from lymphomas, obtained
from HOX11 transgenic mice with terminal lymphoma, activate T cells from
nontransgenic and premalignant transgenic mice, whereas T cells isolated from
lymphomatous transgenic mice are nonresponsive to autologous tumor cell antigens.
These data indicate that HOX11 lymphoma cells express tumor-rejection antigens
that are recognized as foreign in healthy transgenic mice and that
lymphomagenesis is associated with the induction of anergy to tumor
antigen-specific T cells. These findings are highly relevant for the development 
of immunotherapeutic protocols for the treatment of lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC27219
PMID: 11069299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2000 Dec;29(4):371-7.

Promoter demethylation accompanies reactivation of the HOX11 proto-oncogene in
leukemia.

Watt PM(1), Kumar R, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health Research and Centre for Child Health
Research, University of Western Australia, West Perth, Australia.
paulw@ichr.uwa.edu.au

Despite considerable work on the epigenetic control of tumor suppressor genes,
little is known about the potential role of promoter CpG demethylation in the
activation of oncogenes in lymphoid tumors. The HOX11 proto-oncogene is
frequently activated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). HOX11
activation can occur in the absence of translocation of the gene to the T-cell
receptor locus (Salvati et al., 1995), implying that activation mechanisms must
be involved other than the juxtaposition of the gene to adjacent enhancing
sequences. We tested whether the methylation status of the proximal promoter was 
correlated with expression status in T-ALL and found that, in all cases,
expression of HOX11 in T-ALL was associated with extensive demethylation of the
proximal HOX11 promoter, regardless of whether or not translocation was involved.
In contrast, cells that did not express HOX11 showed a more methylated pattern of
CpG residues in the proximal promoter. Methylation of this sequence in vitro was 
sufficient to silence the proximal promoter. We propose a model in which the
selection of leukemia clones via a pathway involving HOX11 expression requires
the demethylation of its promoter as a prerequisite for additional gene
activation mechanisms.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11066085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Aug 15;97(17):9525-30.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor capsulin controls spleen
organogenesis.

Lu J(1), Chang P, Richardson JA, Gan L, Weiler H, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Pathology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

Formation of numerous internal organs involves reciprocal epithelial-mesenchymal 
signaling and subsequent patterning and growth of the organ primordium. Capsulin 
is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor expressed in mesenchymal cells
that encapsulate the epithelial primordia of internal organs, including the
kidney and lung, as well as the epicardium, which gives rise to the coronary
arteries. Capsulin is also expressed in the mesothelium that gives rise to the
spleen. We demonstrate that mice homozygous for a capsulin null mutation fail to 
form a spleen. The homeobox genes Hox11 and Bapx1, shown previously to be
essential regulators of spleen organogenesis, and a lacZ reporter introduced into
the capsulin locus, were expressed in the early splenic primordium, derived from 
the splanchnic mesoderm, of homozygous mutant embryos. However, this primordium
failed to develop beyond an initial group of precursor cells and underwent rapid 
apoptosis. The phenotype of capsulin mutant mice demonstrates that capsulin acts 
within a subpopulation of splanchnic mesodermal cells to control an essential
early step in spleen organogenesis that is likely to represent a point of
regulatory convergence of the capsulin, Hox11, and Bapx1 genes.

PMCID: PMC16898
PMID: 10944221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Dyn. 2000 May;218(1):201-6.

Hox11 is required to maintain normal Wt1 mRNA levels in the developing spleen.

Koehler K(1), Franz T, Dear TN.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Immunobiology, Freiburg, Germany.

Mice deficient in Hox11 are asplenic. As Hoxll can function as a transcription
factor, we examined the spatial and temporal mRNA expression patterns of Hox11
and a candidate target gene, the Wilm's tumor gene Wt1, in the developing spleen.
Hox11 mRNA first appears at approximately dE10.5 in the dorsal mesogastrium while
Wt1 mRNA is expressed from dE11.5, approximately 24 hours after Hox11 mRNA first 
appears. Wt1 mRNA was significantly reduced in the spleen anlage of Hox11-null
mice suggesting that Wt1 acts downstream of Hox11 in a transcriptional cascade.
Additionally, Hox11 protein is able to transactivate the WT1 promoter in a
Hox11-null fibroblast cell line. As Wt1-null embryos have recently been reported 
to be asplenic, these findings suggest that Wt1 and Hox11 may be components
common to a genetic hierarchy that is required for spleen development.

PMID: 10822272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):287-90.

Rnx deficiency results in congenital central hypoventilation.

Shirasawa S(1), Arata A, Onimaru H, Roth KA, Brown GA, Horning S, Arata S,
Okumura K, Sasazuki T, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Departments of Medicine and Pathology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The genes Tlx1 (Hox11), Enx (Hox11L2, Tlx-2) and Rnx (Hox11L2, Tlx-3) constitute 
a family of orphan homeobox genes. In situ hybridization has revealed
considerable overlap in their expression within the nervous system, but Rnx is
singularly expressed in the developing dorsal and ventral region of the medulla
oblongata. Tlx1-deficient and Enx-deficient mice display phenotypes in tissues
where the mutated gene is singularly expressed, resulting in asplenogenesis and
hyperganglionic megacolon, respectively. To determine the developmental role of
Rnx, we disrupted the locus in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Rnx deficient
mice developed to term, but all died within 24 hours after birth from a central
respiratory failure. The electromyographic activity of intercostal muscles
coupled with the C4 ventral root activity assessed in a medulla-spinal cord
preparation revealed a high respiratory rate with short inspiratory duration and 
frequent apnea. Furthermore, a coordinate pattern existed between the abnormal
activity of inspiratory neurons in the ventrolateral medulla and C4 motorneuron
output, indicating a central respiratory defect in Rnx mice. Thus, Rnx is
critical for the development of the ventral medullary respiratory centre and its 
deficiency results in a syndrome resembling congenital central hypoventilation.

PMID: 10700185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Oct 1;273(2):97-100.

CHox11L2, a Hox11 related gene, is expressed in the peripheral nervous system and
subpopulation of the spinal cord during chick development.

Uchiyama K(1), Otsuka R, Hanaoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University,
Sagamihara-Shi, Kanagawa, Japan.

cHox11L2, the chick counterpart of mouse Hox11L2, was isolated. cHox11L2 was
expressed in the developing chick peripheral nervous system, i.e. sensory cranial
nerves of placodal ectoderm origin, sympathetic ganglia, dorsal root ganglia and 
enteric ganglia as well as a limited regions of the spinal cord. In neuronal
derivatives of the neural crest, cHox11L2 was expressed in the postmigratory
cells and not in the migrating neural crest cells. Furthermore, intense signals
of cHox11L2 mRNA were detected also in the spinal cord and the dorsal roots of
10-day embryos. No transcripts were detected in the spinal cord of the postnatal 
day-2 animals. These results suggest that cHox11L2 might play a role in neuronal 
differentiation during chick nervous system development.

PMID: 10505625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 10;274(37):26387-92.

Cig30 and Pitx3 genes are arranged in a partially overlapping tail-to-tail array 
resulting in complementary transcripts.

Tvrdik P(1), Asadi A, Kozak LP, Nuglozeh E, Parente F, Nedergaard J, Jacobsson A.

Author information: 
(1)The Wenner-Gren Institute, Arrhenius Laboratories F3, Stockholm University,
S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

The mouse Cig30 gene codes for a 30-kDa membrane glycoprotein, which appears to
have a role in the recruitment of brown adipose tissue. To elucidate the
structure of the Cig30 gene, we have isolated a lambda phage genomic DNA clone
containing the entire mouse gene and found that Cig30 consists of four exons that
are spread over 4 kilobase pairs of genomic sequence. Using a fluorescence in
situ hybridization assay and interspecific backcross panel mapping, we have
localized the Cig30 locus to the distal region of mouse chromosome 19, between
the Tlx1 and Ins1 loci. Sequencing of the corresponding lambda clone to
completion revealed that the insert contained yet another gene in the opposite
orientation. It turned out to be the newly identified homeobox gene Pitx3.
Interestingly, the genes are very tightly linked, so that the 3' ends of their
transcripts are complementary. Thus, our results provide evidence for
bidirectional transcription of a several hundred base pair-long DNA region as a
result of the extremely tight linkage between Cig30 and Pitx3.

PMID: 10473596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Curr Biol. 1999 Jul 29-Aug 12;9(15):837-40.

The Wilms tumor suppressor gene wt1 is required for development of the spleen.

Herzer U(1), Crocoll A, Barton D, Howells N, Englert C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Karlsruhe Institute for Genetics P.O. Box 3640, 76021,
Karlsruhe, Germany.

The Wilms tumor suppressor gene WT1 (wt1 in mouse) is unique among tumor
suppressors because, in addition to its involvement in cancer [1] [2] and various
other diseases [3] [4] [5] [6], it has an essential role in the development of
certain organs. This is revealed by the phenotype of mice with inactivated wt1
alleles [7]. These animals exhibit a complete failure of kidney and gonad
development as well as abnormalities of the heart and mesothelial structures. On 
a C57BL/6 genetic background, wt1(-/-) animals die between day 13.5 (E13.5) and
15.5 (E15.5) of embryonic development [7]. We report here that crossing of the
wt1 mutation onto different mouse backgrounds delayed embryonic lethality until
birth. In wt1(-/-) mice on these different genetic backgrounds, we observed a
dramatic failure of spleen development, in addition to the well characterized
phenotypic abnormalities. The spleen anlage formed at around E12 to E13 and
involuted by the E15 stage, before the invasion of hematopoietic cells. The
absence of proper spleen development in these wt1(-/-) embryos correlated with
enhanced apoptosis in the primordial spleen cells. The expression of hox11, a
gene that also controls development of the spleen [8] [9], was not altered by the
inactivation of wt1. In situ hybridization revealed that the two genes are
regulated independently. These findings demonstrate that the penetrance of the
wt1(-/-) phenotype depends on the existence of one or more modifier gene(s) and
that wt1 plays a pivotal role in the development of the spleen, thereby extending
its role in organogenesis.

PMID: 10469569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Gene. 1999 Jun 24;234(1):169-76.

Sequence of 10q24 locus surrounding the HOX11 oncogene reveals a new gene HUG1
expressed in a T-ALL cell line.

Watt PM(1), Ranford PR, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health Research,1 PO Box 855, West Perth,
Western Australia 6872, Australia.

HOX11 is a gene encoding a homeobox protein which is found to be deregulated in
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL). As a basis for studying the
mechanism of deregulation of HOX11 expression in leukaemia, the locus containing 
the HOX11 proto-oncogene at 10q24 was cloned from a genomic P1 Artificial
Chromosome (PAC) library. The PAC clone with an insert size of 120kb was isolated
and mapped by restriction analysis. A series of contiguous subclones were then
obtained which span 20kb surrounding the HOX11 gene. These subclones were used to
sequence across the entire 20kb region to the 3' boundary of the PAC insert. This
work provides for the first time the full intron and 5' non-coding sequences of
the HOX11 gene which will aid the identification of novel transcriptional control
elements which may be involved in silencing HOX11 expression in normal cells. The
sequence information was also used to search for novel large open reading frames 
(ORFs). One such ORF (1.1kb) would encode a protein of at least 39kDa. This basic
protein (pI, 12.5) would be very proline rich and could potentially encode a
novel transcription factor. In order to establish if this ORF corresponds to a
bona fide transcribed gene, RT-PCR analysis was performed. The mRNA for this
protein is expressed in the T-ALL cell line Jurkat and has been designated HUG1, 
for HOX11 Upstream Gene.

PMID: 10393251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Leukemia. 1999 Jun;13(6):975-9.

Molecular characterization of a complex chromosomal translocation breakpoint
t(10;14) including the HOX11 oncogene locus.

Salvati PD(1), Watt PM, Thomas WR, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, TVW Telethon Institute
for Child Health Research, West Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

Based on cytogenetic studies, non-random chromosomal translocations which involve
the HOX11 gene at locus 10q24 and the TCR genes at loci 7q35 or 14q11 have been
reported to occur in 5% of T-ALL. HOX11, a member of the homeobox family of
genes, has been shown to play a role in T-ALL. The activation of the HOX11 gene
by translocations to the TCR locus results in the inappropriate expression of a
2.3 kb transcript. In this paper we describe a t(10;14)(q24;q11) breakpoint from 
a T-ALL patient specimen. The breakpoint appears to be mediated by errors in the 
TCR/V(D)J recombination system, but is more complex than commonly described
reciprocal translocations between the HOX11 and TCR genes, since it involves an
inversion event of the TCRdelta genes. In addition, the breakpoint was
characterised to a previously unsequenced area of the 10q24 locus, 3.4 kb
upstream of the HOX11 gene. This breakpoint is more centromeric than the
breakpoint cluster region previously shown to be involved in the majority of
reported t(10;14)(q24;q11) translocations. Hence, our investigations of the
translocation breakpoint in this patient identify another breakpoint region in
the 10q24 locus and may define a novel recombination 'hot spot'. Surprisingly,
our studies provide a mechanism for a previously unexplained complex
translocation described by another group which involves the same region of the
HOX11 promoter.

PMID: 10360388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jun;64(6):1646-54.

Fine mapping of the split-hand/split-foot locus (SHFM3) at 10q24: evidence for
anticipation and segregation distortion.

Ozen RS(1), Baysal BE, Devlin B, Farr JE, Gorry M, Ehrlich GD, Richard CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Gülhane Military Medical Academy, Ankara,
Turkey.

Split-hand/split-foot malformation (SHFM, ectrodactyly, or lobster-claw
deformity) is a human limb malformation characterized by aberrant development of 
central digital rays with absence of fingers and toes, a deep median cleft, and
fusion of remaining digits. SHFM is clinically heterogeneous, presenting both in 
an isolated form and in combination with additional abnormalities affecting the
tibia and/or other organ systems, including the genitourinary, craniofacial, and 
ectodermal structures. Three SHFM disease loci have been genetically mapped to
chromosomes 7q21 (SHFM1), Xq26 (SHFM2), and 10q24 (SHFM3). We mapped data from a 
large Turkish family with isolated SHFM to chromosome 10q24 and have narrowed the
SHFM3 region from 9 cM to an approximately 2-cM critical interval between genetic
markers D10S1147 and D10S1240. In several instances we found evidence for a more 
severe phenotype in offspring of a mildly affected parent, suggesting
anticipation. Finally, data from this family, combined with those from six other 
pedigrees, mapped to 10q24, demonstrate biased transmission of SHFM3 alleles from
affected fathers to offspring. The degree of this segregation distortion is
obvious in male offspring and is possibly of the same magnitude for female
offspring.

PMCID: PMC1377907
PMID: 10330351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Oncogene. 1999 Apr 1;18(13):2273-9.

HOX11 interacts with CTF1 and mediates hematopoietic precursor cell
immortalization.

Zhang N(1), Shen W, Hawley RG, Lu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0671, USA.

HOX11 is a homeodomain-containing oncogenic transcription factor that
immortalizes hematopoietic precursor cells. The mechanism by which HOX11
facilitates this initial step of leukemogenesis is, however, not well understood.
We have used a DNA binding site selection assay to investigate cooperative DNA
binding by HOX11 with other transcription factors. A consensus sequence was
derived and identified as the binding site for the CCAAT-box-binding
transcription factors (CTF). HOX11 was shown to interact in vitro and in vivo
with CTF1. Retrovirus-mediated transduction of an antisense CTF1 cDNA
dramatically reduced the proliferative capacity of HOX11-immortalized
hematopoietic precursor cells. CTF1 is, therefore, the first HOX11 protein
partner identified that plays an important role in hematopoietic precursor cell
immortalization.

PMID: 10327073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Dev Dyn. 1999 Jan;214(1):34-43.

Hox11-family genes XHox11 and XHox11L2 in xenopus: XHox11L2 expression is
restricted to a subset of the primary sensory neurons.

Patterson KD(1), Krieg PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, Zoology Department, University of Texas at
Austin, 78712, USA.

The mouse genome contains a small family of homeobox genes related to Hox11, but 
relatively little is known about the expression of these genes during early
development. Hox11 itself is expressed in the embryonic spleen, among other
tissues, and is required for its formation. No description of Hox11L2 expression 
has been presented previously. We have isolated the Xenopus orthologs of Hox11
and Hox11L2 and have carefully compared their expression patterns during
embryogenesis. The localization of Xhox11 transcripts in the branchial arches,
cranial sensory ganglia and spinal cord is similar, but not identical, to that of
mouse Hox11. Xhox11 expression is not detected in the developing spleen. XHox11L2
is expressed exclusively in a portion of the primary sensory system in the frog
embryo, including the cranial sensory ganglia and the Rohon-Beard sensory
neurons. There is significant overlap in the patterns of Xhox11 and XHox11L2
expression in the spinal cord and cranial sensory ganglia during early
development, suggesting that they may function redundantly in these tissues. The 
timing of Xhox11 and Xhox11L2 expression indicates that Hox11-family members may 
participate in the final stages of the differentiation process.

PMID: 9915574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):7030-7.

The T-cell oncogenic protein HOX11 activates Aldh1 expression in NIH 3T3 cells
but represses its expression in mouse spleen development.

Greene WK(1), Bahn S, Masson N, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry, MRC Laboratory of Molecular
Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

Hox11 is a homeobox gene essential for spleen formation in mice, since atrophy of
the anlage of a developing spleen occurs in early embryonic development in Hox11 
null mice. HOX11 is also expressed in a subset of T-cell acute leukemias after
specific chromosomal translocations. Since the protein has a homeodomain and can 
activate transcription, it probably exerts at least some of its effects in vivo
by regulation of target genes. Representational difference analysis has been used
to isolate cDNA clones corresponding to mRNA species activated following stable
expression of HOX11 in NIH 3T3 cells. The gene encoding the retinoic
acid-synthesizing enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (Aldh1), initially called
Hdg-1, was found to be ectopically activated by HOX11 in this system. Study of
Aldh1 gene expression during spleen development showed that the presence of Aldh1
mRNA inversely correlated with Hox11. Hox11 null mouse embryos have elevated
Aldh1 mRNA in spleen primordia prior to atrophy, while Aldh1 seems to be
repressed by Hox11 during organogenesis of the spleens of wild-type mice. This
result suggests that expression of Aldh1 protein is negatively regulated by Hox11
and that abnormal expression of Aldh1 in Hox11 null mice may cause loss of
splenic precursor cells by aberrant retinoic acid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC109285
PMID: 9819390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Nov 10;95(23):13853-8.

A model for spontaneous B-lineage lymphomas in IgHmu-HOX11 transgenic mice.

Hough MR(1), Reis MD, Singaraja R, Bryce DM, Kamel-Reid S, Dardick I, Breitman
ML, Dubé ID.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Sunnybrook Health Science Center, Toronto, 
Canada, M4N 3M5.

HOX11, a divergent homeodomain-containing transcription factor, was isolated from
the breakpoint of the nonrandom t(10;14)(q24;q11) chromosome translocation found 
in human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias. The translocation places the HOX11
coding sequence under the transcriptional control of TCR alpha/delta regulatory
elements, resulting in ectopic expression of a normal HOX11 protein in
thymocytes. To investigate the oncogenic potential of HOX11, we targeted its
expression in lymphocytes of transgenic mice by placing the human cellular DNA
under the transcriptional control of Ig heavy chain or LCK regulatory sequences. 
Only IgHmu-HOX11 mice expressing low levels of HOX11 were viable. During their
second year of life, all HOX11 transgenic mice became terminally ill with more
than 75% developing large cell lymphomas in the spleen, which frequently
disseminated to thymus, lymph nodes, and other nonhematopoietic tissues. Lymphoma
cells were predominantly clonal IgM+IgD+ mature B cells. Repopulation of severe
combined immunodeficient mice with cells from hyperplastic spleens indicated that
the HOX11 tumor phenotype was transplantable. Before tumor development,
expression of the transgene did not result in perturbations in lymphopoiesis;
however, lymphoid hyperplasia involving the splenic marginal zones was present in
20% of spleens. Our studies provide direct evidence that expression of HOX11 in
lymphocytes leads to malignant transformation. These mice are a useful model
system to study mechanisms involved in transformation from B-lineage hyperplasia 
to malignant lymphoma and for testing novel approaches to therapy. They represent
a novel animal model for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of peripheral mature B cell
origin.

PMCID: PMC24927
PMID: 9811890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Science. 1998 Nov 6;282(5391):1136-8.

Transformation of tooth type induced by inhibition of BMP signaling.

Tucker AS(1), Matthews KL, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, Guy's, King's, and St. Thomas' School 
of Dentistry, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Mammalian dentitions are highly patterned, with different types of teeth
positioned in different regions of the jaws. BMP4 is an early oral epithelial
protein signal that directs odontogenic gene expression in mesenchyme cells of
the developing mandibular arch. BMP4 was shown to inhibit expression of the
homeobox gene Barx-1 and to restrict expression to the proximal, presumptive
molar mesenchyme of mouse embryos at embryonic day 10. The inhibition of BMP
signaling early in mandible development by the action of exogenous Noggin protein
resulted in ectopic Barx-1 expression in the distal, presumptive incisor
mesenchyme and a transformation of tooth identity from incisor to molar.

PMID: 9804553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 8;17(14):1787-95.

Multiple negative elements contribute to repression of the HOX11 proto-oncogene.

Brake RL(1), Kees UR, Watt PM.

Author information: 
(1)TVW Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, West Perth, Western
Australia.

The HOX11 proto-oncogene is normally expressed in embryogenesis where it directs 
the synthesis of the spleen. In adult tissues, HOX11 expression is silenced by an
unknown mechanism. Aberrant expression of HOX11 occurs in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), where it is thought to be involved in T-cell
immortalization. The deregulated expression of HOX11 is frequently associated
with chromosomal translocations which juxtapose a T-cell receptor (TCR) gene
upstream of the HOX11 gene. In these cases, it is presumed that the activation of
HOX11 expression results from bringing the gene under the control of TCR enhancer
elements. However, activation of HOX11 also occurs in the absence of an
associated translocation in both T-ALL and erythroleukaemia cells, implying that 
an alternative activation mechanism may exist. We hypothesized that HOX11 may be 
repressed in normal T-cells and erythroid cells by the action of negative
elements which may be deleted or mutated in leukaemia. We therefore conducted a
search for negative elements in the human HOX11 promoter which may function to
silence its expression in normal cells of the haematopoietic lineages. Since
little sequence of the HOX11 promoter was available, we began our investigation
by sequencing over 4.5 kilobases of untranslated DNA from upstream of HOX11. The 
human sequence that overlaps with the 2.1 kb of murine Hox11 is highly conserved,
suggesting that a large region of DNA upstream of HOX11 may have a regulatory
function. We then used transfection assays to test the ability of portions of the
promoter to drive transcription of a reporter gene. These studies identified four
negative elements. Two of them (NRE2 and NRE4) function in all cell lines tested,
while the remaining two (NRE1 and NRE3) appear to be cell-type specific. The DNA 
sequences of three elements are conserved between the human and mouse HOX11/Hox11
promoters. We propose a model in which the combined action of these negative
elements contributes to the overall repression of HOX11 expression in normal
blood cells.

PMID: 9778044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3502-8.

Optimal activation of an endogenous gene by HOX11 requires the NH2-terminal 50
amino acids.

Masson N(1), Greene WK, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The HOX11 homeobox gene was first identified through studies of the t(7;10) and
t(10;14) chromosomal translocations of acute T-cell leukemia. In addition,
analysis of Hox11-/- mice has demonstrated a critical role for this gene in
murine spleen development. A possible mode of in vivo function for the HOX11
protein in these two situations is regulation of target genes following DNA
binding via the homeodomain, but little is known about how HOX11 regulates
transcription in vivo. By performing transcriptional studies in yeast and
mammalian one-hybrid systems, a modular transcriptional transactivation region at
the NH2 terminus of HOX11 has been functionally dissected from other parts of the
protein. This NH2-terminal region includes the previously identified short
conserved Hep motif, which itself activates transcription in one-hybrid assays.
The importance of the NH2-terminal region for the function of HOX11 in vivo was
assayed by activating a HOX11-dependent gene in NIH 3T3 cells. Activation of this
gene was found to be dependent upon an intact homeodomain in HOX11, but maximal
activation was obtained only when the NH2-terminal 50 amino acids of HOX11 was
present, showing that this region of HOX11 is important for in vivo
transcriptional control of a chromosomal target gene.

PMCID: PMC108931
PMID: 9584190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Mar 5;76(2):125-32.

Skeletal dysplasias with gracile bones: three new cases, including two offspring 
of a mother with a dwarfing condition.

Costa T(1), Azouz EM, Fitzpatrick J, Kamel-Reid S, Smith CR, Silver MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Canada. teresa.costa@dal.ca

We describe 3 new cases of a rare form of dwarfism (so-called "lethal skeletal
dysplasia with gracile bones" or "osteocraniostenosis"), a condition
characterized by thin, brittle bones and death in late gestation or early
neonatal life. The first was a 37-week gestation female who died at delivery. She
had facial anomalies and positional abnormalities of the hands and feet. The
others were male stillborn sibs, who died in utero in the third trimester. Their 
mother had an undiagnosed dwarfing condition associated with body asymmetry,
microcephaly, and unusual facial appearance. Both fetuses were documented by
ultrasound to have short limbs and probable long bone fractures late in the
second trimester. At autopsy, one fetus had no spleen and the other a hypoplastic
spleen. Radiographically, all three cases had very thin diaphyses, diaphyseal
fractures, and thin ribs and clavicles. In contrast to the first case who had a
normally mineralized calvaria, the sibs had grossly deficient calvarial
mineralization. Microscopically, endochondral ossification was qualitatively
normal but quantitatively deficient in all three cases. The long bones,
especially those of the sibs, lacked the well-defined outer cortex in the
mid-shaft normally seen by the third trimester. This failure of organization into
the cortex and medulla suggests a failure of bone remodelling. Given the variable
presentation in these cases, "lethal skeletal dysplasia with gracile bones" is
probably a heterogeneous disorder. The recurrence in one family suggests that the
mother has somatic/germline mosaicism of a lethal gene, expressed clinically as
growth failure and asymmetry.

PMID: 9511974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mech Dev. 1998 Jan;70(1-2):133-45.

The mouse Hoxc11 gene: genomic structure and expression pattern.

Hostikka SL(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City 84112-5331, USA.

The mouse and human Hox complex consists of 39 genes in four linkage groups
(A-D). Although the structure and expression patterns of most of these genes have
been reported, the 5' members of the Hox C linkage group have been only partially
characterized. Herein we report the primary and genomic structure of the mouse
Hoxc11 gene as well as its expression pattern. The Hoxc11 gene encodes a 304
amino acid protein which is translated from a 2.2 kb transcript, derived from two
exons. Hoxc11 mRNA is found in the most posterior region of the developing embryo
commencing at 9.5 days of gestation. Expression is detected in the posterior
neural tube, dorsal root ganglia, prevertebrae and hindlimbs. Expression is also 
found in metanephric mesenchyme which, later in development, becomes restricted
to the cortical region of the developing kidney. In the developing genitalia,
prominent expression is first observed in the posterior urogenital sinus that
gives rise to the urethra, vagina and prostate. Later, expression is seen in
paramesonephric and mesonephric ducts and in the genital tubercle. In the
hindlimbs, Hoxc11 expression is seen in the mesenchyme posterior to the region
forming the femur and fibula, but does not extend anteriorly to the region giving
rise to the tibia or distally to the tarsal bones.

PMID: 9510030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Dec;20(4):408-11.

Characterization of a t(10;12)(q24;p13) in a case of CML in transformation.

Aguiar RC(1), Chase A, Oscier DG, Carapeti M, Goldman JM, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College School of Medicine, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

We have used Southern blotting and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to
define the breakpoints of a reciprocal translocation, t(10;12)(q24;p13), acquired
as a secondary abnormality in a patient with Philadelphia chromosome positive
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) in transformation. A YAC clone that spanned the
breakpoint at 12p13 was identified; this YAC included the CDKN1B gene but did not
include ETV6. Neither ETV6 nor CDKN1B was rearranged, as determined by FISH and
Southern blotting; however, a small deletion encompassing the translocated CDKN1B
allele was detected. Analysis of two candidate genes at 10q24, HOX11 and NFKB2
suggested that they are not involved in this translocation. The preliminary
mapping of breakpoints in this case demonstrated that they are different from an 
apparently identical translocation identified previously in a patient with
myelodysplastic syndrome. The identification of the split YAC and small deletion 
should enable a more focused search for a gene or genes that may contribute to
progression from chronic phase to blast crisis in CML.

PMID: 9408758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Clin Invest. 1997 Aug 15;100(4):795-801.

A novel pathogenesis of megacolon in Ncx/Hox11L.1 deficient mice.

Hatano M(1), Aoki T, Dezawa M, Yusa S, Iitsuka Y, Koseki H, Taniguchi M, Tokuhisa
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine, Chiba
260, Japan. hatano@med.m.chiba-u.ac.jp

The Ncx/Hox11L.1 gene, a member of the Hox11 homeobox gene family, is mainly
expressed in neural crest-derived tissues. To elucidate the role of Ncx/Hox11L.1,
the gene has been inactivated in embryonic stem cells by homologous
recombination. The homozygous mutant mice were viable. These mice developed
megacolon with enteric ganglia by age 3-5 wk. Histochemical analysis of the
ganglia revealed that the enteric neurons hyperinnervated in the narrow segment
of megacolon. Some of these neuronal cells degenerated and neuronal cell death
occurred in later stages. We propose that Ncx/Hox11L.1 is required for
maintenance of proper functions of the enteric nervous system. These mutant mice 
can be used to elucidate a novel pathogenesis for human neuronal intestinal
dysplasia.

PMCID: PMC508250
PMID: 9259577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Gene. 1997 Jul 1;193(1):73-9.

A negative regulatory region of the murine Hox11 gene.

Arai Y(1), Hatano M, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Center for Biomedical Science, Chiba
University School of Medicine, Japan.

The HOX11 gene was isolated from the chromosomal breakpoint of human T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemias with a chromosomal translocation t(10;14). Expression of 
this proto-oncogene is strictly controlled in normal tissues. However, regulatory
elements of the gene have never been studied. Since the HOX11 gene is well
conserved between human and murine, we sequenced 5' flanking region of the murine
Hox11 gene and analyzed the elements. We identified the transcription start site 
(+1) of the gene using mRNA from fetal spleens by primer extension analysis. The 
start site was determined at 795 bp upstream from the ATG site. A typical TATA
box sequence was found at 35 bp upstream from the start site. Furthermore,
promoter activity of the 5' flanking region of the start site was monitored by
luciferase assay. The activity mainly located within a 540-bp fragment
immediately upstream from the start site (-540 to +1). The (-1240 to -540) region
contained a negative regulatory element of the transcription. The TATA box
sequence and the nucleotide sequence around the transcription start site were
conserved in the human HOX11 gene. The transcription start site of the human
HOX11 gene in normal tissues is discussed.

PMID: 9249069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Exp Med. 1997 Jun 16;185(12):2157-70.

On the key role of secondary lymphoid organs in antiviral immune responses
studied in alymphoplastic (aly/aly) and spleenless (Hox11(-)/-) mutant mice.

Karrer U(1), Althage A, Odermatt B, Roberts CW, Korsmeyer SJ, Miyawaki S,
Hengartner H, Zinkernagel RM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, Department of Pathology, University
Hospital of Zürich, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

The role of the spleen and of other organized secondary lymphoid organs for the
induction of protective antiviral immune responses was evaluated in orphan
homeobox gene 11 knockout mice (Hox11(-/-)) lacking the spleen, and in homozygous
alymphoplastic mutant mice (aly/aly) possessing a structurally altered spleen but
lacking lymph nodes and Peyer's patches. Absence of the spleen had no major
effects on the immune response, other than delaying the antibody response by 1-2 
d. In aly/aly mice, the thymus-independent IgM response against vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) was delayed and reduced, whereas the T-dependent switch to
the protective IgG was absent. Therefore, aly/aly mice were highly susceptible to
VSV infection. Since aly/aly spleen cells yielded neutralizing IgM and IgG after 
adoptive transfer into recipients with normally structured secondary lymphoid
organs, these data suggest that the structural defect was mainly responsible for 
inefficient T-B cooperation. Although aly/aly mice generated detectable, but
reduced, CTL responses after infection with vaccinia virus (VV) and lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), the elimination of these viruses was either
delayed (VV) or virtually impossible (LCMV); irrespective of the dose or the
route of infection, aly/aly mice developed life-long LCMV persistence. These
results document the critical role of organized secondary lymphoid organs in the 
induction of naive T and B cells. These structures also provide the basis for
cooperative interactions between antigen-presenting cells, T cells, and B cells, 
which are a prerequisite for recovery from primary virus infections via skin or
via blood.

PMCID: PMC2196355
PMID: 9182687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Med. 1997 Jun;3(6):646-50.

Enx (Hox11L1)-deficient mice develop myenteric neuronal hyperplasia and
megacolon.

Shirasawa S(1), Yunker AM, Roth KA, Brown GA, Horning S, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The isolated homeobox gene Enx (Hox11L1) is expressed in enteric neurons
innervating distal ileum, and proximal and distal colon. Enx-deficient mice
develop megacolon with massive distension of the proximal colon. The number of
myenteric ganglia, total neurons per ganglion, and NADPH diaphorase presumptive
inhibitory neurons per ganglion are increased in the proximal and distal colon,
but decreased in the distal ileum of all Enx-/- mice. Enx-/- mice provide a model
for human neuronal intestinal dysplasia (NID), in which myenteric neuronal
hyperplasia and megacolon are seen. These results suggest that Enx is required
for the proper positional specification and differentiative cell fate of enteric 
neurons.

PMID: 9176491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1997 May;195(5):419-25.

Ncx, a Hox11 related gene, is expressed in a variety of tissues derived from
neural crest cells.

Hatano M(1), Iitsuka Y, Yamamoto H, Dezawa M, Yusa S, Kohno Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We have isolated the murine homeobox gene (Ncx) that belong to a Hox11 gene
family. Expression of the Ncx gene was analyzed in total RNAs from embryos by
reverse transcribed polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The mRNA was detected in 
embryos after 9.5 days of embryogenesis (E9.5) and was maximal at E12.5. The
RT-PCR also detected the message in total RNAs from adrenal glands and intestine 
in adult mice. The expression was further examined in various tissues from
embryos by in situ hybridization. It was detected in dorsal root ganglia, cranial
nerve ganglia (V, IX, X), enteric nerve ganglia and adrenal glands from embryos
between E9.5 and E13.5. Since its expression is restricted to tissues derived
from neural crest cells, Ncx may play a role in differentiation and proliferation
of neural crest lineage cells.

PMID: 9176664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Blood. 1997 Apr 1;89(7):2276-82.

Defects of the mismatch repair gene MSH2 are implicated in the development of
murine and human lymphoblastic lymphomas and are associated with the aberrant
expression of rhombotin-2 (Lmo-2) and Tal-1 (SCL).

Lowsky R(1), DeCoteau JF, Reitmair AH, Ichinohasama R, Dong WF, Xu Y, Mak TW,
Kadin ME, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene hMSH2 underlie a novel pathway of
tumorigenesis for some cancers of epithelial origin. Mice deficient in MSH2 are
susceptible to lymphomas but defects in this gene have not been identified in
human lymphoid tumors. To determine if the lymphomas these mice develop are
related to a particular subtype of human lymphoma we evaluated 20 clinically ill 
homozygous MSH2-/- mice ranging in age from 2 to 13 months. The murine tumors
comprised a single histopathologic entity representing the malignant counterpart 
of precursor thymic T cells and closely resembled human precursor T-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL). Evaluation of the expression of three T-cell
malignancy associated genes showed that Rhombotin-2 (RBTN-2 also known as Lmo-2),
TAL-1 (also known as SCL), and HOX-11 were expressed in 100%, 40%, and 0% of the 
murine tumors, respectively. The MSH2-/- murine model of precursor T-cell LBL was
substantiated by the finding of a nearly identical expression profile of RBTN-2, 
TAL-1, and HOX-11 in 10 well-characterized cases of human LBL. Direct evidence
for MSH2 abnormalities in human LBL was established by sequence analysis of exon 
13 of hMSH2, which revealed coding region mutations in 2 of 10 cases. Our
findings implicate defects in the MMR system with the aberrant expression of
T-cell specific proto-oncogenes and define a new pathway of human
lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 9116269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nature. 1997 Jan 30;385(6615):454-8.

HOX11 interacts with protein phosphatases PP2A and PP1 and disrupts a G2/M
cell-cycle checkpoint.

Kawabe T(1), Muslin AJ, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Hox11 is an orphan homeobox gene that controls the genesis of the spleen. HOX11
is also oncogenic, having been isolated from a chromosomal breakpoint in human
T-cell leukaemia. Transgenic mice that redirected HOX11 to the thymus
demonstrated cell-cycle aberration and progression to malignancy. We observed
that the protein HOX11 interacted with protein serine-threonine phosphatase 2A
catalytic subunit (PP2AC), as well as protein phosphatase 1 (PP1C) in mammalian
cells. Inhibition of PP2A can regulate the cell cycle and control the activation 
of maturation-promoting factor in Xenopus oocytes. Microinjection of HOX11 into
Xenopus oocytes arrested at the G2 phase of the cell cycle promoted progression
to the M phase. G2 arrest can be induced by gamma-irradiation, but is eliminated 
by expression of HOX11 within a T-cell line. Thus HOX11 is a cellular oncogene
that targets PP2A and PP1, both of which are targets for oncogenic viruses and
chemical tumour promoters. This interaction suggests a mechanism by which a
homeobox can alter the cell cycle.

PMID: 9009195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cancer Res. 1997 Jan 15;57(2):337-45.

Transforming function of the HOX11/TCL3 homeobox gene.

Hawley RG(1), Fong AZ, Reis MD, Zhang N, Lu M, Hawley TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The HOX11/TCL3 homeobox gene was identified at the breakpoint region in pediatric
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia harboring 10q24 chromosomal translocations.
We previously reported that primary murine bone marrow cells transduced ex vivo
with a recombinant HOX11-containing retrovirus, MSCV-HOX11, gave rise to cell
lines at high frequency having characteristics of early myeloid cells. Cell lines
were also established from the bone marrow and spleen of transplant recipients
sacrificed 5 months after engraftment with MSCV-HOX11-transduced bone marrow
cells. These latter lines, which exhibited a more differentiated myelomonocytic
phenotype, harbored proviruses encoding a smaller HOX11 protein. None of the mice
that received HOX11-expressing bone marrow cells or myeloid cell lines developed 
leukemia during 6-month observation periods. Here, we report that two bone marrow
transplant recipients eventually developed T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia-like malignancies at 7 and 12 months posttransplant, indicating that
progression to a fully malignant state required additional mutations. One tumor
synthesized full-length HOX11 whereas the other expressed the smaller version of 
the protein. The smaller HOX11 protein suffered a carboxyl-terminal truncation.
We subsequently constructed MSCV-based retroviral vectors expressing deleted
forms of HOX11 and identified an amino-terminal region that was dispensible for
generation of myeloid cell lines having a similar phenotype as those induced by
full-length HOX11. We thus conclude that regions near the amino and carboxyl
termini of HOX11 are not essential for transforming function, nor do they appear 
to determine the lineage or stage of differentiation of the target cell for
transformation.

PMID: 9000579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hum Gene Ther. 1996 Dec 1;7(18):2263-71.

Retrovirus-mediated gene expression in hematopoietic cells correlates inversely
with growth factor stimulation.

Lu M(1), Zhang N, Maruyama M, Hawley RG, Ho AD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0671, USA.

Cells of the hematopoetic system, especially hematopoietic progenitor and stem
cells, are perceived as ideal targets for human gene therapy. In this report, the
stability of retrovirus-mediated gene expression driven by three different potent
promoters has been examined in purified human CD34+ cells. The promoters, murine 
stem cell virus (MSCV) long terminal repeat (LTR) and pgk, show gene expression
in 10 times more hematopoietic colonies derived from CD34+ cells than the
commonly used Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MLV) LTR. Quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis, however, demonstrates 
that the levels of gene expression in retrovirus-transduced cells decrease with
time in long-term bone marrow cultures and in suspension cultures containing
hematopoietic growth factors. Removal of hematopoietic growth factors from the
suspension culture medium was associated with a decrease in cell proliferation
and differentiation, but with stable gene expression. Retrovirus-mediated gene
expression is, therefore, inversely related to proliferation and differentiation 
of the transduced CD34+ cells. These observations may have implications in future
design and implementation of human gene therapy protocols.

PMID: 8953317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Oncogene. 1996 Oct 17;13(8):1781-7.

Three distinct domains in the HOX-11 homeobox oncoprotein are required for
optimal transactivation.

Zhang N(1), Shen W, Ho AD, Lu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0671, USA.

HOX-11 (tcl-3) is a homeobox oncogene isolated from the breakpoint region of the 
t(10;14) chromosomal translocation recurring in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Here we demonstrate that the HOX-11 homeoprotein mediates
transactivation of reporter genes through various promoters in both mammalian and
yeast cells. By deletion analysis, the transactivation domains of HOX-11 have
been mapped to three amino acid stretches in the homeoprotein, the
glycine-proline-rich region at the amino terminus, the homeodomain and the
glutamine-rich region at the carboxyl terminus. The three distinct functional
domains of HOX-11 act in concert for optimal transactivation. In addition, the
homeodomain of HOX-11 appears to be differentially utilized in a
promoter-dependent manner. Our data support the notion that the HOX-11
homeoprotein functions as an oncogenic transcription activator in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 8895525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Immunol. 1995 Nov;32(16):1177-82.

Two forms of Hox11 a T cell leukemia oncogene, are expressed in fetal spleen but 
not in primary lymphocytes.

Yamamoto H(1), Hatano M, Iitsuka Y, Mahyar NS, Yamamoto M, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

HOX11 is identified from the breakpoint of human T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemias with t(10;14). Since overexpression of HOX11 in T cells caused
leukemias in transgenic mice, the endogenous HOX11 may play a role in
proliferation and differentiation of T cells. In order to elucidate the role, we 
examined the expression of Hox11 in normal lymphocytes by a reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis. Two alternatively spliced Hox11
mRNAs were expressed in fetal spleens. However, lymphocytes did not express Hox11
mRNA during differentiation. Furthermore, it was not induced in primary
lymphocytes after activation. These results suggest that ectopic expression of
HOX11 in T cells is responsible for leukemogenesis.

PMID: 8559142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 5;11(7):1333-8.

HOX11 expression in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia is associated with
T-cell phenotype.

Salvati PD(1), Ranford PR, Ford J, Kees UR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Children's Leukaemia and Cancer Research, TVW Telethon Institute
for Child Health Research, West Perth, Australia.

Based on cytogenetic analysis, chromosomal translocations involving band 10q24
occur in 4-7% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The HOX11 gene is
located in this chromosomal band and is activated by translocations t(10;14)
(q24;q11) and t(7;10) (q35;q24). Ectopic expression of the HOX11 gene appears to 
be involved in the development of T-cell tumors. The aim of this study was to
determine the frequency of HOX11 activation in pediatric ALL patients and to
correlate gene expression with ALL immunophenotype. None of 53 B-lineage ALLs was
positive for HOX11 expression, however, Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis
revealed that four of 12 T-ALLs (33%) showed expression of the gene. In order to 
assess whether HOX11 expression is present in other pediatric malignancies we
examined a panel of 20 tumor cell lines established from solid tumors and
leukemias, but none of them showed expression of HOX11. Using our RT-PCR method
we confirmed that HOX11 expression is not detectable in normal T-cells. These
findings indicate that HOX11 expression in pediatric ALL is exclusive to T-ALL
and does not occur in B-lineage ALL. The frequency detected by molecular
techniques was significantly higher than the frequency reported in the literature
based on cytogenetic analysis. These results support the notion that ectopic
expression of the HOX11 homeobox gene is a crucial step in T-cell tumorigenesis.

PMID: 7478554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Development. 1995 Sep;121(9):2909-15.

The Hox11 gene is essential for cell survival during spleen development.

Dear TN(1), Colledge WH, Carlton MB, Lavenir I, Larson T, Smith AJ, Warren AJ,
Evans MJ, Sofroniew MV, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The HOX11 homeobox gene was identified via the translocation t(10;14) in T cell
leukaemia. To determine the function of this gene in mice, null mutations were
made using homologous recombination in ES cells to incorporate lacZ into the
hox11 transcription unit. Production of beta-galactosidase from the recombinant
hox11 allele in +/- mutants allowed identification of sites of hox11 expression
which included the developing spleen. Newborn hox11 -/- mice exhibit asplenia.
Spleen formation commences normally at E11.5 in hox11 -/- mutant embryos but the 
spleen anlage undergoes rapid and complete resorption between E12.5 and E13.5.
Dying spleen cells exhibit molecular features of apoptosis, suggesting that
programmed cell death is initiated at this stage of organ development in the
absence of hox11 protein. Thus hox11 is not required to initiate spleen
development but is essential for the survival of splenic precursors during
organogenesis. This function for hox11 suggests that enhanced cell survival may
result from the t(10;14) which activates HOX11 in T cell leukaemias, further
strengthening the association between oncogene-induced cell survival and
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 7555717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jun 11;23(11):1928-35.

The optimal binding sequence of the Hox11 protein contains a predicted
recognition core motif.

Tang S(1), Breitman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

HOX11 is a homeobox-containing oncogene of specific T-cell leukemias. We
determined the DNA binding specificity of the Hox11 protein by using a novel
technique of random oligonucleotide selection developed in this study. The
optimal Hox11 binding sequence, GGCGGTAAGTGG, contained a core TAAGTG motif that 
is consistent with a prediction based on the residues at specific positions that 
potentially make DNA base contacts and models of homeodomain-DNA interaction
proposed from studies with other homeodomains. The specific interaction between
Hox11 and the selected optimal binding sequence was further confirmed by
band-shift and DNA competition assays. Given that the Hox11 homeodomain shares
low homology with other well studied homeodomains, the presence of a predictable 
recognition core motif in its optimal binding sequence supports the notion that
different homeodomains interact with DNA in a similar manner, through highly
conserved residues at specific positions that allow contact with DNA.

PMCID: PMC306965
PMID: 7596820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Development. 1995 May;121(5):1373-85.

Hoxa 11 structure, extensive antisense transcription, and function in male and
female fertility.

Hsieh-Li HM(1), Witte DP, Weinstein M, Branford W, Li H, Small K, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science Research, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Hoxa 11 is a murine Abdominal-B-type homeobox gene. The structure of this gene is
presented, including genomic and cDNA sequence. The cDNA includes the complete
open reading frame and based on primer extension results is near full length.
Surprisingly, the antisense strand of Hoxa 11 was found to be transcribed.
Moreover, these antisense transcripts were processed and polyadenylated. The
developmental expression patterns for both sense and antisense transcripts were
examined using serial section and whole-mount in situ hybridizations. Hoxa 11
transcription patterns were defined in the limbs, kidney and stromal cells
surrounding the Mullerian and Wolffian ducts. Of particular interest, in the
developing limbs, the sense and antisense transcripts showed complementary
expression patterns, with antisense RNAs increasing in abundance in regions where
sense RNAs were diminishing in abundance. Furthermore, targeted mutation of Hoxa 
11 is shown to result in both male and female sterility. The female mutants
produce normal ova, which develop properly post-fertilization when transferred to
wild-type surrogate mothers. The Hoxa 11 homozygous mutants are shown to provide 
a defective uterine environment. The mutant males exhibited a malformation of the
vas deferens that resembles a partial homeotic transformation to an epididymis.
In addition, the mutant testes fail to descend properly into the scrotum and,
likely as a result, spermatogenesis is perturbed.

PMID: 7789268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Am J Pathol. 1995 May;146(5):1089-101.

Development expression of Hox11 and specification of splenic cell fate.

Roberts CW(1), Sonder AM, Lumsden A, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hox11 is the first member of a novel class of orphan homeobox genes. We report
that Hox11 is expressed in a discrete temporal and spatially segmented pattern
during embryonic development and appears critical for the specification of
splenic cell fate. Expression is first observed in the developing muscle plates
of branchial arches 1, 2, 3 and 4/6, and subsequently within motor neurons of
cranial nerves V, VII, IX, and X, which innervate these muscles. Hox11 serves as 
a molecular maker distinguishing branchial from somatic motor nuclei.
Additionally, Hox11 is expressed in the surface ectoderm of the first branchial
arch in the region destined to become the tongue and teeth and then in ganglia
innervating this area. However, Hox11-deficient mice have no apparent
morphological of functional defects within these structures. Notably the closely 
related homeobox genes, Hox11L.1 and Hox1L1.2, were not expressed in a redundant 
pattern. Neither Hox11L1 nor Hox11L2 was expressed in the branchial arches or
their motor nuclei within wild-type or Hox11-/- mice. Beginning at E11.5, Hox11
is normally expressed at a single site in the abdomen within splanchnic mesoderm 
destined to form the spleen, and Hox11-/- mice have no spleen. We noted no
increase in cell death within the dorsal mesogastrium of Hox11-deficient mice.
Instead the dorsal mesogastrium fails to separate from the stomach. Hox11-/- mice
display a larger stomach and possibly pancreas, suggesting that these mesodermal 
cells now contribute to other organs.

PMCID: PMC1869297
PMID: 7747804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Genomics. 1994 Nov 15;24(2):388-90.

Genetic mapping of two mouse homeobox genes Tlx-1 and Tlx-2 to murine chromosomes
19 and 6.

Wen XY(1), Tang S, Breitman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We have previously cloned two mouse homeobox genes Tlx-1 (T-cell leukemia
homeobox gene-1) and a related gene Tlx-2 based on their homology to human HOX11,
a putative proto-oncogene involved in human T-cell leukemia. We have mapped Tlx-1
to mouse chromosome 19 and Tlx-2 to chromosome 6 by linkage analysis using an
interspecific backcross (C57BL/6J x Mus spretus) F1 x M. spretus. The proposed
gene orders and genetic distances for Tlx-1 and Tlx-2 are centromere
19-Lpc-1-(25.53 cM)-Pltr-4-(5.32 cM)-Tlx-1- (3.19 cM)-Ins-1-(7.45 cM)-Xmv-18, and
centromere 6-Tcrb-(12.90 cM)-Mltr-3-(10.75 cM)-Tlx-2-(18.42 cM)-Xmv-6.

PMID: 7698766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nature. 1994 Apr 21;368(6473):747-9.

Hox11 controls the genesis of the spleen.

Roberts CW(1), Shutter JR, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, St Louis, Missouri 63110.

Many homeobox genes are clustered in a linear array along a chromosome,
reflecting their ordered expression along the anterior-posterior axis of the
embryo. Expression patterns as well as grafting, ectopic expression and
loss-of-function experiments suggest that the Hox genes encode a combinatorial
system of positional specification along that axis. In contrast, the function of 
orphan homeobox genes located at sites outside the four mammalian Hox clusters is
less well understood. To assess the functional role of the orphan homeobox gene
Hox11, we have generated Hox11-deficient mice through gene targeting. Hox11-/-
mice have no spleen, but otherwise appear normal. Hox11 is normally expressed in 
the splenic anlage arising from the splanchnic mesoderm. Hox11-/- embryos have no
cellular organization at the site of splenic development but all other splanchnic
derivatives develop normally. Hox11 controls the genesis of a single organ,
providing new insight into the genetic regulation of morphogenesis.

PMID: 7908720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Oncogene. 1993 Dec;8(12):3265-70.

The HOX-11 (TCL-3) homeobox proto-oncogene encodes a nuclear protein that
undergoes cell cycle-dependent regulation.

Zhang N(1), Gong ZZ, Minden M, Lu M.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern Ontario Regional Cancer Centre, Sudbury, Canada.

Erratum in
    Oncogene 1994 Apr;9(4):1305.

Molecular analysis of the t(10;14) chromosomal translocation found in pediatric
patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia has led to the identification
of the HOX-11 (TCL-3) protooncogene. The HOX-11 cDNA contains an open reading
frame encoding a homeoprotein with features of DNA-binding. The majority of the
t(10;14) chromosomal translocation breakpoints have been mapped to the 5' end of 
the HOX-11 gene, supporting the notion that deregulation of the HOX-11 gene by
the t(10;14) chromosomal translocation contributed importantly to leukemia
formation. To further define the role of the HOX-11 homeoprotein, we have
prepared rabbit antiserum against a trpE-HOX-11 fusion protein. The purified
anti-HOX-11 IgG immuno-precipitated a protein with apparent relative molecular
mass of 40 kD. Biochemical fractionation demonstrated that the protein is
localized in the nucleus. Furthermore, the HOX-11 RNA and protein appeared to be 
modulated during the cell cycle, with the highest level of expression at G1/S
phase boundary. Taken together, these data suggest that the HOX-11 gene product
may function as a transcription factor for G1 progression in the cell cycle.

PMID: 7902555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Soc Trans. 1993 Nov;21(4):809-15.

Ciba Medal Lecture. Chromosomal abnormalities in cancer cells: identification of 
molecules important for tumour development.

Rabbitts TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, U.K.

PMID: 8132072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 15;90(10):4431-5.

The HOX11 gene encodes a DNA-binding nuclear transcription factor belonging to a 
distinct family of homeobox genes.

Dear TN(1), Sanchez-Garcia I, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

A translocation involving human chromosome 10, band q24, in a subset of T-cell
acute leukemias disrupts a region surrounding the putative oncogene HOX11, which 
encodes a protein with a homeodomain. The HOX11 protein binds to a specific DNA
sequence, it localizes to the cell nucleus, and it transactivates transcription
of a reporter gene linked to a cis-regulatory element, suggesting that HOX11
functions in vivo as a positive transcription activator. PCR analysis shows that 
the HOX11 homeodomain is a member of a distinct class of homeodomains,
representatives of which occur in murine and Drosophila genomes. These all
contain a threonine residue in place of the more common isoleucine or valine in
helix 3 of the homeodomain. HOX11 therefore appears to belong to a family of
DNA-binding transactivators of transcription.

PMCID: PMC46525
PMID: 8099440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Oncogene. 1992 Jul;7(7):1325-30.

Genomic organization of the putative human homeobox proto-oncogene HOX-11 (TCL-3)
and its endogenous expression in T cells.

Lu M(1), Zhang N, Ho AD.

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern Ontario Regional Cancer Centre, University of Ottawa, Sudbury,
Canada.

The HOX-11 (TCL-3) gene, which is abnormally expressed in the leukemic cells of
some patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, is a new member of the
homeobox gene family. It is structurally altered by the t(10;14) chromosomal
translocation, resulting in head-to-tail juxtaposition of HOX-11 with the T-cell 
receptor delta-chain gene. In order to understand the normal functions of HOX-11 
and its role in T-cell leukemia, we have determined the exon-intron structure of 
the HOX-11 gene. By using oligonucleotide primers flanking an intron of the
HOX-11 gene, we have developed a quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for the expression of HOX-11. We detected HOX-11
expression in multiple cell lineages including normal T cells and two T-cell
lines in which the HOX-11 gene appeared to be unaltered in structure. Our results
suggest that deregulation of the endogenous expression of HOX-11 in normal T
cells represents an essential step towards the formation of this type of T-cell
leukemia.

PMID: 1352396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Blood. 1991 Dec 1;78(11):2996-3003.

A novel human homeobox gene lies at the chromosome 10 breakpoint in lymphoid
neoplasias with chromosomal translocation t(10;14).

Dubé ID(1), Kamel-Reid S, Yuan CC, Lu M, Wu X, Corpus G, Raimondi SC, Crist WM,
Carroll AJ, Minowada J, et al.

Author information: 
(1)University of Toronto Hospitals' Cancer Cytogenetics Program, Ontario, Canada.

The translocation t(10;14)(q24;q11) is an acquired change seen in 4% to 7% of
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL). We previously demonstrated that the
translocation juxtaposes the T-cell receptor (TCR) delta-chain gene in chromosome
14q11 with a novel region in chromosome 10q24 and is likely catalyzed by
recombinases normally involved in the generation of immunoglobulin and TCR
diversity. We now present the sequence of a gene on chromosome 10 that lies
immediately telomeric of the breakpoints in nine new ALL patients with acquired
rearrangements in 10q24. The gene is a novel human homeobox gene and is expressed
in leukemic cells from ALL patients with rearrangements in a defined chromosome
10 breakpoint cluster region, but not in other adult tissues or cell lines. This 
new gene has been designated HOX11. Our results strongly support a role for
homeobox genes in oncogenesis and may represent the first example of a human
cancer in which deregulated expression of an unaltered homeobox gene is involved 
in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 1683261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Oct 15;88(20):8900-4.

HOX11, a homeobox-containing T-cell oncogene on human chromosome 10q24.

Kennedy MA(1), Gonzalez-Sarmiento R, Kees UR, Lampert F, Dear N, Boehm T,
Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

A common chromosomal abnormality in childhood T-cell acute leukemia is a
translocation, t(10;14) (q24;q11), that together with the variant
t(7;10)(q35;q24) is present in up to 7% of this tumor type. The gene adjacent to 
the 10q24 region is transcriptionally activated after translocation to either
TCRD (14q11) or TCRB (7q35). It encodes a homeobox gene closely related to the
developmentally regulated homeotic genes of flies and mammals. The coding
capacity of this activated gene, designated HOX11, is undisturbed in a T-cell
line carrying the translocation t(7;10)(q35;q24). Therefore, the HOX11 homeobox
gene seems to be involved in T-cell tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC52618
PMID: 1681546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


