
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):998-1005. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.026. Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Altered calcium handling and increased contraction force in human embryonic stem 
cell derived cardiomyocytes following short term dexamethasone exposure.

Kosmidis G(1), Bellin M(1), Ribeiro MC(1), van Meer B(1), Ward-van Oostwaard
D(1), Passier R(2), Tertoolen LG(1), Mummery CL(1), Casini S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands; MIRA, University of Twente,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address: s.casini@amc.uva.nl.

One limitation in using human pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes
(hPSC-CMs) for disease modeling and cardiac safety pharmacology is their immature
functional phenotype compared with adult cardiomyocytes. Here, we report that
treatment of human embryonic stem cell derived cardiomyocytes (hESC-CMs) with
dexamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid, activated glucocorticoid signaling
which in turn improved their calcium handling properties and contractility.
L-type calcium current and action potential properties were not affected by
dexamethasone but significantly faster calcium decay, increased forces of
contraction and sarcomeric lengths, were observed in hESC-CMs after dexamethasone
exposure. Activating the glucocorticoid pathway can thus contribute to mediating 
hPSC-CMs maturation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26456652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Biochim Pol. 2015;62(3):423-33. doi: 10.18388/abp.2015_1035. Epub 2015 Aug
18.

Analysis of genes involved in response to doxorubicin and a GD2
ganglioside-specific 14G2a monoclonal antibody in IMR-32 human neuroblastoma
cells.

Horwacik I(1), Durbas M(1), Boratyn E(1), Sawicka A(1), Wegrzyn P(2), Krzanik
S(1), Górka A(1), Drozniak J(1), Augustyniak E(1), Kowalczyk A(1), Rokita H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Faculty of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Biotechnology, The Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, The Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland.

Neuroblastoma is the most common extra-cranial solid tumor of childhood and it is
characterized by the presence of a glycosphingolipid, GD2 ganglioside. Monoclonal
antibodies targeting the antigen are currently tested in clinical trials.
Additionally, several research groups reported results revealing that
ganglioside-specific antibodies can affect cellular signaling and cause direct
cytotoxicity against tumor cells. To shed more light on gene expression
signatures of tumor cells, we used microarrays to analyze changes of
transcriptome in IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cell cultures treated with
doxorubicin (DOX) or a mouse monoclonal antibody binding to GD2 ganglioside 14G2a
(mAb) for 24 h. The obtained results highlight that disparate cellular pathways
are regulated by doxorubicin and 14G2a. Next, we used RT-PCR to verify mRNA
levels of selected DOX-responsive genes such as RPS27L, PPM1D, SESN1, CDKN1A,
TNFSF10B, and 14G2a-responsive genes such as SVIL, JUN, RASSF6, TLX2, ID1. Then, 
we applied western blot and analyzed levels of RPS27L, PPM1D, sestrin 1 proteins 
after DOX-treatment. Additionally, we aimed to measure effects of doxorubicin and
topotecan (TPT) and 14G2a on expression of a novel human NDUFAF2 gene encoding
for mimitin protein (MYC-induced mitochondrial protein) and correlate it with
expression of the MYCN gene. We showed that expression of both genes was
concomitantly decreased in the 14G2a-treated IMR-32 cells after 24 h and 48 h.
Our results extend knowledge on gene expression profiles after application of DOX
and 14G2a in our model and reveal promising candidates for further research aimed
at finding novel anti-neuroblastoma targets.

PMID: 26284262  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 7;35(1):234-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3353-14.2015.

Fgf-signaling-dependent Sox9a and Atoh1a regulate otic neural development in
zebrafish.

Wang J(1), Wu Y(1), Zhao F(1), Wu Y(1), Dong W(1), Zhao J(1), Zhu Z(1), Liu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Education Ministry Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation and the State Key Laboratory of Bio-membrane and Membrane
Bio-engineering, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China. (2)The Education Ministry Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation and the State Key Laboratory of Bio-membrane and Membrane
Bio-engineering, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China doliu@pku.edu.cn.

Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) play important roles in developmental processes 
of the inner ear, including the ontogeny of the statoacoustic ganglia (SAG) and
hair cells. However, the detailed genetic mechanism(s) underlying
Fgf/Fgfr-dependent otic neural development remains elusive. Using conditional
genetic approaches and inhibitory small molecules, we have revealed that
Fgfr-PI3K/Akt signaling is mainly responsible for zebrafish SAG development and
have determined that Sox9a and Atoh1a act downstream of Fgfr-Akt signaling to
specify and/or maintain the otic neuron fate during the early segmentation stage.
Sox9a and Atoh1a coregulate numerous downstream factors identified through our
ChIP-seq analyses, including Tlx2 and Eya2. Fgfr-Erk1/2 signaling contributes to 
ultricular hair cell development during a critical period between 9 and 15 hours 
postfertilization. Our work reveals that a genetic network of the previously
known sensory determinant Atoh1 and the neural crest determinant Sox9 plays
critical roles in SAG development. These newly uncovered roles for Atoh1and Sox9 
in zebrafish otic development may be relevant to study in other species.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/350234-11$15.00/0.

PMID: 25568117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Nat Chem. 2014 Apr;6(4):315-9. doi: 10.1038/nchem.1870. Epub 2014 Feb 16.

Stable GaX2, InX2 and TlX2 radicals.

Protchenko AV(1), Dange D(2), Harmer JR(3), Tang CY(1), Schwarz AD(1), Kelly
MJ(1), Phillips N(1), Tirfoin R(1), Birjkumar KH(4), Jones C(2), Kaltsoyannis
N(4), Mountford P(1), Aldridge S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford,
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QR, UK. (2)School of Chemistry, PO Box 23, Monash
University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia. (3)1] Centre for Advanced
Electron Spin Resonance, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QR [2] Center for Advanced Imaging, University of
Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia. (4)Department of Chemistry,
University College London, Christopher Ingold Laboratories, 20 Gordon Street,
London WC1H 0AJ, UK.

The chemistry of the Group 13 metals is dominated by the +1 and +3 oxidation
states, and simple monomeric M(II) species are typically short-lived, highly
reactive species. Here we report the first thermally robust monomeric MX2
radicals of gallium, indium and thallium. By making use of sterically demanding
boryl substituents, compounds of the type M(II)(boryl)2 (M = Ga, In, Tl) can be
synthesized. These decompose above 130 °C and are amenable to structural
characterization in the solid state by X-ray crystallography. Electron
paramagnetic resonance and computational studies reveal a dominant metal-centred 
character for all three radicals (>70% spin density at the metal). M(II) species 
have been invoked as key short-lived intermediates in well-known
electron-transfer processes; consistently, the chemical behaviour of these novel 
isolated species reveals facile one-electron shuttling processes at the metal
centre.

PMID: 24651198  [PubMed]


5. Yi Chuan. 2013 Oct;35(10):1198-208.

[Comparative analysis of conservation and regulatory network on core
transcription factors in mouse inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Wei QJ(2), Xing GQ(3), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During vertebrate inner ear development, several core genes, such as Six1, Six4, 
Pax2, Pax8, Foxi1, Dlx5, Gbx2, Irx2/3, and Msx1, are crucial to the regulation of
the otic placode induction. In order to get the gene regulatory network during
inner ear development, bioinformatics methods were adopted to analyze
conservation and regulation of the core transcription factors in mice. Pax2,
Pax8, Foxi1, and Dlx5 remained to be the main regulators during inner ear
development, which was consistent with the gene regulatory network from
literature. Six1 was regulated by many transcription factors, and Gbx2, Irx2/3,
and Msx1 played important roles in the regulatory network. The differences in the
constructed regulatory network were reasonably analyzed. It was predicted that
Msxl regulated the expression of Six1 and Gbx2. In addition, several
transcription factors, such as Sox5, Lhx2, Rax, Otx1, Otx2, Pitxl, Pitx2, Nkx2-5,
Irx4, Irx6, Dlx2, Hmx1/2/3, Pou4f3, Pax4 and Tlx2, were found to be involved in
the regulatory network. Our results provide an improved understanding of the
regulatory mechanism during inner ear development.

PMID: 24459893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurodev Disord. 2014;6(1):36. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-6-36. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

PreImplantation factor (PIF*) promotes embryotrophic and neuroprotective decidual
genes: effect negated by epidermal growth factor.

Duzyj CM(1), Paidas MJ(1), Jebailey L(2), Huang JS(3), Barnea ER(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale Women and
Children's Center for Blood Disorders, Yale University School of Medicine, 333
Cedar St, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)GeneGo Inc., A Thomson
Reuters Business, 5901 Priestly Drive Suite 200, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Biology Unit, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)Society for the Investigation of
Early Pregnancy, 1697 Lark Lane, Cherry Hill, NJ 08003, USA ; BioIncept LLC (PIF 
Proprietary), 1697 Lark Lane, Cherry Hill, NJ 08003, USA.

BACKGROUND: Intimate embryo-maternal interaction is paramount for pregnancy
success post-implantation. The embryo follows a specific developmental timeline
starting with neural system, dependent on endogenous and decidual factors. Beyond
altered genetics/epigenetics, post-natal diseases may initiate at
prenatal/neonatal, post-natal period, or through a continuum. Preimplantation
factor (PIF) secreted by viable embryos promotes implantation and trophoblast
invasion. Synthetic PIF reverses neuroinflammation in non-pregnant models. PIF
targets embryo proteins that protect against oxidative stress and protein
misfolding. We report of PIF's embryotrophic role and potential to prevent
developmental disorders by regulating uterine milieu at implantation and first
trimester.
METHODS: PIF's effect on human implantation (human endometrial stromal cells
(HESC)) and first-trimester decidua cultures (FTDC) was examined, by global gene 
expression (Affymetrix), disease-biomarkers ranking (GeneGo), neuro-specific
genes (Ingenuity) and proteins (mass-spectrometry). PIF co-cultured epidermal
growth factor (EGF) in both HESC and FTDC (Affymetrix) was evaluated.
RESULTS: In HESC, PIF promotes neural differentiation and transmission genes
(TLX2, EPHA10) while inhibiting retinoic acid receptor gene, which arrests
growth. PIF promotes axon guidance and downregulates EGF-dependent neuroregulin
signaling. In FTDC, PIF promotes bone morphogenetic protein pathway (SMAD1,
53-fold) and axonal guidance genes (EPH5) while inhibiting PPP2R2C, negative
cell-growth regulator, involved in Alzheimer's and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
In HESC, PIF affects angiotensin via beta-arrestin, transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-ß), notch, BMP, and wingless-int (WNT) signaling pathways that
promote neurogenesis involved in childhood neurodevelopmental diseases-autism and
also affected epithelial-mesenchymal transition involved in neuromuscular
disorders. In FTDC, PIF upregulates neural development and hormone signaling,
while downregulating genes protecting against xenobiotic response leading to
connective tissue disorders. In both HESC and FTDC, PIF affects neural
development and transmission pathways. In HESC interactome, PIF promotes FUS
gene, which controls genome integrity, while in FTDC, PIF upregulates STAT3
critical transcription signal. EGF abolished PIF's effect on HESC, decreasing
metalloproteinase and prolactin receptor genes, thereby interfering with
decidualization, while in FTDC, EGF co-cultured with PIF reduced ZHX2, gene that 
regulates neural AFP secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: PIF promotes decidual trophic genes and proteins to regulate neural 
development. By regulating the uterine milieu, PIF may decrease embryo
vulnerability to post-natal neurodevelopmental disorders. Examination of
PIF-based intervention strategies used during embryogenesis to improve pregnancy 
prognosis and reduce post-natal vulnerability is clearly in order.

PMCID: PMC4470351
PMID: 26085845  [PubMed]


7. Epigenetics. 2013 Sep;8(9):921-34. doi: 10.4161/epi.25577. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Genome-scale analysis of DNA methylation in colorectal cancer using Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChips.

Naumov VA(1), Generozov EV, Zaharjevskaya NB, Matushkina DS, Larin AK, Chernyshov
SV, Alekseev MV, Shelygin YA, Govorun VM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Physical Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biology
Agency of Russian Federation; Moscow, Russia.

Illumina's Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays were used to examine
genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in 22 sample pairs from colorectal cancer
(CRC) and adjacent tissues and 19 colon tissue samples from cancer-free donors.
We show that the methylation profiles of tumors and healthy tissue samples can be
clearly distinguished from one another and that the main source of methylation
variability is associated with disease status. We used different statistical
approaches to evaluate the methylation data. In general, at the CpG-site level,
we found that common CRC-specific methylation patterns consist of at least 15,667
CpG sites that were significantly different from either adjacent healthy tissue
or tissue from cancer-free subjects. Of these sites, 10,342 were hypermethylated 
in CRC, and 5,325 were hypomethylated. Hypermethylated sites were common in the
maximum number of sample pairs and were mostly located in CpG islands, where they
were significantly enriched for differentially methylated regions known to be
cancer-specific. In contrast, hypomethylated sites were mostly located in CpG
shores and were generally sample-specific. Despite the considerable variability
in methylation data, we selected a panel of 14 highly robust candidates showing
methylation marks in genes SND1, ADHFE1, OPLAH, TLX2, C1orf70, ZFP64, NR5A2, and 
COL4A. This set was successfully cross-validated using methylation data from 209 
CRC samples and 38 healthy tissue samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas consortium
(AUC = 0.981 [95% CI: 0.9677-0.9939], sensitivity = 100% and specificity = 82%). 
In summary, this study reports a large number of loci with novel differential
methylation statuses, some of which may serve as candidate markers for diagnostic
purposes.

PMCID: PMC3883769
PMID: 23867710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Feb;50:187-200. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.10.019. Epub 2012 Oct
25.

Transcriptional dysregulation and impairment of PHOX2B auto-regulatory mechanism 
induced by polyalanine expansion mutations associated with congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome.

Di Lascio S(1), Bachetti T, Saba E, Ceccherini I, Benfante R, Fornasari D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

The PHOX2B transcription factor plays a crucial role in autonomic nervous system 
development. In humans, heterozygous mutations of the PHOX2B gene lead to
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS), a rare disorder characterized
by a broad variety of symptoms of autonomic nervous system dysfunction including 
inadequate control of breathing. The vast majority of patients with CCHS are
heterozygous for a polyalanine repeat expansion mutation involving a polyalanine 
tract of twenty residues in the C-terminus of PHOX2B. Although several lines of
evidence support a dominant-negative mechanism for PHOX2B mutations in CCHS, the 
molecular effects of PHOX2B mutant proteins on the transcriptional activity of
the wild-type protein have not yet been elucidated. As one of the targets of
PHOX2B is the PHOX2B gene itself, we tested the transcriptional activity of
wild-type and mutant proteins on the PHOX2B gene promoter, and found that the
transactivation ability of proteins with polyalanine expansions decreased as a
function of the length of the expansion, whereas DNA binding was severely
affected only in the case of the mutant with the longest polyalanine tract (+13
alanine). Co-transfection experiments using equimolar amounts of PHOX2B wild-type
and mutant proteins in order to simulate a heterozygous state in vitro and four
different PHOX2B target gene regulatory regions (PHOX2B, PHOX2A, DBH, TLX2)
clearly showed that the polyalanine expanded proteins alter the transcriptional
activity of wild-type protein in a promoter-specific manner, without any clear
correlation with the length of the expansion. Moreover, although reduced
transactivation may be caused by retention of the wild-type protein in the
cytoplasm or in nuclear aggregates, this mechanism can only be partially
responsible for the pathogenesis of CCHS because of the reduction in cytoplasmic 
and nuclear accumulation when the +13 alanine mutant is co-expressed with
wild-type protein, and the fact that the shortest polyalanine expansions do not
form visible cytoplasmic aggregates. Deletion of the C-terminal of PHOX2B leads
to a protein that correctly localizes in the nucleus but impairs PHOX2B wild-type
transcriptional activity, thus suggesting that protein mislocalization is not the
only mechanism leading to CCHS. The results of this study provide novel in vitro 
experimental evidence of a transcriptional dominant-negative effect of PHOX2B
polyalanine mutant proteins on wild-type protein on two different PHOX2B target
genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23103552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Basic Res Cardiol. 2012 Mar;107(2):247. doi: 10.1007/s00395-012-0247-7. Epub 2012
Feb 11.

Proarrhythmia in a non-failing murine model of cardiac-specific Na+/Ca 2+
exchanger overexpression: whole heart and cellular mechanisms.

Pott C(1), Muszynski A, Ruhe M, Bögeholz N, Schulte JS, Milberg P, Mönnig G,
Fabritz L, Goldhaber JI, Breithardt G, Schmitz W, Philipson KD, Eckardt L,
Kirchhof P, Müller FU.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental and Clinical Electrophysiology, Department of
Cardiology and Angiology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
christian.pott@ukmuenster.de

The cardiac Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) generates an inward electrical current
during SR-Ca(2+) release, thus possibly promoting afterdepolarizations of the
action potential (AP). We used transgenic mice 12.5 weeks or younger with
cardiomyocyte-directed overexpression of NCX (NCX-Tg) to study the proarrhythmic 
potential and mechanisms of enhanced NCX activity. NCX-Tg exhibited normal
echocardiographic left ventricular function and heart/body weight ratio, while
the QT interval was prolonged in surface ECG recordings. Langendorff-perfused
NCX-Tg, but not wild-type (WT) hearts, developed ventricular tachycardia. APs and
ionic currents were measured in isolated cardiomyocytes. Cell capacitance was
unaltered between groups. APs were prolonged in NCX-Tg versus WT myocytes along
with voltage-activated K(+) currents (K(v)) not being reduced but even increased 
in amplitude. During abrupt changes in pacing cycle length, early
afterdepolarizations (EADs) were frequently recorded in NCX-Tg but not in WT
myocytes. Next to EADs, delayed afterdepolarizations (DAD) triggering spontaneous
APs (sAPs) occurred in NCX-Tg but not in WT myocytes. To test whether sAPs were
associated with spontaneous Ca(2+) release (sCR), Ca(2+) transients were
recorded. Despite the absence of sAPs in WT, sCR was observed in myocytes of both
genotypes suggesting a facilitated translation of sCR into DADs in NCX-Tg.
Moreover, sCR was more frequent in NCX-Tg as compared to WT. Myocardial protein
levels of Ca(2+)-handling proteins were not different between groups except the
ryanodine receptor (RyR), which was increased in NCX-Tg versus WT. We conclude
that NCX overexpression is proarrhythmic in a non-failing environment even in the
absence of reduced K(V). The underlying mechanisms are: (1) occurrence of EADs
due to delayed repolarization; (2) facilitated translation from sCR into DADs;
(3) proneness to sCR possibly caused by altered Ca(2+) handling and/or increased 
RyR expression.

PMCID: PMC3500087
PMID: 22327339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):H1636-44. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00742.2011. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Revisiting the ionic mechanisms of early afterdepolarizations in cardiomyocytes: 
predominant by Ca waves or Ca currents?

Zhao Z(1), Wen H, Fefelova N, Allen C, Baba A, Matsuda T, Xie LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, University of Medicine and 
Dentistry of New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New Jersey 07101, USA.

Early afterdepolarizations (EADs) have been implicated in severe cardiac
arrhythmias and sudden cardiac deaths. However, the mechanism(s) for EAD genesis,
especially regarding the relative contribution of Ca(2+) wave (CaW) vs. L-type Ca
current (I(Ca,L)), still remains controversial. In the present study, we
simultaneously recorded action potentials (APs) and intracellular Ca(2+) images
in isolated rabbit ventricular myocytes and systematically compared the
properties of EADs in the following two pharmacological models: 1) hydrogen
peroxide (H(2)O(2); 200 µM); and 2) isoproterenol (100 nM) and BayK 8644 (50 nM) 
(Iso + BayK). We assessed the rate dependency of EADs, the temporal relationship 
between EADs and corresponding CaWs, the distribution of EADs over voltage, and
the effects of blockers of I(Ca,L), Na/Ca exchangers, and ryanodine receptors.
The most convincing evidence came from the AP-clamp experiment, in which the cell
membrane clamp was switched from current clamp to voltage clamp using a normal AP
waveform without EAD; CaWs disappeared in the H(2)O(2) model, but persisted in
the Iso + BayK model. We postulate that, although CaWs and reactivation of
I(Ca,L) may act synergistically in either case, reactivation of I(Ca,L) plays a
predominant role in EAD genesis under oxidative stress (H(2)O(2) model), while
spontaneous CaWs are a predominant cause for EADs under Ca(2+) overload condition
(Iso + BayK model).

PMCID: PMC3330805
PMID: 22307670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):H1546-62. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00944.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

New mechanisms of pulmonary arterial hypertension: role of Ca²<U+207A> signaling.

Kuhr FK(1), Smith KA, Song MY, Levitan I, Yuan JX.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep, and Allergy, Department of
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a severe and progressive disease that
usually culminates in right heart failure and death if left untreated. Although
there have been substantial improvements in our understanding and significant
advances in the management of this disease, there is a grim prognosis for
patients in the advanced stages of PAH. A major cause of PAH is increased
pulmonary vascular resistance, which results from sustained vasoconstriction,
excessive pulmonary vascular remodeling, in situ thrombosis, and increased
pulmonary vascular stiffness. In addition to other signal transduction pathways, 
Ca(2+) signaling in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) plays a central
role in the development and progression of PAH because of its involvement in both
vasoconstriction, through its pivotal effect of PASMC contraction, and vascular
remodeling, through its stimulatory effect on PASMC proliferation. Altered
expression, function, and regulation of ion channels and transporters in PASMCs
contribute to an increased cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration and enhanced Ca(2+)
signaling in patients with PAH. This review will focus on the potential
pathogenic role of Ca(2+) mobilization, regulation, and signaling in the
development and progression of PAH.

PMCID: PMC3330808
PMID: 22245772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2011 Nov;89(11):769-82. doi: 10.1139/Y11-075. Epub 2011 
Oct 18.

FKBP12.6 mice display temporal gender differences in cardiac Ca(2+)-signalling
phenotype upon chronic pressure overload.

Prévilon M(1), Pezet M, Semprez F, Mercadier JJ, Rouet-Benzineb P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale (Inserm), UMR U698, 
Paris, France.

Preventing Ca(2+)-leak during diastole may provide a means to improve overall
cardiac function. The immunosuppressant FK506-binding protein 12.6 (FKBP12.6)
regulates ryanodine receptor-2 (RyR2) gating and binds to and inhibits
calcineurin (Cn). It is also involved in the pathophysiology of heart failure
(HF). Here, we investigated the effects of FKBP12.6 over-expression and gender on
Ca(2+)-handling proteins (RyR2, SERCA2a/PLB, and NCX), and on pro-(CaMKII,
Cn/NFAT) and anti-hypertrophic (GSK3ß) signalling pathways in a thoracic aortic
constriction (TAC) mouse model. Wild type mice (WT) and mice over-expressing
FKBP12.6 of both genders underwent TAC or sham-operation (Sham). FKBP12.6
over-expression ameliorated post-TAC survival rates in both genders. Over time,
FKBP12.6 over-expression reduced the molecular signature of left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH) and the transition to HF (BNP and ß-MHC mRNAs) and attenuated
Cn/NFAT activation in TAC-males only. The gender difference in pro- and
anti-hypertrophic LVH signals was time-dependent: TAC-females exhibited earlier
pathological LVH associated with concomitant SERCA2a down-regulation, CaMKII
activation, and GSK3ß inactivation. Both genotypes showed systolic dysfunction,
possibly related to down-regulated RyR2, but only FK-TAC-males exhibited
preserved diastolic LV function. Although FKBP12.6 over-expression did not impact
the vicious cycle of TAC-induced HF, this study reveals some subtle sequential
and temporal gender differences in Ca(2+)-signalling pathways of pathological
LVH.

PMID: 22007848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Vis. 2011;17:1182-91. Epub 2011 May 5.

Oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and calcium overload in human lamina 
cribrosa cells from glaucoma donors.

McElnea EM(1), Quill B, Docherty NG, Irnaten M, Siah WF, Clark AF, O'Brien CJ,
Wallace DM.

Author information: 
(1)1Institute of Ophthalmology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

PURPOSE: Oxidative stress is implicit in the pathological changes associated with
glaucoma. The purpose of this study was to compare levels of oxidative stress in 
glial fibrillary acid-negative protein (GFAP) lamina cribrosa (LC) cells obtained
from the optic nerve head (ONH) region of 5 normal (NLC) and 4 glaucomatous (GLC)
human donor eyes and to also examine mitochondrial function and calcium
homeostasis in this region of the ONH.
METHODS: Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was examined by a
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) assay which measures
malondialdehyde (MDA), a naturally occurring product of lipid peroxidation and is
used as an indicator of oxidative stress. Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) 
and intracellular calcium ([Ca(2+)](i)) levels were evaluated by flow cytometry
using the JC-1 (5,5',6,6'-tetrachloro-1,1',3,3'-tetrabenzimidazolecarbocyanine
iodide) and fluo-4/AM probes respectively. Anti-oxidant and Ca(2+) transport
system gene and protein expression were determined by real time polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) using gene-specific primer/probe sets and western
immunoblotting, respectively.
RESULTS: Intracellular ROS production was increased in GLC compared to NLC (27.19
± 7.05 µM MDA versus 14.59 ± 0.82 µM MDA, p < 0.05). Expression of the
anti-oxidants Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C1 (AKR1C1) and Glutamate
cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (GCLC) were significantly lower in GLC (p =
0.02) compared to NLC control. MMP was lower in GLC (57.5 ± 6.8%) compared to NLC
(41.8 ± 5.3%). [Ca(2+)](i) levels were found to be higher (p < 0.001) in GLC
cells compared to NLC. Expression of the plasma membrane Ca(2+)/ATPase (PMCA) and
the sodium-calcium (NCX) exchangers were lower, while intracellular
sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)/ATPase 3 (SERCA) expression was significantly 
higher in GLC compared to NLC. Subjection of NLC cells to oxidative stress (200
µM H(2)0(2)) reduced expression of Na(+)/Ca2(+) exchanger 1 (NCX 1), plasma
membrane Ca2+ ATPase 1 (PMCA 1), and PMCA 4 as determined by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data finds evidence of oxidative stress, mitochondrial
dysfunction and impaired calcium extrusion in GLC cells compared to NLC cells and
suggests their importance in the pathological changes occurring at the ONH in
glaucoma. Future therapies may target reducing oxidative stress and / or
[Ca(2+)](i).

PMCID: PMC3102025
PMID: 21617752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Jun;50(6):1017-25. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.01.016.
Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Exercise training does not improve cardiac function in compensated or
decompensated left ventricular hypertrophy induced by aortic stenosis.

van Deel ED(1), de Boer M, Kuster DW, Boontje NM, Holemans P, Sipido KR, van der 
Velden J, Duncker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiology, Thoraxcenter, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

There is ample evidence that regular exercise exerts beneficial effects on left
ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, remodeling and dysfunction produced by ischemic
heart disease or systemic hypertension. In contrast, the effects of exercise on
pathological LV hypertrophy and dysfunction produced by LV outflow obstruction
have not been studied to date. Consequently, we evaluated the effects of 8 weeks 
of voluntary wheel running in mice (which mitigates post-infarct LV dysfunction) 
on LV hypertrophy and dysfunction produced by mild (mTAC) and severe (sTAC)
transverse aortic constriction. mTAC produced ~40% LV hypertrophy and increased
myocardial expression of hypertrophy marker genes but did not affect LV function,
SERCA2a protein levels, apoptosis or capillary density. Exercise had no effect on
global LV hypertrophy and function in mTAC but increased interstitial collagen,
and ANP expression. sTAC produced ~80% LV hypertrophy and further increased ANP
expression and interstitial fibrosis and, in contrast with mTAC, also produced LV
dilation, systolic as well as diastolic dysfunction, pulmonary congestion,
apoptosis and capillary rarefaction and decreased SERCA2a and ryanodine receptor 
(RyR) protein levels. LV diastolic dysfunction was likely aggravated by elevated 
passive isometric force and Ca(2+)-sensitivity of myofilaments. Exercise training
failed to mitigate the sTAC-induced LV hypertrophy and capillary rarefaction or
the decreases in SERCA2a and RyR. Exercise attenuated the sTAC-induced increase
in passive isometric force but did not affect myofilament Ca(2+)-sensitivity and 
tended to aggravate interstitial fibrosis. In conclusion, exercise had no effect 
on LV function in compensated and decompensated cardiac hypertrophy produced by
LV outflow obstruction, suggesting that the effect of exercise on pathologic LV
hypertrophy and dysfunction depends critically on the underlying cause.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21291889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Calcium. 2010 Aug-Sep;48(2-3):114-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2010.07.005. Epub 
2010 Aug 21.

Selective interference with TRPC3/6 channels disrupts OX1 receptor signalling via
NCX and reveals a distinct calcium influx pathway.

Louhivuori LM(1), Jansson L, Nordström T, Bart G, Näsman J, Akerman KE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicum Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of
Helsinki, Finland.

TRPC channels play significant roles in the regulation of neuronal plasticity and
development. The mechanism by which these nonselective cation channels exert
their trophic actions appears to involve entry of Ca(2+) into the cells. Using a 
neuronal cell model (differentiated human IMR32 neuroblastoma cells), we
demonstrate a central role for sodium entry via TRPC3/6 channels in
receptor-mediated increases in intracellular calcium. These Na(+)-dependent
Ca(2+) influxes, which were observed in a subpopulation of cells, were
efficiently blocked by protein kinase C activation, by the Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger
inhibitors, and by molecular disruption of TRPC3/6 channel function. On the other
hand, another subpopulation of cells showed a Na(+)-independent Ca(2+) entry upon
stimulation of the same receptors, orexin/hypocretin and bradykinin receptors.
This second type of response was not affected by the above mentioned treatments, 
but it was sensitive to polyvalent cations, such as ruthenium red, spermine and
Gd(3+). The data suggest that a NCX-TRPC channel interaction constitutes an
important functional unit in receptor-mediated Ca(2+) influx in neuronal cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Physiol. 2010 Sep 1;588(Pt 17):3267-76. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.187708. Epub
2010 Jul 19.

Activation of reverse Na+-Ca2+ exchange by the Na+ current augments the cardiac
Ca2+ transient: evidence from NCX knockout mice.

Larbig R(1), Torres N, Bridge JH, Goldhaber JI, Philipson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Laboratories, MRL 3-645, David Geffen School of
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1760, USA.

The hypothesis that Na(+) influx during the action potential (AP) activates
reverse Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange (NCX) and subsequent entry of trigger Ca(2+) is
controversial. We tested this hypothesis by monitoring intracellular Ca(2+)
before and after selective inactivation of I(Na) prior to a simulated action
potential in patch-clamped ventricular myocytes isolated from adult wild-type
(WT) and NCX knockout (KO) mice. First, we inactivated I(Na) using a ramp
prepulse to 45 mV. In WT cells, inactivation of I(Na) decreased the Ca(2+)
transient amplitude by 51.1 +/- 4.6% (P < 0.001, n = 14) and reduced its maximum 
release flux by 53.0 +/- 4.6% (P < 0.001, n = 14). There was no effect on
diastolic Ca(2+). In striking contrast, Ca(2+) transients in NCX KO
cardiomyocytes were unaffected by the presence or absence of I(Na) (n = 8). We
obtained similar results when measuring trigger Ca(2+) influx in myocytes with
depleted sarcoplasmic reticulum. In WT cells, inactivation of I(Na) decreased
trigger Ca(2+) influx by 37.8 +/- 6% and maximum rate of flux by 30.6 +/- 7.7% at
2.5 mm external Ca(2+) (P < 0.001 and P < 0.05, n = 9). This effect was again
absent in the KO cells (n = 8). Second, exposure to 10 mum tetrodotoxin to block 
I(Na) also reduced the Ca(2+) transients in WT myocytes but not in NCX KO
myocytes. We conclude that I(Na) and reverse NCX modulate Ca(2+) release in
murine WT cardiomyocytes by augmenting the pool of Ca(2+) that triggers ryanodine
receptors. This is an important mechanism for regulation of Ca(2+) release and
contractility in murine heart.

PMCID: PMC2976021
PMID: 20643777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Genesis. 2010 Aug;48(8):479-84. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20644.

A Tlx2-Cre mouse line uncovers essential roles for hand1 in extraembryonic and
lateral mesoderm.

Maska EL, Cserjesi P, Hua LL, Garstka ME, Brody HM, Morikawa Y.

Hand1 regulates development of numerous tissues within the embryo, extraembryonic
mesoderm, and trophectoderm. Systemic loss of Hand1 results in early embryonic
lethality but the cause has remained unknown. To determine if Hand1 expression in
extraembryonic mesoderm is essential for embryonic survival, Hand1 was
conditionally deleted using the HoxB6-Cre mouse line that expresses Cre in
extraembryonic and lateral mesoderm. Deletion of Hand1 using HoxB6-Cre resulted
in embryonic lethality identical to systemic knockout. To determine if lethality 
is due to Hand1 function in extraembryonic mesoderm or lateral mesoderm, we
generated a Tlx2-Cre mouse line expressing Cre in lateral mesoderm but not
extraembryonic tissues. Deletion of Hand1 using the Tlx2-Cre line results in
embryonic survival with embryos exhibiting herniated gut and thin enteric smooth 
muscle. Our results show that Hand1 regulates development of lateral mesoderm
derivatives and its loss in extraembryonic mesoderm is the primary cause of
lethality in Hand1-null embryos.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2955361
PMID: 20506548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Sep;342(1-2):251-60. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0492-8. Epub 
2010 May 19.

Hearts of surviving MLP-KO mice show transient changes of intracellular calcium
handling.

Kemecsei P(1), Miklós Z, Bíró T, Marincsák R, Tóth BI, Komlódi-Pásztor E, Barnucz
E, Mirk E, Van der Vusse GJ, Ligeti L, Ivanics T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Physiology and Clinical Experimental Research, Semmelweis
University, Tuzolto u. 37-47, Budapest, Hungary.

The muscle Lim protein knock-out (MLP-KO) mouse model is extensively used for
studying the pathophysiology of dilated cardiomyopathy. However, explanation is
lacking for the observed long survival of the diseased mice which develop until
adulthood despite the gene defect, which theoretically predestines them to early 
death due to heart failure. We hypothesized that adaptive changes of cardiac
intracellular calcium (Ca(i)(2+)) handling might explain the phenomenon. In order
to study the progression of changes in cardiac function and Ca(i)(2+) cycling,
myocardial Ca(i)(2+)-transients recorded by Indo-1 surface fluorometry were
assessed with concomitant measurement of hemodynamic performance in isolated
Langendorff-perfused hearts of 3- and 9-month old MLP-KO animals. Hearts were
challenged with beta-agonist isoproterenol and the sarcoplasmic reticular
Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) inhibitor cyclopiazonic acid (CPA). Cardiac mRNA content 
and levels of key Ca(2+) handling proteins were also measured. A decline in
lusitropic function was observed in 3-month old, but not in 9-month old MLP-KO
mice under unchallenged conditions. beta-adrenergic responses to isoproterenol
were similar in all the studied groups. The CPA induced an increase in
end-diastolic Ca(i)(2+)-level and a decrease in Ca(2+)-sequestration capacity in 
3-month old MLP-KO mice compared to age-matched controls. This unfavorable
condition was absent at 9 months of age. SERCA2a expression was lower in 3-month 
old MLP-KO than in the corresponding controls and in 9-month old MLP-KO hearts.
Our results show time-related recovery of hemodynamic function and an
age-dependent compensatory upregulation of Ca(i)(2+) handling in hearts of MLP-KO
mice, which most likely involve the normalization of the expression of SERCA2a in
the affected hearts.

PMID: 20490897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Genes Evol. 2009 Oct;219(9-10):481-96.

Conservation of gene linkage in dispersed vertebrate NK homeobox clusters.

Wotton KR(1), Weierud FK, Juárez-Morales JL, Alvares LE, Dietrich S, Lewis KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, King's College London, Floor 27 Guy's 
Tower, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, SE1 9RT, UK.

Nk homeobox genes are important regulators of many different developmental
processes including muscle, heart, central nervous system and sensory organ
development. They are thought to have arisen as part of the ANTP megacluster,
which also gave rise to Hox and ParaHox genes, and at least some NK genes remain 
tightly linked in all animals examined so far. The protostome-deuterostome
ancestor probably contained a cluster of nine Nk genes:
(Msx)-(Nk4/tinman)-(Nk3/bagpipe)-(Lbx/ladybird)-(Tlx/c15)-(Nk7)-(Nk6/hgtx)-(Nk1/s
louch)-(Nk5/Hmx). Of these genes, only NKX2.6-NKX3.1, LBX1-TLX1 and LBX2-TLX2
remain tightly linked in humans. However, it is currently unclear whether this is
unique to the human genome as we do not know which of these Nk genes are
clustered in other vertebrates. This makes it difficult to assess whether the
remaining linkages are due to selective pressures or because chance
rearrangements have "missed" certain genes. In this paper, we identify all of the
paralogs of these ancestrally clustered NK genes in several distinct vertebrates.
We demonstrate that tight linkages of Lbx1-Tlx1, Lbx2-Tlx2 and Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6 have
been widely maintained in both the ray-finned and lobe-finned fish lineages.
Moreover, the recently duplicated Hmx2-Hmx3 genes are also tightly linked.
Finally, we show that Lbx1-Tlx1 and Hmx2-Hmx3 are flanked by highly conserved
noncoding elements, suggesting that shared regulatory regions may have resulted
in evolutionary pressure to maintain these linkages. Consistent with this, these 
pairs of genes have overlapping expression domains. In contrast, Lbx2-Tlx2 and
Nkx3.1-Nkx2.6, which do not seem to be coexpressed, are also not associated with 
conserved noncoding sequences, suggesting that an alternative mechanism may be
responsible for the continued clustering of these genes.

PMID: 20112453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Gene Ther. 2010 May;17(5):373-4. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2009.90. Epub 2010 Jan
22.

Neuroblastoma-specific expression of potential therapeutics cannot be achieved
using a promoter region of the NCX (TLX2) gene.

Tivnan A, Stallings RL.

Comment on
    Cancer Gene Ther. 2001 Dec;8(12):997-1002.

PMCID: PMC2943140
PMID: 20094074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMB Rep. 2009 Dec 31;42(12):788-93.

Functional characterization of a minimal sequence essential for the expression of
human TLX2 gene.

Borghini S(1), Bachetti T, Fava M, Duca MD, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G Gaslini Universita di Genova,
Italy.

TLX2 is an orphan homeodomain transcription factor whose expression is mainly
associated with tissues derived from neural crest cells. Recently, we have
demonstrated that PHOX2A and PHOX2B are able to enhance the neural cell-type
specific expression of human TLX2 by binding distally the 5'-flanking region. In 
the present work, to deepen into the TLX2 transcription regulation, we have
focused on the proximal 5'- flanking region of the gene, mapping the
transcription start site and identifying a minimal promoter necessary and
sufficient for the basal transcription in cell lines from different origin.
Site-directed mutagenesis has allowed to demonstrate that the integrity of this
sequence is crucial for gene expression, while electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments have revealed that such an
activity is dependent on the binding of a PBX factor. Consistent with these
findings, such a basal promoter activity has resulted to be enhanced by the
previously reported PHOX2-responding sequence.

PMID: 20044949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Circ Res. 2010 Feb 5;106(2):317-27. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.208272. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Rad as a novel regulator of excitation-contraction coupling and beta-adrenergic
signaling in heart.

Wang G(1), Zhu X, Xie W, Han P, Li K, Sun Z, Wang Y, Chen C, Song R, Cao C, Zhang
J, Wu C, Liu J, Cheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Life Science, Peking University,
Beijing, China.

RATIONALE: Rad (Ras associated with diabetes) GTPase, a monomeric small G
protein, binds to Ca(v)beta subunit of the L-type Ca(2+) channel (LCC) and
thereby regulates LCC trafficking and activity. Emerging evidence suggests that
Rad is an important player in cardiac arrhythmogenesis and hypertrophic
remodeling. However, whether and how Rad involves in the regulation of
excitation-contraction (EC) coupling is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate possible role of Rad in cardiac EC
coupling and beta-adrenergic receptor (betaAR) inotropic mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Adenoviral overexpression of Rad by 3-fold in rat
cardiomyocytes suppressed LCC current (I(Ca)), [Ca(2+)](i) transients, and
contractility by 60%, 42%, and 38%, respectively, whereas the "gain" function of 
EC coupling was significantly increased, due perhaps to reduced "redundancy" of
LCC in triggering sarcoplasmic reticulum release. Conversely, approximately 70%
Rad knockdown by RNA interference increased I(Ca) (50%), [Ca(2+)](i) transients
(52%) and contractility (58%) without altering EC coupling efficiency; and the
dominant negative mutant RadS105N exerted a similar effect on I(Ca). Rad
upregulation caused depolarizing shift of LCC activation and hastened
time-dependent LCC inactivation; Rad downregulation, however, failed to alter
these attributes. The Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchange activity, sarcoplasmic reticulum
Ca(2+) content, properties of Ca(2+) sparks and propensity for Ca(2+) waves all
remained unperturbed regardless of Rad manipulation. Rad overexpression, but not 
knockdown, negated betaAR effects on I(Ca) and Ca(2+) transients.
CONCLUSION: These results establish Rad as a novel endogenous regulator of
cardiac EC coupling and betaAR signaling and support a parsimonious model in
which Rad buffers Ca(v)beta to modulate LCC activity, EC coupling, and betaAR
responsiveness.

PMID: 19926875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Pediatr Surg Int. 2009 Nov;25(11):961-5. doi: 10.1007/s00383-009-2451-6.

Immature enteric neurons in Ncx/Hox11L.1 deficient intestinal neuronal dysplasia 
model mice.

Kato Y(1), Miyahara K, Hatano M, Hasegawa Y, Seki T, Frykman PK, Kusafuka J, Lane
GJ, Yamataka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric General and Urogenital Surgery, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.
ykato@juntendo.ac.jp

AIM: The Ncx/Hox11L.1 gene is required for adequate development of enteric
neurons in mice and Ncx/Hox11L.1 deficient (Ncx-/-) mice are used as a model for 
human intestinal neuronal dysplasia (IND) because of similar histopathology
(hyperganglionosis), however, some 50% of Ncx-/- mice develop megacolon with a
caliber change in the proximal colon, and die when 21-35 days old. We used
polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) to examine the maturity
of enteric neurons in Ncx-/- mice to further understand the etiology of IND.
METHODS: PSA-NCAM immunoreactivity was measured in specimens taken 1 cm proximal 
to the ileocecal valve (ileum), 1 cm distal to the ileocecal valve (proximal
colon), and 1 cm proximal to the anus (distal colon) from 63 mice (Ncx-/-: n =
14, Ncx+/-: n = 30, and Ncx+/+: n = 19) on days 14 (D14), 21 (D21), and 27 or
later (>D27).
RESULTS: PSA-NCAM was positive (indicating immaturity) in proximal colon
(submucosal and myenteric plexuses) from 8/14 (57%) Ncx-/- mice (2/4 on D14, 4/6 
on D21, and 2/4 on >D27) and from 5/30 (17%) Ncx+/- mice (0/2 in D14, 2/13 in
D21, and 3/15 in >D27). PSA-NCAM was negative (indicating maturity) in all other 
specimens. The incidence of PSA-NCAM positive neurons in Ncx-/- appeared to be
correlated with the mortality rate seen in IND mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that colonic dysmotility and pathology seen in
Ncx-/- mice may be due to persistence of immature neurons in the proximal colon, 
which could also be the case in human IND and warrants further investigation.

PMID: 19697050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Toxicol Lett. 2009 Sep 10;189(2):152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2009.05.015. Epub
2009 May 27.

Acute methamphetamine exposure inhibits cardiac contractile function.

Turdi S(1), Schamber RM, Roe ND, Chew HG Jr, Culver B, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine, University of
Wyoming College of Health Sciences, Laramie, WY 82071, USA.

Methamphetamine, a commonly seen substance of abuse, has been reported to exert
detrimental effect on bodily function including the cardiovascular system
although its mechanism of action is poorly understood. This study was designed to
examine the direct impact of methamphetamine on isolated whole heart and single
cardiomyocyte contractile function. Murine hearts and isolated cardiomyocytes
from adult FVB mice were exposed to various concentrations of methamphetamine for
30min prior to the assessment of mechanical function using a Langendroff
apparatus and an IonOptix Myocam system, respectively. Cardiac contractile
properties analyzed included maximal velocity of left ventricular pressure
development and decline (+/-dP/dt), peak shortening amplitude (PS), maximal
velocity of shortening/relengthening (+/-dLdt), time-to-PS (TPS), time-to-90%
relengthening (TR(90)), resting and electrically stimulated increase of
intracellular Ca(2+) as well as intracellular Ca(2+) decay. Our results revealed 
that acute methamphetamine exposure depressed +/-dP/dt, PS and rise of
intracellular Ca(2+) without affecting +/-dLdt, TPS, TR(90), resting
intracellular Ca(2+) and intracellular Ca(2+) decay. Furthermore, methamphetamine
nullified the adrenergic agonist norepinephrine-elicited positive cardiomyocyte
contractile response, including elevated PS, +/-dLdt and shortened TR(90) without
affecting TPS. Western blot analysis showed unchanged expression of
sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a) and phospholamban,
associated with upregulated Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger levels following acute
methamphetamine exposure. In addition, methamphetamine promoted overt
cardiomyocyte protein damage evaluated by carbonyl formation. Taken together,
these results demonstrate direct cardiac depressant effect of methamphetamine in 
myocardium and isolated cardiomyocytes, possibly associated with protein damage
and dampened adrenergic response.

PMCID: PMC2730117
PMID: 19481142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mucosal Immunol. 2009 Jul;2(4):351-61. doi: 10.1038/mi.2009.15. Epub 2009 May 6.

From the fetal liver to spleen and gut: the highway to natural antibody.

Rosado MM(1), Aranburu A, Capolunghi F, Giorda E, Cascioli S, Cenci F, Petrini S,
Miller E, Leanderson T, Bottazzo GF, Natali PG, Carsetti R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy.

Comment in
    Mucosal Immunol. 2009 Sep;2(5):380-2.

The film of sIgA lining the intestinal epithelium plays a role in the regulation 
of the commensal microflora and prevention of pathogen invasion. We show that, in
the absence of intentional immunization, all sIgA in the gut is produced by B-1a 
B cells. We also show that B-1a B cells and sIgA derive from lineage-negative
precursors found in the fetal liver and located in the spleen after birth. The
splenic precursors do not generate B cells of the adaptive immune system in bone 
marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes, but efficiently replenish the cells producing
the natural antibodies. Therefore, B-1a B cells with their splenic progenitors
and their progeny of plasma cells fill the same function of the primordial immune
system of lower vertebrates. The natural antibodies in the serum and on the
intestinal epithelium may be an evolutionary ancient tool for the immediate
protection against commensal and pathogenic bacteria.

PMID: 19421184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. BMC Genomics. 2009 Apr 8;10:151. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-151.

Norepinephrine transport-mediated gene expression in noradrenergic neurogenesis.

Hu YF(1), Caron MG, Sieber-Blum M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. yhu@mcw.edu

BACKGROUND: We have identified a differential gene expression profile in neural
crest stem cells that is due to deletion of the norepinephrine transporter (NET) 
gene. NET is the target of psychotropic substances, such as tricyclic
antidepressants and the drug of abuse, cocaine. NET mutations have been
implicated in depression, anxiety, orthostatic intolerance and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). NET function in adult noradrenergic neurons of the
peripheral and central nervous systems is to internalize norepinephrine from the 
synaptic cleft. By contrast, during embryogenesis norepinephrine (NE) transport
promotes differentiation of neural crest stem cells and locus ceruleus
progenitors into noradrenergic neurons, whereas NET inhibitors block
noradrenergic differentiation. While the structure of NET und the regulation of
NET function are well described, little is known about downstream target genes of
norepinephrine (NE) transport.
RESULTS: We have prepared gene expression profiles of in vitro differentiating
wild type and norepinephrine transporter-deficient (NETKO) mouse neural crest
cells using long serial analysis of gene expression (LongSAGE). Comparison
analyses have identified a number of important differentially expressed genes,
including genes relevant to neural crest formation, noradrenergic neuron
differentiation and the phenotype of NETKO mice. Examples of differentially
expressed genes that affect noradrenergic cell differentiation include genes in
the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway, the Phox2b binding
partner Tlx2, the ubiquitin ligase Praja2, and the inhibitor of Notch signaling, 
Numbl. Differentially expressed genes that are likely to contribute to the NETKO 
phenotype include dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (Dbh), tyrosine hydroxylase (Th), the
peptide transmitter 'cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript' (Cart), and
the serotonin receptor subunit Htr3a. Real-time PCR confirmed differential
expression of key genes not only in neural crest cells, but also in the adult
superior cervical ganglion and locus ceruleus. In addition to known genes we have
identified novel differentially expressed genes and thus provide a valuable
database for future studies.
CONCLUSION: Loss of NET function during embryonic development in the mouse
deregulates signaling pathways that are critically involved in neural crest
formation and noradrenergic cell differentiation. The data further suggest
deregulation of signaling pathways in the development and/or function of the
NET-deficient peripheral, central and enteric nervous systems.

PMCID: PMC2679758
PMID: 19356247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Placenta. 2008 Jul;29(7):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Novel homeobox genes are differentially expressed in placental microvascular
endothelial cells compared with macrovascular cells.

Murthi P(1), Hiden U, Rajaraman G, Liu H, Borg AJ, Coombes F, Desoye G, Brennecke
SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development and aberrant
angiogenesis contributes substantially to placental pathologies. The complex
process of angiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors leading to the
formation of endothelial cells that line the microvasculature. Homeobox genes are
important transcription factors that regulate vascular development in embryonic
and adult tissues. We have recently shown that placental homeobox genes HLX,
DLX3, DLX4, MSX2 and GAX are expressed in placental endothelial cells. Hence, the
novel homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2, TGIF, HEX, PHOX1, MEIS2, HOXB7, and LIM6 were
detected that have not been reported in endothelial cells previously.
Importantly, these homeobox genes have not been previously reported in placental 
endothelial cells and, with the exception of HEX, PHOX1 and HOXB7, have not been 
described in any other endothelial cell type. Reverse transcriptase PCR was
performed on cDNA from freshly isolated placental microvascular endothelial cells
(PLEC), and the human placental microvascular endothelial cell line HPEC. cDNAs
prepared from control term placentae, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMVEC) and human umbilical vein macrovascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
used as controls. PCR analyses showed that all novel homeobox genes tested were
expressed by all endothelial cells types. Furthermore, real-time PCR analyses
revealed that homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2 and PHOX1 relative mRNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in HUVEC compared with microvascular endothelial
cells, while the relative mRNA expression levels of MEIS2 and TGIF were
significantly increased in macrovascular cells compared with microvascular
endothelial cells. Thus we have identified novel homeobox genes in microvascular 
endothelial cells and have shown that homeobox genes are differentially expressed
between micro- and macrovascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 18514308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Dec;42(12):2062-6.

The mechanism of intestinal motility in homozygous mutant Ncx/Hox11L.1-deficient 
mice--a model for intestinal neuronal dysplasia.

Kobayashi H(1), Kusafuka J, Lane GJ, Yamataka A, Satoh K, Hayakawa T, Kase Y,
Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine and Hospital Administration, Juntendo
University School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. koba@med.juntendo.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Homozygous mutant Ncx/Hox11L.1-deficient (Ncx-/-) mice develop
mega-ileo-ceco-colon with a caliber change in the proximal colon. This study
investigated the mechanism of intestinal motility in these mice.
METHOD: Five-week-old male and female Ncx-/- mice with mega-ileo-ceco-colon (n = 
8) were compared with age-matched male BDF1 mice used as controls (n = 8). All
mice were sacrificed, and uniform-sized strips of jejunum, ileum, proximal colon,
and distal colon were exposed to electrical field stimulation and pretreatment
with atropine sulfate, guanethidine, or tetrodotoxin. Contractile responses were 
recorded and compared.
RESULTS: Longitudinal muscle from strips of jejunum and ileum from all mice (BDF1
and Ncx-/-) did not respond to electrical field stimulation, whereas ileal
circular muscle contracted in BDF1 mice and contracted and relaxed in Ncx-/-
mice. Pretreatment with atropine sulfate and guanethidine inhibited the responses
of circular muscle of distal colon and ileum in BDF1 mice significantly (P <
.05), but no effect was observed in Ncx-/- mice.
CONCLUSION: In ileum, BDF1 mice have cholinergic and adrenergic dominant
contraction patterns, whereas Ncx-/- mice have relaxation-dominant patterns
because of nonadrenergic, noncholinergic nerves. Based on this, there would
appear to be some kind of variation in the gastrointestinal nerve supply in
Ncx-/- mice.

PMID: 18082708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007 Nov;15(11):2699-711.

Chromium (D-phenylalanine)3 improves obesity-induced cardiac contractile defect
in ob/ob mice.

Dong F(1), Yang X, Sreejayan N, Ren J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research and Alternative Medicine and Division of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Wyoming, Laramie, Wyoming 82071, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Low-molecular weight chromium compounds, such as chromium picolinate
[Cr(pic)(3)], improve insulin sensitivity, although toxicity is a concern. We
synthesized a novel chromium complex, chromium (d-phenylalanine)(3)
[Cr(d-phe)(3)], in an attempt to improve insulin sensitivity with reduced
toxicity. The aim of this study was to compare the two chromium compounds on
cardiac contractile function in ob/ob obese mice.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: C57BL lean and ob/ob obese mice were randomly
divided into three groups: H(2)O, Cr(d-phe)(3), or Cr(pic)(3) (45 mug/kg per day 
orally for 6 months).
RESULTS: The glucose tolerance test displayed improved glucose clearance by
Cr(d-phe)(3) but not Cr(pic)(3). Myocytes from ob/ob mice exhibited depressed
peak shortening (PS) and maximal velocity of shortening/relengthening (+/-dL/dt),
prolonged time-to-PS and time-to-90% relengthening (TR90), reduced electrically
stimulated rise in intracellular Ca(2+) (Deltafura-2 fluorescence intensity), and
slowed intracellular Ca(2+) decay. Although a 3-month Cr(d-phe)(3) treatment for 
a separate group of ob/ob and lean 2-month-old mice only rectified reduced
+/-dL/dt in ob/ob mice, all mechanical and intracellular Ca(2+) abnormalities
were significantly attenuated or ablated by 6 months of Cr(d-phe)(3) but not
Cr(pic)(3) treatment (except TR90). Sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase
activity and Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger expression were depressed in ob/ob mice,
which were reversed by both Cr(d-phe)(3) and Cr(pic)(3), with a more pronounced
effect from Cr(d-phe)(3). Cr(d-phe)(3) corrected reduced insulin-stimulated
glucose uptake and improved basal phosphorylation of Akt and insulin receptor, as
well as insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt and insulin receptor in ob/ob
myocytes. Heart homogenates from ob/ob mice had enhanced oxidative stress and
protein carbonyl formation compared with the lean group, which were attenuated by
both Cr(d-phe)(3) and Cr(pic)(3).
DISCUSSION: Our data suggest that the new Cr(d-phe)(3) compound possesses better 
cardio-protective and insulin-sensitizing properties against obesity.

PMID: 18070761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;26(6):395-401.

Identification of the consensus DNA sequence for Nczf binding.

Kitahashi M(1), Sato Y, Fujimura L, Ozeki C, Arima M, Sakamoto A, Yamamoto S,
Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan.

The Nczf gene, which is identified as a target gene of Ncx, encodes a novel
Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) zinc finger protein, which functions as a
sequence-specific transcriptional repressor. We generated a fusion protein of the
zinc finger domain of Nczf and glutathione S-transferase to identify Nczf-binding
consensus DNA sequences with random oligonucleotides of 15 and 35 bases. The
consensus binding sequence of core nucleotides contains (A/T/C)CTTT(A/G)TTNT. In 
a gel mobility shift assay, the probe containing these sequences bound to the
fusion protein. In silico analysis, these consensus sequences were found on
regulatory regions of the endothelin receptor B and the microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor genes, which are involved in neural crest development. These
results suggest that Nczf functions as a sequence-specific transcription
repressor to regulate neural crest cell development.

PMID: 17570763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Jun;42(6):1081-8.

Ncx (Enx, Hox11L.1) is required for neuronal cell death in enteric ganglia of
mice.

Aoki T(1), Jusuf AA, Iitsuka Y, Isono K, Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics (H2), Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba 
University, Chuo-ku, Chiba city, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Ncx (Enx, Hox11L.1)-deficient (Ncx-/-) mice develop
mega-ileo-ceco-colon with a larger number of neuronal cells in the enteric
ganglia. We investigated mechanisms related to this abnormality and directed our 
attention to the effects on gastrointestinal tract functions.
METHODS: The number of NADPH diaphorase or cuprolinic blue-positive neuronal
cells in the enteric ganglia was examined during growth of the mice. Neuronal
cell death of enteric ganglia was assayed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick end labeling. Function
of the gastrointestinal tract was determined by measuring excretion time of the
barium chloride given into the stomach.
RESULTS: The number of neuronal cells decreased in control mice older than 2
weeks, and neuronal cell death was evident in the ganglia. However, the number of
neuronal cells did not decrease in Ncx-/- mice, and cell death was rare.
Excretion time of barium chloride was prolonged in all Ncx-/- mice examined and
was improved by the administration of an inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase.
CONCLUSIONS: Ncx participates in cell death of enteric neurons. Motor abnormality
of the gastrointestinal tract in Ncx-/- mice may be attributed to the large
number of neuronal cells.

PMID: 17560225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;15(8):848-55. Epub 2007 May 16.

Transcriptional regulation of TLX2 and impaired intestinal innervation: possible 
role of the PHOX2A and PHOX2B genes.

Borghini S(1), Di Duca M, Santamaria G, Vargiolu M, Bachetti T, Cargnin F, Pini
Prato A, De Giorgio R, Lerone M, Stanghellini V, Jasonni V, Fornasari D,
Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

TLX2 (also known as HOX11L1, Ncx and Enx) is a transcription factor playing a
crucial role in the development of the enteric nervous system, as confirmed by
mice models exhibiting intestinal hyperganglionosis and pseudo-obstruction.
However, congenital defects of TLX2 have been excluded as a major cause of
intestinal motility disorders in patients affected with intestinal neuronal
dysplasia (IND) or pseudo-obstruction. After demonstrating the direct regulation 
of TLX2 expression by the homeoprotein PHOX2B, in the present work, we have
focused on its paralogue PHOX2A. By co-transfections, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we have demonstrated that PHOX2A,
like PHOX2B, is involved in the cascade leading to TLX2 transactivation and
presumably in the intestinal neuronal differentiation. Based on the hypothesis
that missed activation of the TLX2 gene induces the development of enteric
nervous system defects, PHOX2A and PHOX2B have been regarded as novel candidate
genes involved in IND and pseudo-obstruction and consequently analyzed for
mutations in a specific set of 26 patients. We have identified one still
unreported PHOX2A variant; however, absence of any functional effect on TLX2
transactivation suggests that regulators or effectors other than the PHOX2 genes 
must act in the same pathway, likely playing a non redundant and direct role in
the pathogenesis of such enteric disorders.

PMID: 17505528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncol Rep. 2006 Oct;16(4):915-9.

Allelic loss of Hox11L1 gene locus predicts outcome of gastrointestinal stromal
tumors.

Kaifi JT(1), Wagner M, Schurr PG, Wachowiak R, Reichelt U, Yekebas EF, Mann O,
Vashist Y, Kleinhans H, Link BC, Strate T, Kalinin V, Izbicki JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany. jkaifi@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in tumors has been described to have prognostic
impact. Hox11L1 gene, located on chromosome 2, has a role in proliferation of
neuronal myenteric Cajal cells being the progenitor cells of GISTs. The aim was
to examine the frequency and prognostic value of allelic loss of Hox11L1 gene
locus in GISTs. Tumor and control DNA of 72 GIST patients was extracted after
microdissection from tissue sections. Patients underwent surgery between 1992 and
2003 and were histopathologically reclassified. Microsatellite marker D2S286 on
chromosomes 2 near Hox11L1 gene locus was used for detection of LOH by PCR and
capillary electrophoresis. Survival was calculated by Kaplan-Meier plots. LOH was
found in 7 (10%) of 72 GISTs. Fifty-four (75%) cases did not show LOH. Eleven
(15%) were homozygous and consequently non-informative. Survival analysis (n=59) 
revealed a significantly worse tumor-specific and relapse-free survival for GIST 
patients with LOH in the tumor by univariate analysis (p<0.05 by log-rank test;
median follow-up time 37 months). LOH of Hox11L1 gene locus is a useful parameter
for prognosis of GIST. The data propose that Hox11L1 has a role in tumorigenesis 
in GISTs.

PMID: 16969514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Development. 2006 Sep;133(17):3419-28.

Differential regulation of gene expression in the digit forming area of the mouse
limb bud by SHH and gremlin 1/FGF-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal signalling.

Panman L(1), Galli A, Lagarde N, Michos O, Soete G, Zuniga A, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, DKBW Centre for Biomedicine, University of Basel
Medical School, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Spatially and temporally coordinated changes in gene expression are crucial to
orderly progression of embryogenesis. We combine mouse genetics with experimental
manipulation of signalling to analyze the kinetics by which the SHH morphogen and
the BMP antagonist gremlin 1 (GREM1) control gene expression in the digit-forming
mesenchyme of mouse limb buds. Although most mesenchymal cells respond rapidly to
SHH signalling, the transcriptional upregulation of specific SHH target signals
in the mesenchyme occurs with differential temporal kinetics and in a spatially
restricted fashion. In particular, the expression of the BMP antagonist Grem1 is 
always upregulated in mesenchymal cells located distal to the SHH source and acts
upstream of FGF signalling by the apical ectodermal ridge. GREM1/FGF-mediated
feedback signalling is, in turn, required to propagate SHH and establish the
presumptive digit expression domains of the Notch ligand jagged 1 (Jag1) and
5'Hoxd genes in the distal limb bud mesenchyme. Their establishment is
significantly delayed in Grem1-deficient limb buds and cannot be rescued by
specific restoration of SHH signalling in mutant limb buds. This shows that
GREM1/FGF feedback signalling is required for regulation of the temporal kinetics
of the mesenchymal response to SHH signalling. Finally, inhibition of SHH signal 
transduction at distinct time points reveals the differential temporal dependence
of Grem1, Jag1 and 5'Hoxd gene expression on SHH signalling. In particular, the
expression of Hoxd13 depends on SHH signal transduction significantly longer than
does Hoxd11 expression, revealing that the reverse co-linear establishment, but
not maintenance of their presumptive digit expression domains, depends on SHH
signalling.

PMID: 16908629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6080-6.

Silencing of Peroxiredoxin 2 and aberrant methylation of 33 CpG islands in
putative promoter regions in human malignant melanomas.

Furuta J(1), Nobeyama Y, Umebayashi Y, Otsuka F, Kikuchi K, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands (CGI) is involved in silencing of
tumor suppressor genes and is also a potential cancer biomarker. Here, to
identify CGIs aberrantly methylated in human melanomas, we did a genome-wide
search using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis. CGIs in 
putative promoter regions of 34 genes (ABHD9, BARHL1, CLIC5, CNNM1, COL2A1,
CPT1C, DDIT4L, DERL3, DHRS3, DPYS, EFEMP2, FAM62C, FAM78A, FLJ33790, GBX2, GPR10,
GPRASP1, HOXA9, HOXD11, HOXD12, HOXD13, p14ARF, PAX6, PRDX2, PTPRG, RASD1, RAX,
REC8L1, SLC27A3, TGFB2, TLX2, TMEM22, TMEM30B, and UNC5C) were found to be
methylated in at least 1 of 13 melanoma cell lines but not in two cultured normal
melanocytes. Among these genes, Peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2) was expressed in normal
melanocytes, and its expression was lost in melanomas with methylation. The loss 
of expression was restored by treatment of melanomas with a demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In surgical melanoma specimens, methylation of PRDX2 was 
detected in 3 of 36 (8%). Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis of PRDX2
showed that disappearance of immunoreactivity tends to associate with its
methylation. PRDX2 was recently reported to be a negative regulator of
platelet-derived growth factor signaling, and its silencing was suggested to be
involved in melanomas. On the other hand, 12 CGIs were methylated in >or=9 of the
13 melanoma cell lines and are considered as candidate melanoma biomarkers.

PMID: 16778180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Endocrinology. 2006 Jun;147(6):2681-9. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Involvement of bone morphogenetic protein-6 in differential regulation of
aldosterone production by angiotensin II and potassium in human adrenocortical
cells.

Inagaki K(1), Otsuka F, Suzuki J, Kano Y, Takeda M, Miyoshi T, Otani H, Mimura Y,
Ogura T, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama City
700-8558, Japan.

Aldosterone production is modified by several growth factors that reside in the
adrenal. We have recently reported the existence of a bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP) system in human adrenocortical cells, in which BMP-6 augments aldosterone
synthesis. Here, we investigated functional roles of BMP-6, focusing on the
differential regulation of aldosterone synthesis induced by angiotensin (Ang) II 
and potassium (K). In human adrenocortical H295R cells, BMP-6 augmented Ang
II-induced CYP11B2 transcription and mRNA and aldosterone production but had no
effect on K-induced aldosterone production. Inhibition of endogenous BMP-6 action
by neutralizing antibodies impaired aldosterone production induced by Ang II but 
not that induced by K. Blockage of ligand-receptor binding using extracellular
domain (ECD) of BMP type I receptors revealed that ECDs to activin receptor-like 
kinase (ALK)-2 and ALK-3 significantly reduced the aldosterone production induced
by Ang II. None of the type I-receptor ECDs tested had any effect on K-induced
aldosterone levels. Overexpression of a dominant negative-activin type II
receptor construct selectively decreased Ang II-induced aldosterone production
without having any effect on K-induced aldosterone production. BMP type II
receptor-dominant negative had no effect on aldosterone induced by either Ang II 
or K. These results infer that BMP-6 acts through ALK-2, ALK-3, and activin type 
II receptor receptors in adrenocortical cells. BMP-6 pretreatment extends the
induction of ERK1/2 phosphorylation by Ang II and treatment with ECDs to ALK-2
and ALK-3 impaired Ang II-induced ERK phosphorylation. The specific inhibitor of 
ERK activation, U0126, suppressed the activation of CYP11B2 transcription induced
by BMP-6 without affecting Smad phosphorylation and Tlx2-Luc activity.
Collectively, the endogenous BMP-6 system plays critical roles in aldosterone
production between Ang II and K through ERK signaling pathway.

PMID: 16527843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem J. 2006 Apr 15;395(2):355-61.

The TLX2 homeobox gene is a transcriptional target of PHOX2B in
neural-crest-derived cells.

Borghini S(1), Bachetti T, Fava M, Di Duca M, Cargnin F, Fornasari D, Ravazzolo
R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto Gerolamo Gaslini, 16148 Genova,
Italy.

The TLX2 (HOX11L1, Ncx, Enx) and PHOX2B genes encode transcription factors
crucial in the development of neural-crest-derived cells, leading to ANS
(autonomic nervous system) specific neuronal lineages. Moreover, they share a
similar expression pattern and are both involved in downstream steps of BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) signalling. In an attempt to reconstruct the gene network 
sustaining the correct development of the ANS, we have undertaken an in vitro
experimental strategy to identify direct upstream regulators of the TLX2 gene.
After characterizing a sequence displaying enhancer property in its 5' flanking
region, we confirmed the functional link between the human PHOX2B and TLX2 genes.
Transient transfections and electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays suggested that 
PHOX2B is able to bind the cell-specific element in the 5' regulatory region of
the TLX2 gene, determining its transactivation in neuroblastoma cells. Such
interaction was also confirmed in vivo by means of chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay and, in addition, up-regulation of endogenous TLX2 mRNA level was
demonstrated following PHOX2B over-expression, by quantitative real-time PCR.
Finally, PHOX2B proteins carrying mutations responsible for CCHS (congenital
central hypoventilation syndrome) development showed a severe impairment in
activating TLX2 expression, both in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, these
results support the PHOX2B-TLX2 promoter interaction, suggesting a physiological 
role in the transcription-factor cascade underlying the differentiation of
neuronal lineages of the ANS during human embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1422762
PMID: 16402914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan;282(1-2):53-63.

Reduced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ -ATPase activity and dephosphorylated
phospholamban contribute to contractile dysfunction in human hibernating
myocardium.

Nef HM(1), Möllmann H, Skwara W, Bölck B, Schwinger RH, Hamm Ch, Kostin S,
Schaper J, Elsässer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Kerckhoff Heart Centre, Benekestr. 2-8, Bad Nauheim 
61231, Germany.

Human hibernating myocardium (HHM) is characterized by reversible contractile
dysfunction during chronic ischemia. A disturbed calcium-homeostasis is a
decisive factor for reduced functional capacity in heart diseases. We therefore
investigated calcium-handling proteins in HHM. In 12 patients suffering from
multi-vessel coronary artery disease and contractile dysfunction with indication 
for bypass surgery, HHM was detected preoperatively by thallium scintigraphy,
radionuclide ventriculography and dobutamine echocardiography. Transmural
biopsies of these regions were taken and analyzed by immunohistochemistry and
electron microscopy. Furthermore, SR-calcium ATPase (SERCA2a), phospholamban
(PLN), the phosphorylated forms of PLN (PLN-Ser16, PLN-Thr17) as well as
sodium-calcium exchanger (NCX) and ryanodine receptor (RyR2) were investigated by
RT-PCR and Western-blotting. Additionally, SERCA2a activity was measured by an
enzyme-coupled assay. In all patients complete functional recovery could be
documented 3 months after revascularization by repeating all preoperative
investigations. In HHM maximal SERCA2a activity was significantly reduced (HHM:
424.5 +/- 33.9, control: 609.0 +/- 48.5 nmol ATP mg protein(-1) min(-1), p <or=
0.05), whereas SERCA2a protein levels were unchanged. mRNA levels (HHM: 1.36 +/- 
0.08 vs. control: 0.78 +/- 0.04, p <or= 0.05) and protein amount (HHM:1.67 +/-
0.14 vs. control: 1.00 +/- 0.04, p <or= 0.05) of PLN (A1) were increased
resulting in an increased PLN:SERCA2a-ratio. PLN-Ser16 (HHM: 0.60 +/- 0.08 vs.
control: 1.00 +/- 0.11, p <or= 0.05) and PLN-Thr17 (HHM: 0.63 +/- 0.11 vs.
control: 1.00 +/- 0.06, p <or= 0.05) phosphorylation was significantly decreased.
RyR2 and NCX showed no significant alteration. In HHM a decreased activity of
SERCA2a due to an impaired phosphorylation of PLN contributes to contractile
dysfunction. The increase in the relative ratio of PLN/SERCA2a leads to a
decreased calcium affinity of SERCA2a.

PMID: 16317512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;290(4):C1239-47. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Role of plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase in contraction-relaxation processes of the
bladder: evidence from PMCA gene-ablated mice.

Liu L(1), Ishida Y, Okunade G, Shull GE, Paul RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, OH 45267-0576, USA.

We investigated the roles and relationships of plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase
(PMCA), sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA)2, and Na(+)/Ca(2+)
exchanger (NCX) in bladder smooth muscle contractility in Pmca-ablated mice:
Pmca4-null mutant (Pmca4(-/-)) and heterozygous Pmca1 and homozygous Pmca4 double
gene-targeted (Pmca1(+/-)Pmca4(-/-)) mice. Gene manipulation did not alter the
amounts of PMCA1, SERCA2, and NCX. To study the role of each Ca(2+) transport
system, contraction of circular ring preparations was elicited with KCl (80 mM)
plus atropine, and then the muscle was relaxed with Ca(2+)-free physiological
salt solution containing EGTA. We measured the contributions of Ca(2+) clearance 
components by inhibiting SERCA2 (with 10 microM cyclopiazonic acid) and/or NCX
(by replacing NaCl with N-methyl-D-glucamine/HCl plus 10 microM KB-R7943).
Contraction half-time (time to 50% of maximum tension) was prolonged in the
gene-targeted muscles but marginally shortened when SERCA2 or NCX was inhibited. 
The inhibition of NCX significantly inhibited this prolongation, suggesting that 
NCX activity might be augmented to compensate for PMCA4 function in the
gene-targeted muscles under nonstimulated conditions. Inhibition of SERCA2 and
NCX as well as gene targeting all prolonged the relaxation half-time. The
contribution of PMCA to relaxation was calculated to be approximately 25-30%,
with that of SERCA2 being 20% and that of NCX being 70%. PMCA and SERCA2 appeared
to function additively, but the function of NCX might overlap with those of other
components. In summary, gene manipulation of PMCA indicates that PMCA, in
addition to SERCA2 and NCX, plays a significant role in both
excitation-contraction coupling and the Ca(2+) extrusion-relaxation relationship,
i.e., Ca(2+) homeostasis, of bladder smooth muscle.

PMID: 16291816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Nov;40(11):1760-5.

Evaluation of Hox11L1 in the fmc/fmc rat model of chronic intestinal
pseudo-obstruction.

Parisi MA(1), Lipman NS, Clarke CM, Taylor B, Kapur RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center and 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The spontaneous rat mutation, familial megacecum and colon
(fmc), is responsible for an autosomal recessive phenotype similar to intestinal 
pseudo-obstruction observed in Hox11L1-/- mice. We hypothesized that fmc is a
mutant allele of the rat Hox11L1 gene and tested this hypothesis by direct
sequencing.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from fmc/fmc rats and wild-type littermates. All
exons, introns, and DNA 5' to the transcriptional start site of rat Hox11L1 were 
directly sequenced, and data from the mutant and wild-type animals were compared 
with each other and corresponding genomic data from humans and mice.
RESULTS: Alignment of sequences obtained from rat, human, and mouse indicates
that putative regulatory elements of the Hox11L1 gene are conserved in rat, mice,
and humans. No mutations were identified in the Hox11L1 allele of fmc/fmc rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the phenotypic similarities between fmc/fmc rats and
Hox11L1-/- mice, fmc does not appear to be a mutant allele of the Hox11L1 gene.

PMID: 16291166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Endocrinology. 2005 Dec;146(12):5332-40. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

Regulatory roles of bone morphogenetic proteins and glucocorticoids in
catecholamine production by rat pheochromocytoma cells.

Kano Y(1), Otsuka F, Takeda M, Suzuki J, Inagaki K, Miyoshi T, Miyamoto M, Otani 
H, Ogura T, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Japan.

We here report a new physiological system that governs catecholamine synthesis
involving bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and activin in the rat
pheochromocytoma cell line, PC12. BMP type I receptors, including activin
receptor-like kinase-2 (ALK-2) (also referred to as ActRIA) and ALK-3 (BMPRIA),
both type II receptors, ActRII and BMPRII, as well as the ligands BMP-2, -4, and 
-7 and inhibin/activin subunits were expressed in PC12 cells. PC12 cells
predominantly secrete dopamine, whereas noradrenaline and adrenaline production
is negligible. BMP-2, -4, -6, and -7 and activin A each suppressed dopamine and
cAMP synthesis in a dose-dependent fashion. The BMP ligands also decreased
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase mRNA expression, whereas activin
suppressed tyrosine hydroxylase expression. BMPs induced both Smad1/5/8
phosphorylation and Tlx2-Luc activation, whereas activin stimulated 3TP-Luc
activity and p38 MAPK phosphorylation. ERK signaling was not affected by BMPs or 
activin. Dexamethasone enhanced catecholamine synthesis, accompanying increases
in tyrosine hydroxylase and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase
transcription without cAMP accumulation. In the presence of dexamethasone, BMPs
and activin failed to reduce dopamine as well as cAMP production. In addition,
dexamethasone modulated mitotic suppression of PC12 induced by BMPs in a
ligand-dependent manner. Furthermore, intracellular BMP signaling was markedly
suppressed by dexamethasone treatment and the expression of ALK-2, ALK-3, and
BMPRII was significantly inhibited by dexamethasone. Collectively, the endogenous
BMP/activin system plays a key role in the regulation of catecholamine
production. Controlling activity of the BMP system may be critical for
glucocorticoid-induced catecholamine synthesis by adrenomedullar cells.

PMID: 16150914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Gene Expr. 2005;12(3):137-49.

An in vitro approach to test the possible role of candidate factors in the
transcriptional regulation of the RET proto-oncogene.

Bachetti T(1), Borghini S, Ravazzolo R, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto G. Gaslini, 16148 Genova, Italy.

Neural crest cells arise from the epithelium of the dorsal neural tube and
migrate to various districts giving origin, among others, to sympathetic,
parasympathetic, and enteric ganglia. It has been shown that the transcription
factors HOX11L1, HOX11L2, MASH1, PHOX2A, and PHOX2B are all necessary, to various
extents, to the correct development of the autonomic nervous system. To
investigate their possible role in the transcriptional regulation of the RET
proto-oncogene, a gene playing a crucial role in correct intestinal innervation, 
we undertook a specific in vitro experimental strategy. Two neuroblastoma cell
lines (SK-N-MC and SK-N-BE) were cotransfected with each transcription factor
expressing plasmids and sequential deletion constructs of the 5' c-RET flanking
region cloned upstream of the Luciferase reporter gene. Here we show that HOX11L1
enhances the activity of the c-RET promoter in SK-N-MC cell line by stimulating a
region between -166 bp and -35 bp. Gel shift assays performed with
oligonucleotides spanning this promoter sequence showed a change of the SP1
interaction with its binding sites, consequent to transfection with HOX11L1.
While HOX11L2 showed no effect in both the cell lines, we have observed PHOX2A,
PHOX2B, and MASH1 triggering a reproducible increase in the Luciferase activity
in SK-N-BE cell line. A sequence responsible of the PHOX2A-dependent activation
has been identified, while PHOX2B seems to act indirectly, as no physical binding
has been demonstrated on c-RET promoter.

PMID: 16127999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Jun;11(6):271-6.

Regenerative medicine: a radical reappraisal of the spleen.

Kodama S(1), Davis M, Faustman DL.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School & Massachusetts General Hospital-East Immunology Lab,
Building 149, 13(th) Street, Room 3602, Boston, MA 02193, USA.

The spleen has long been considered a dispensable organ. Recent research,
however, has found that the spleen of adult mice holds a reservoir of stem cells 
that can rapidly and robustly differentiate into functional cells of diverse
lineages. Splenic stem cells express Hox11, a key embryonic transcription factor 
that regulates organogenesis. The presence of multi-lineage stem cells in the
spleen might represent lifelong persistence of cells from a primitive embryonic
region called the aorta-gonad-mesonephros. By bringing together findings from
diverse disciplines, we propose that the adult spleen is an important source of
multi-lineage stem cells for future cellular therapies for diabetes and other
diseases.

PMID: 15949768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3113-26.

A Pbx1-dependent genetic and transcriptional network regulates spleen ontogeny.

Brendolan A(1), Ferretti E, Salsi V, Moses K, Quaggin S, Blasi F, Cleary ML,
Selleri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University, Weill
Medical School, New York, NY, 10021, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3575.

The genetic control of cell fate specification, morphogenesis and expansion of
the spleen, a crucial lymphoid organ, is poorly understood. Recent studies of
mutant mice implicate various transcription factors in spleen development, but
the hierarchical relationships between these factors have not been explored. In
this report, we establish a genetic network that regulates spleen ontogeny, by
analyzing asplenic mice mutant for the transcription factors Pbx1, Hox11 (Tlx1), 
Nkx3.2 (Bapx1) and Pod1 (capsulin, Tcf21). We show that Hox11 and Nkx2.5, among
the earliest known markers for splenic progenitor cells, are absent in the
splenic anlage of Pbx1 homozygous mutant (-/-) embryos, implicating the TALE
homeoprotein Pbx1 in splenic cell specification. Pbx1 and Hox11 genetically
interact in spleen formation and loss of either is associated with a similar
reduction of progenitor cell proliferation and failed expansion of the splenic
anlage. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that Pbx1 binds to the Hox11
promoter in spleen mesenchymal cells, which co-express Pbx1 and Hox11.
Furthermore, Hox11 binds its own promoter in vivo and acts synergistically with
TALE proteins to activate transcription, supporting its role in an
auto-regulatory circuit. These studies establish a Pbx1-Hox11-dependent genetic
and transcriptional pathway in spleen ontogeny. Additionally, we demonstrate that
while Nkx3.2 and Pod1 control spleen development via separate pathways, Pbx1
genetically regulates key players in both pathways, and thus emerges as a central
hierarchical co-regulator in spleen genesis.

PMID: 15944191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2005 Mar-Apr;8(2):148-61. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Hox11L1 expression by precursors of enteric smooth muscle: an alternative
explanation for megacecum in HOX11L1-/- mice.

Kapur RP(1), Clarke CM, Doggett B, Taylor BE, Baldessari A, Parisi MA, Howe DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center, 4800
Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. raj.kapur@seattlechildrens.org

Previous studies have focused on expression of Hox11L1 in enteric neurons as the 
explanation for intestinal and urinary bladder dysmotility observed in mice that 
do not have the transcription factor. However, Hox11L1 is also expressed
transiently in endo-, meso-, and ectodermal cells of the most caudal embryo
during gastrulation. We sought to more fully characterize the fates of these
cells because they might help explain the pathogenesis of lethal
pseudo-obstruction in Hox11L1-null mice. The Cre recombinase cDNA was introduced 
into the Hox11L1 locus, and expression of the "knock-in" allele was used to
activate the Rosa26R, beta-galactosidase reporter gene in cells with ongoing
Hox11L1 transcription and their descendants. During gastrulation, Rosa26R
activation was observed in progenitors of caudal somatic and visceral cells,
including enteric smooth muscle. Expression in enteric neural precursors appeared
much later. Analysis of endogenous Hox11L1 mRNA in aneuronal segments of large
intestine that were grafted under the renal capsule indicated that the early
activation of Hox11L1 in visceral mesoderm was transient and ceased before
colonization of the large intestine by neural progenitors. Mice homozygous for
the Cre allele died shortly after weaning, with cecal and proximal colonic
distention but without overt anatomic defects that might represent maldevelopment
of the visceral mesoderm. Our findings expand the range of possible functions of 
Hox11L1 to include activation of an as yet unknown developmental program in
visceral smooth muscle and allow the possibility that intestinal dysmotility in
Hox11L1-null animals may not be a primary neural disorder.

PMID: 15803212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Jun;39(6):927-30.

Acetylcholine-related bowel dysmotility in homozygous mutant
NCX/HOX11L.1-deficient (NCX-/-) mice-evidence that acetylcholine is implicated in
causing intestinal neuronal dysplasia.

Yanai T(1), Kobayashi H, Yamataka A, Lane GJ, Miyano T, Hayakawa T, Satoh K, Kase
Y, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Homozygous mutant Ncx/Hox11L.1-deficient (Ncx-/-) mice
develop mega-ileo-ceco-colon (mega-ICC) with a caliber change in the proximal
colon. The authors investigated the mechanism of intestinal dysmotility in these 
mice.
METHODS: Five-week-old Ncx-/- mice with mega ICC were compared with age-matched
BDF1 control mice. Jejunum, ileum, and colon were excised from all mice and
1.0-cm-long strips of each organ, each with a resting tension of 0.5g, were
suspended in an organ bath filled with Tyrode's solution at 37 degrees C and
bubbled with a mixture of 95% oxygen and 5% carbon dioxide. Contractile responses
to acetylcholine chloride (ACh), histamine, serotonin, and barium chloride
(BaCl2) were recorded isometrically.
RESULTS: For ACh, Ncx-/- mice had decreased distal colon circular muscle
contraction only at lower doses and decreased distal colon longitudinal muscle
contraction for all doses compared with controls (P <.05 or P <.01). In the
proximal colon, Ncx-/- mice had increased circular muscle contraction only at
higher doses and decreased longitudinal muscle contraction only at lower doses
compared with controls (P <.01 or P <.05). ACh did not affect jejunum, and there 
were no significant effects on ileum. There was no response to histamine and
serotonin by any part of the bowel, and the response to BaCl2 was the same for
both Ncx-/- mice and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Only ACh differentially affected muscle contraction in Ncx-/- mice
in the proximal and distal colon. Thus, ACh is implicated in causing the bowel
dysmotility seen in Ncx-/- mice and human IND.

PMID: 15185227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003 Jul;285(1):H305-15. Epub 2003 Mar 20.

Calcium dynamics in the failing heart: restoration by beta-adrenergic receptor
blockade.

Plank DM(1), Yatani A, Ritsu H, Witt S, Glascock B, Lalli MJ, Periasamy M, Fiset 
C, Benkusky N, Valdivia HH, Sussman MA.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, The Children's Hospital and
Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Changes in calcium (Ca2+) regulation contribute to loss of contractile function
in dilated cardiomyopathy. Clinical treatment using beta-adrenergic receptor
antagonists (beta-blockers) slows deterioration of cardiac function in end-stage 
heart failure patients; however, the effects of beta-blocker treatment on Ca2+
dynamics in the failing heart are unknown. To address this issue,
tropomodulin-overexpressing transgenic (TOT) mice, which suffer from dilated
cardiomyopathy, were treated with a nonselective beta-receptor blocker (5 mg.
kg-1. day-1 propranolol) for 2 wk. Ca2+ dynamics in isolated cardiomyocytes of
TOT mice significantly improved after treatment compared with untreated TOT mice.
Frequency-dependent diastolic and Ca2+ transient amplitudes were returned to
normal in propranolol-treated TOT mice and but not in untreated TOT mice. Ca2+
kinetic measurements of time to peak and time decay of the caffeine-induced Ca2+ 
transient to 50% relaxation were also normalized. Immunoblot analysis of
untreated TOT heart samples showed a 3.6-fold reduction of sarco(endo)plasmic
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA), whereas Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX) concentrations
were increased 2.6-fold relative to nontransgenic samples. Propranolol treatment 
of TOT mice reversed the alterations in SERCA and NCX protein levels but not
potassium channels. Although restoration of Ca2+ dynamics occurred within 2 wk of
beta-blockade treatment, evidence of functional improvement in cardiac
contractility assessed by echocardiography took 10 wk to materialize. These
results demonstrate that beta-adrenergic blockade restores Ca2+ dynamics and
normalizes expression of Ca2+-handling proteins, eventually leading to improved
hemodynamic function in cardiomyopathic hearts.

PMID: 12649072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Gene Ther. 2001 Dec;8(12):997-1002.

Tissue-specific expression of a suicide gene for selective killing of
neuroblastoma cells using a promoter region of the NCX gene.

Narita M(1), Bahar R, Hatano M, Kang MM, Tokuhisa T, Goto S, Saisho H, Sakiyama
S, Tagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Chiba Cancer Center Research Institute, Chiba, Japan.

Comment in
    Cancer Gene Ther. 2010 May;17(5):373-4.

The human NCX gene, a homologue of the murine neural crest homeobox
(Ncx/Hox11L.1) gene whose expression is restricted to a subset of neural
crest-derived tissues, was expressed in human neuroblastoma cells but not in
other tumors or fibroblasts. A 4.5-kb genomic fragment in the 5'-flanking region 
of the NCX gene efficiently transcribed the fused luciferase reporter gene in
human neuroblastoma cells but not in non-neuroblastoma cells. Sequential deletion
of this regulatory region from the 5' side demonstrated that a 1.7-kb fragment
upstream from the start codon retained the preferential promoter activity in
neuroblastoma cells. The transcriptional activation by the NCX promoter was
stronger than that by the SV40 T antigen promoter in human neuroblastoma cells.
Transfection of neuroblastoma cells with the NCX promoter-linked herpes simplex
virus-thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) gene increased their sensitivity to ganciclovir. 
The regulatory region of the NCX gene is thus useful for neuroblastoma-specific
suicide gene therapy.

PMID: 11781663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Circ Res. 2001 Jul 20;89(2):160-7.

Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) atpase (SERCA) 1a structurally substitutes for
SERCA2a in the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum and increases cardiac Ca(2+)
handling capacity.

Lalli MJ(1), Yong J, Prasad V, Hashimoto K, Plank D, Babu GJ, Kirkpatrick D,
Walsh RA, Sussman M, Yatani A, Marbán E, Periasamy M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Ectopic expression of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) ATPase (SERCA) 1a
pump in the mouse heart results in a 2.5-fold increase in total SERCA pump level.
SERCA1a hearts show increased rates of contraction/relaxation and enhanced Ca(2+)
transients; however, the cellular mechanisms underlying altered Ca(2+) handling
in SERCA1a transgenic (TG) hearts are unknown. In this study, using confocal
microscopy, we demonstrate that SERCA1a protein traffics to the cardiac SR and
structurally substitutes for the endogenous SERCA2a isoform. SR Ca(2+) load
measurements revealed that TG myocytes have significantly enhanced SR Ca(2+)
load. Confocal line-scan images of field-stimulated SR Ca(2+) release showed an
increased rate of Ca(2+) removal in TG myocytes. On the other hand, ryanodine
receptor binding activity was decreased by approximately 30%. However, TG
myocytes had a greater rate of spontaneous ryanodine receptor opening as measured
by spark frequency. Whole-cell L-type Ca(2+) current density was reduced by
approximately 50%, whereas the time course of inactivation was unchanged in TG
myocytes. These studies provide important evidence that SERCA1a can substitute
both structurally and functionally for SERCA2a in the heart and that SERCA1a
overexpression can be used to enhance SR Ca(2+) transport and cardiac
contractility.

PMID: 11463723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1095-6.

New era for translational research in cardiac arrhythmias.

Adachi-Akahane S, Kurachi Y.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1159-67.

PMID: 11397771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Jun;15(6):946-59.

Müllerian inhibiting substance signaling uses a bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-like pathway mediated by ALK2 and induces SMAD6 expression.

Clarke TR(1), Hoshiya Y, Yi SE, Liu X, Lyons KM, Donahoe PK.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgical Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Signal reception of Müllerian inhibiting substance (MIS) in the mesenchyme around
the embryonic Müllerian duct in the male is essential for regression of the duct.
Deficiency of MIS or of the MIS type II receptor, MISRII, results in abnormal
reproductive development in the male due to the maintenance of the duct. MIS is a
member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) superfamily of secreted
protein hormones that signal through receptor complexes of type I and type II
serine/threonine kinase receptors. To investigate candidate MIS type I receptors,
we examined reporter construct activation by MIS. The bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP)-responsive Tlx2 and Xvent2 promoter-driven reporter constructs were
stimulated by MIS but the TGFbeta/activin-induced p3TP-lux or CAGA-luc reporter
constructs were not. The induction of Tlx2-luc was dependent upon the kinase
activity of MISRII and was blocked by a dominant negative truncated ALK2 (tALK2) 
receptor but not by truncated forms of the other BMP type I receptors ALK1, ALK3,
or ALK6. MIS induced activation of a Gal4DBD-Smad1 but not a Gal4DBD-Smad2 fusion
protein. This activation could also be blocked by tALK2. The BMP-induced
inhibitory Smad, Smad6, was up-regulated by MIS endogenously in Leydig
cell-derived lines and is expressed in male but not female Müllerian duct
mesenchyme. ALK6 has been shown to function as an MIS type I receptor.
Investigation of the pattern of ALK2, MISRII, and ALK6 in the developing
urogenital system demonstrated overlapping expression of ALK2 and MISRII in the
mesenchyme surrounding the duct while ALK6 was observed only in the epithelium.
Examination of ALK6 -/- male animals revealed no defect in duct regression. The
reporter construct analysis, pattern of expression of the receptors, and analysis
of ALK6-deficient animals suggest that ALK2 is the MIS type I receptor involved
in Müllerian duct regression.

PMID: 11376113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Urol. 2001 Mar;165(3):993-8.

Vesicourethral sphincter dysfunction in ncx deficient mice with an increased
neuronal cell number in vesical ganglia.

Jusuf AA(1), Kojima S, Matsuo M, Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: Ncx/Hox11L.1 knockout mice have a megacolon with an increased number of 
neuronal cells in the enteric ganglia. Since Ncx/Hox11L.1 is expressed in
neuronal cells in the vesical ganglia, we examined lower urinary tract function
and the number of neuronal cells in the vesical ganglia in Ncx/Hox11L.1 knockout 
mice.
METHODS: Female knockout and control mice were investigated in regard to voiding 
frequency, and cystometry and histological studies were done. The number of
neuronal cells in the vesical ganglia was observed by staining with nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase and cuprolinic blue.
RESULTS: In knockout mice voiding frequency was 2-fold and bladder capacity was
less than in controls. Although bladder structure was histologically similar in
knockout mice and controls, cystometry showed that threshold and remaining
pressure was less in knockout mice. Neuronal cells positive for nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase or cuprolinic blue were more numerous
in the vesical ganglia of knockout mice than controls. The intraperitoneal
injection of a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor increased threshold and remaining 
pressure on cystometry in knockout mice to the control level.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased number of neuronal cells in the vesical ganglia
induces vesicourethral sphincter muscle dysfunction in knockout mice. Since
administering a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor somewhat overcomes the
dysfunction, the amount of nitric oxide in vesical nerve cells is important for
controlling vesicourethral sphincter muscle function.

PMID: 11176528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jun 23;475(3):170-4.

Identification of an optimal Ncx binding sequence required for transcriptional
activation.

Shimizu H(1), Kang M, Iitsuka Y, Ichinose M, Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

The Ncx gene encodes a homeobox containing transcription factor that belongs to
the Hox11 gene family. We determined specific Ncx protein binding consensus DNA
sequences. Optimal Ncx binding sequences were 5'-CGGTAATTGG-3' (TAAT core) and
5'-CGGTAAGTGG-3' (TAAG core), which coincided with the Hox11 binding sequence.
Both Ncx and Hox11 could bind to the TAAT and the TAAG core oligonucleotide in
vitro. However, they could efficiently transactivate the reporter plasmid linked 
to the TAAT core sequence but not to the TAAG core sequence. Thus, Ncx and Hox11 
act as transcriptional activators via their target sequence, 5'-CGGTAATTGG-3'.

PMID: 10869550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cell Sci. 2000 Jan;113 Pt 2:269-78.

BMP-2/ALK3 and HGF signal in parallel to regulate renal collecting duct
morphogenesis.

Gupta IR(1), Macias-Silva M, Kim S, Zhou X, Piscione TD, Whiteside C, Wrana JL,
Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) exert
antagonistic effects on renal collecting duct formation during embryogenesis. A
current model proposes HGF inhibits BMP-2 signaling at the level of Smad1 in a
common target cell. Here, we show that BMP-2 and HGF control collecting duct
formation via parallel pathways. We examined the interactions between BMP-2 and
HGF in the mIMCD-3 model of collecting duct morphogenesis. During tubule
formation, HGF rescued the inhibitory effects of BMP-2 and of a constitutive
active form of the BMP-2 receptor, ALK3, stably expressed in mIMCD-3 cells. To
determine whether the effect of HGF occurs through known mediators which act
downstream of the BMP-2/ALK3 complex, we examined the effect of HGF on
BMP-2-induced Smad1 phosphorylation, Smad1/Smad4 complex formation, and Smad1
nuclear translocation. Neither HGF nor other receptor tyrosine kinase ligands
(EGF, FGF-4) induced phosphorylation of endogenous Smad1 in mIMCD-3 cells or in
Mv1Lu, MC3T3-E1 or P19 cells. Furthermore, none of these ligands blocked
induction of the BMP-responsive promoter, Tlx2. Thus, HGF overcomes the
inhibitory effects of BMP-2 on collecting duct morphogenesis without interrupting
any of the known signaling events in the BMP-2 dependent Smad1 signaling pathway.
We conclude that BMP-2/ALK3 and HGF function to control parallel pathways
downstream of their respective cell surface receptors. Integration of these
signals likely occurs at the level of transcriptional or post-transcriptional
events.

PMID: 10633078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):24401-7.

An enhancer element for expression of the Ncx (Enx, Hox11L1) gene in neural
crest-derived cells.

Iitsuka Y(1), Shimizu H, Kang MM, Sasagawa K, Sekiya S, Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The murine Ncx (Enx, Hox11L1) gene is specifically expressed in a neuronal subset
of neural crest-derived tissues. In attempts to elucidate the regulatory DNA
element of the tissue-specific expression, we sequenced the 5'-flanking region of
the Ncx gene. The transcriptional initiation site was determined at 297
nucleotides (-297) upstream from the ATG start codon (+1). A retinoic acid
response element was located on the region between -1163 and -1150. Transient
transfection assays with the 5'-flanking sequences fused to the luciferase gene
showed that the region between -1387 and -1368 was crucial for the
tissue-specific enhancer activity. Furthermore, nuclear proteins extracted from
neural crest-derived cells such as murine and human neuroblastoma cells bind to
the DNA region between -1387 and -1368. This DNA element was also conserved in
the 5'-flanking region of the human NCX gene. Our observations strongly suggest
that the DNA element (between -1387 and -1368) contributes to tissue-specific
expression of the Ncx gene in murine and human species.

PMID: 10446220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1999;84(1-2):115-7.

HOX11L1, a gene involved in peripheral nervous system development, maps to human 
chromosome 2p13.1-->p12 and mouse chromosome 6C3-D1.

Puliti A(1), Cinti R, Betsos N, Romeo G, Ceccherini I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova-Quarto, 
Italy.

HOX11L1 is a homeobox gene involved in peripheral nervous system development as
confirmed by knockout mice exhibiting megacolon with enteric ganglia, a phenotype
associated in human with Intestinal Neuronal Dysplasia (IND). Using FISH and
radiation hybrids we have localized HOX11L1 to human chromosome 2p13.1-->p12, in 
a 14-cR interval between WI-5987 (D2S2088) and GCT1B4 (D2S2497), and confirmed
the synteny between mouse 6C3-D1 and human 2p13.1-->p12 chromosomes by mapping an
EST cDNA clone corresponding to mouse HOX11L1 (Tlx2).

PMID: 10343123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25628-36.

Specific activation of Smad1 signaling pathways by the BMP7 type I receptor,
ALK2.

Macías-Silva M(1), Hoodless PA, Tang SJ, Buchwald M, Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Division of Gastroenterology, The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

BMP7 and activin are members of the transforming growth factor beta superfamily. 
Here we characterize endogenous activin and BMP7 signaling pathways in P19
embryonic carcinoma cells. We show that BMP7 and activin bind to the same type II
receptors, ActRII and IIB, but recruit distinct type I receptors into heteromeric
receptor complexes. The major BMP7 type I receptor observed was ALK2, while
activin bound exclusively to ALK4 (ActRIB). BMP7 and activin elicited distinct
biological responses and activated different Smad pathways. BMP7 stimulated
phosphorylation of endogenous Smad1 and 5, formation of complexes with Smad4 and 
induced the promoter for the homeobox gene, Tlx2. In contrast, activin induced
phosphorylation of Smad2, association with Smad4, and induction of the activin
response element from the Xenopus Mix.2 gene. Biochemical analysis revealed that 
constitutively active ALK2 associated with and phosphorylated Smad1 on the
COOH-terminal SSXS motif, and also regulated Smad5 and Smad8 phosphorylation.
Activated ALK2 also induced the Tlx2 promoter in the absence of BMP7.
Furthermore, we show that ALK1 (TSRI), an orphan receptor that is closely related
to ALK2 also mediates Smad1 signaling. Thus, ALK1 and ALK2 induce Smad1-dependent
pathways and ALK2 functions to mediate BMP7 but not activin signaling.

PMID: 9748228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1997 May;195(5):419-25.

Ncx, a Hox11 related gene, is expressed in a variety of tissues derived from
neural crest cells.

Hatano M(1), Iitsuka Y, Yamamoto H, Dezawa M, Yusa S, Kohno Y, Tokuhisa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

We have isolated the murine homeobox gene (Ncx) that belong to a Hox11 gene
family. Expression of the Ncx gene was analyzed in total RNAs from embryos by
reverse transcribed polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The mRNA was detected in 
embryos after 9.5 days of embryogenesis (E9.5) and was maximal at E12.5. The
RT-PCR also detected the message in total RNAs from adrenal glands and intestine 
in adult mice. The expression was further examined in various tissues from
embryos by in situ hybridization. It was detected in dorsal root ganglia, cranial
nerve ganglia (V, IX, X), enteric nerve ganglia and adrenal glands from embryos
between E9.5 and E13.5. Since its expression is restricted to tissues derived
from neural crest cells, Ncx may play a role in differentiation and proliferation
of neural crest lineage cells.

PMID: 9176664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


