
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 12;11(2):e0148678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148678.
eCollection 2016.

TOPORS, a Dual E3 Ubiquitin and Sumo1 Ligase, Interacts with 26 S Protease
Regulatory Subunit 4, Encoded by the PSMC1 Gene.

Czub B(1), Shah AZ(1), Alfano G(1), Kruczek PM(1), Chakarova CF(1), Bhattacharya 
SS(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London (UCL), London EC1V 9EL, 
United Kingdom. (2)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa
(CABIMER), Seville-41092, Spain.

The significance of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) for protein degradation
has been highlighted in the context of neurodegenerative diseases, including
retinal dystrophies. TOPORS, a dual E3 ubiquitin and SUMO1 ligase, forms a
component of the UPS and selected substrates for its enzymatic activities, such
as DJ-1/PARK7 and APOBEC2, are important for neuronal as well as retinal
homeostasis, respectively. TOPORS is ubiquitously expressed, yet its mutations
are only known to result in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. We performed
a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screen of a human retinal cDNA library in order to
identify interacting protein partners of TOPORS from the retina, and thus begin
delineating the putative disease mechanism(s) associated with the retina-specific
phenotype resulting from mutations in TOPORS. The screen led to isolation of the 
26 S protease regulatory subunit 4 (P26s4/ PSMC1), an ATPase indispensable for
correct functioning of UPS-mediated proteostasis. The interaction between
endogenous TOPORS and P26s4 proteins was validated by co-immuno-precipitation
from mammalian cell extracts and further characterised by immunofluorescent
co-localisation studies in cell lines and retinal sections. Findings from
hTERT-RPE1 and 661W cells demonstrated that TOPORS and P26s4 co-localise at the
centrosome in cultured cells. Immunofluorescent staining of mouse retinae
revealed a strong P26s4 reactivity at the interface between retinal pigmented
epithelium (RPE) layer and the photoreceptors outer segments (OS). This finding
leads us to speculate that P26s4, along with TOPORS, may have a role(s) in RPE
phagocytosis, in addition to contributing to the overall photoreceptor and
retinal homeostasis via the UPS.

PMCID: PMC4752349
PMID: 26872363  [PubMed - in process]


2. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Dec 1;56(13):8297-305. doi:
10.1167/iovs.15-17104.

Genotype and Phenotype Studies in Autosomal Dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa (adRP) 
of the French Canadian Founder Population.

Coussa RG(1), Chakarova C(2), Ajlan R(1), Taha M(1), Kavalec C(1), Gomolin J(1), 
Khan A(1), Lopez I(1), Ren H(1), Waseem N(2), Kamenarova K(3), Bhattacharya
SS(2), Koenekoop RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)The McGill Ocular Genetics Laboratory Paediatric Ophthalmology Division,
Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada. (2)UCL-Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom. (3)Department 
of Cellular Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, CSIC-CABIMER, Seville, Spain.

PURPOSE: The French Canadian population of Quebec is a unique, well-known founder
population with religious, linguistic, and geographic isolation. The genetics of 
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in Quebec is not well studied thus far. The purpose of 
our study was to establish the genetic architecture of autosomal dominant RP
(adRP) and to characterize the phenotypes associated with new adRP mutations in
Quebec.
METHODS: Sanger sequencing of the commonly mutated currently known adRP genes was
performed in a clinically well-characterized cohort of 60 adRP French Canadian
families. Phenotypes were analyzed by projected visual acuity (best corrected),
Goldmann visual fields, optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus
autofluorescence (FAF), and ERG. The potential effect of the novel mutations was 
assessed using in silico bioinformatic tools. The pathogenicity of all variants
was then confirmed by segregation analysis within the families, when available.
RESULTS: We identified the causal mutation/gene in 24 of our adRP families, as 24
(40%) of 60 patients had adRP mutations in six known adRP genes. Eleven (46%) of 
these mutations were in RHO, four mutations (17%) were found in SNRNP200, three
mutations (12.5%) in PRPH2/RDS, three mutations (12.5%) in TOPORS, two mutations 
(8%) in PRPF31, and one mutation (4%) in IMPDH1. Four mutations were novel. We
identified new mutations in RHO (p.S270I), PRPF31 (p.R288W), IMPDH1 (p.Q318H),
and TOPORS (p.H889R); the rest were previously reported. We present the
genotype-phenotype characteristics of the four novel missense mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first large screening of adRP genes in the founder
population of Quebec. Our prevalence of known adRP genes is 40% in the French
Canadian population, which is lower than in other adRP populations around the
world, illustrating the uniqueness of the French Canadian population. Our
findings are crucial in expanding the current understanding of the
genotypic-phenotypic spectrum of RP and documenting the genetic architecture of
our founder population.

PMCID: PMC4699406 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26720483  [PubMed - in process]


3. Fiziol Zh. 2014;60(4):11-21.

Acute L-glutamine deprivation affects the expression of TP53-related protein
genes in U87 glioma cells.

Minchenko DO, Danilovskyi SV, Kryvdiuk IV, Hlushchak NA, Kovalevska OV,
Karbovskyi LL, Minchenko OH.

We have studied the effect of acute L-glutamine deprivation on the expression
oftumor protein 53 (TP53)-related genes such as TOPORS (topoisomerase I binding, 
arginine/serine-rich, E3 ubiquitin protein ligase), TP53BPI (TP53 bindingprotein 
1), TP53TG1 (TP53 inducible gene 1), SESN1 (p53 regulatedPA26 nuclear protein),
NME6 (NME/NM23 nucleoside diphosphate kinase 6), and ZMAT3 (zinc finger
Matrin-type 3) in glioma cells with ERN1 knockdown. It was shown that blockade of
ERN1 finction in U87 glioma cells is induced the expression of RYBP and SESN1
genes, but decreased the expression of TP53BP1, TP53TG1, TOPORS, NME6, genes.
Moreover, the expression levels ofRYBPI SESN1, TP53BP1, and ZMAT3 genes is
increased in control glioma cells by L-glutamine deprivation condition but
blockade of ERN1 signaling enzyme function significantly enhances this effect on 
the expression all of these genes. At the same time, the ERN1 knockdown
eliminates the response TP53TG1 and TOPORS genes to L-glutamine deprivation
condition. Results of this investigation clearly demonstrate that the expression 
most of genes encoding TP53-related factors depends upon acute L-glutamine
deprivation condition as well as upon ERN1, the major signaling system of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

PMID: 25335230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 17;289(42):28924-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.603043. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Zinc-binding domain-dependent, deaminase-independent actions of apolipoprotein B 
mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide 2 (Apobec2), mediate its effect on
zebrafish retina regeneration.

Powell C(1), Cornblath E(1), Goldman D(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute and Department of
Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (2)From 
the Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute and Department of Biological 
Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109 neuroman@umich.edu.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 6;290(10):6007.

The Apobec/AID family of cytosine deaminases can deaminate cytosine and thereby
contribute to adaptive and innate immunity, DNA demethylation, and the
modification of cellular mRNAs. Unique among this family is Apobec2, whose
enzymatic activity has been questioned and whose function remains poorly
explored. We recently reported that zebrafish Apobec2a and Apobec2b (Apobec2a,2b)
regulate retina regeneration; however, their mechanism of action remained
unknown. Here we show that although Apobec2a,2b lack cytosine deaminase activity,
they require a conserved zinc-binding domain to stimulate retina regeneration.
Interestingly, we found that human APOBEC2 is able to functionally substitute for
Apobec2a,2b during retina regeneration. By identifying Apobec2-interacting
proteins, including ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 9 (Ubc9); topoisomerase
I-binding, arginine/serine-rich, E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (Toporsa); and POU
class 6 homeobox 2 (Pou6f2), we uncovered that sumoylation regulates Apobec2
subcellular localization and that nuclear Apobec2 controls Pou6f2 binding to DNA.
Importantly, mutations in the zinc-binding domain of Apobec2 diminished its
ability to stimulate Pou6f2 binding to DNA, and knockdown of Ubc9 or Pou6f2
suppressed retina regeneration.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4200251
PMID: 25190811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Oncol. 2014 May;8(3):633-41. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.01.009. Epub 2014 Jan
24.

Regulation of the localisation and function of the oncogene LYRIC/AEG-1 by
ubiquitination at K486 and K491.

Luxton HJ(1), Barnouin K(2), Kelly G(3), Hanrahan S(4), Totty N(4), Neal DE(1),
Whitaker HC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute,
University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(2)Protein Analysis and Proteomics, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute,
London WC2A 3LY, UK; Protein Analysis and Proteomics, Cancer Research UK London
Research Institute, Clare Hall Laboratories, South Mimms, Potters Bar EN6 3LD,
UK. (3)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, London WC2A 3LY, UK. (4)Protein Analysis and Proteomics, Cancer
Research UK London Research Institute, London WC2A 3LY, UK. (5)Uro-Oncology
Research Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, 
Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. Electronic address:
Hayley.Whitaker@cruk.cam.ac.uk.

The pivotal role of LYRIC/AEG-1 in malignant transformation, tumourigenesis and
chemo-resistance has previously been demonstrated in different cell types and
sub-cellular compartments. The localisation of LYRIC/AEG-1 appears crucial to its
function and is regulated by three lysine-rich nuclear localisation signal
regions, one of which was previously demonstrated to be modified by ubiquitin.
Here we show that mutation of LYRIC/AEG-1 at K486 and K491 results in a loss of
ubiquitination. A K486/491R double mutant that is incapable of ubiquitination
shows reduced binding to the NF<U+03BA>B subunit p65 or importin-ß resulting in a
distinctive peri-nuclear localisation of LYRIC/AEG-1. We also provide evidence to
suggest that TOPORS, an E3 ligase that also regulates p53 modification may be
responsible for LYRIC/AEG-1 ubiquitin modification. Overall we demonstrate that
specific sites of LYRIC/AEG-1 ubiquitination are essential for regulating
LYRIC/AEG-1 localisation and functionally interacting proteins.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4013555
PMID: 24529480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Sep 19;54(9):6255-61. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-12605.

Prevalence of mutations in eyeGENE probands with a diagnosis of autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

Sullivan LS(1), Bowne SJ, Reeves MJ, Blain D, Goetz K, Ndifor V, Vitez S, Wang X,
Tumminia SJ, Daiger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: To screen samples from patients with presumed autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) for mutations in 12 disease genes as a contribution
to the research and treatment goals of the National Ophthalmic Disease Genotyping
and Phenotyping Network (eyeGENE).
METHODS: DNA samples were obtained from eyeGENE. A total of 170 probands with an 
intake diagnosis of adRP were tested through enrollment in eyeGENE. The 10 most
common genes causing adRP (IMPDH1, KLHL7, NR2E3, PRPF3/RP18, PRPF31/RP11,
PRPF8/RP13, PRPH2/RDS, RHO, RP1, and TOPORS) were chosen for PCR-based dideoxy
sequencing, along with the two X-linked RP genes, RPGR and RP2. RHO, PRPH2,
PRPF31, RPGR, and RP2 were completely sequenced, while only mutation hotspots in 
the other genes were analyzed.
RESULTS: Disease-causing mutations were identified in 52% of the probands. The
frequencies of disease-causing mutations in the 12 genes were consistent with
previous studies.
CONCLUSIONS: The Laboratory for Molecular Diagnosis of Inherited Eye Disease at
the University of Texas in Houston has thus far received DNA samples from 170
families with a diagnosis of adRP from the eyeGENE Network. Disease-causing
mutations in autosomal genes were identified in 48% (81/170) of these families
while mutations in X-linked genes accounted for an additional 4% (7/170). Of the 
55 distinct mutations detected, 19 (33%) have not been previously reported. All
diagnostic results were returned by eyeGENE to participating patients via their
referring clinician. These genotyped samples along with their corresponding
phenotypic information are also available to researchers who may request access
to them for further study of these ophthalmic disorders. (ClinicalTrials.gov
number, NCT00378742.).

PMCID: PMC3778873
PMID: 23950152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jun 25;108(12):2495-504. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.266. Epub 2013
Jun 4.

p28, a first in class peptide inhibitor of cop1 binding to p53.

Yamada T(1), Christov K, Shilkaitis A, Bratescu L, Green A, Santini S, Bizzarri
AR, Cannistraro S, Gupta TK, Beattie CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, University of Illinois
at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: A 28 amino-acid (aa) cell-penetrating peptide (p28) derived from
azurin, a redox protein secreted from the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, produces a post-translational increase in p53 in cancer cells by
inhibiting its ubiquitination.
METHODS: In silico computational simulations were used to predict motifs within
the p53 DNA-binding domain (DBD) as potential sites for p28 binding. In vitro
direct and competitive pull-down studies as well as western blot and RT-PCR
analyses were used to validate predictions.
RESULTS: The L1 loop (aa 112-124), a region within the S7-S8 loop (aa 214-236)
and T140, P142, Q144, W146, R282 and L289 of the p53DBD were identified as
potential sites for p28 binding. p28 decreased the level of the E3 ligase COP1
>80%, in p53wt and p53mut cells with no decrease in COP1 in p53dom/neg or p53null
cells. Brief increases in the expression of the E3 ligases, TOPORS, Pirh2 and
HDM2 (human double minute 2) in p53wt and p53mut cells were in response to
sustained increases in p53.
CONCLUSION: These data identify the specific motifs within the DBD of p53 that
bind p28 and suggest that p28 inhibition of COP1 binding results in the
sustained, post-translational increase in p53 levels and subsequent inhibition of
cancer cell growth independent of an HDM2 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3694247
PMID: 23736031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Vis. 2013;19:654-64. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Detection of novel mutations that cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
in candidate genes by long-range PCR amplification and next-generation
sequencing.

de Sousa Dias M(1), Hernan I, Pascual B, Borràs E, Mañé B, Gamundi MJ, Carballo
M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Hospital of Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain.

PURPOSE: To devise an effective method for detecting mutations in 12 genes (CA4, 
CRX, IMPDH1, NR2E3, RP9, PRPF3, PRPF8, PRPF31, PRPH2, RHO, RP1, and TOPORS)
commonly associated with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) that
account for more than 95% of known mutations.
METHODS: We used long-range PCR (LR-PCR) amplification and next-generation
sequencing (NGS) performed in a GS Junior 454 benchtop sequencing platform.
Twenty LR-PCR fragments, between 3,000 and 10,000 bp, containing all coding exons
and flanking regions of the 12 genes, were obtained from DNA samples of patients 
with adRP. Sequencing libraries were prepared with an enzymatic (Fragmentase
technology) method.
RESULTS: Complete coverage of the coding and flanking sequences of the 12 genes
assayed was obtained with NGS, with an average sequence depth of 380× (ranging
from 128× to 1,077×). Five previous known mutations in the adRP genes were
detected with a sequence variation percentage between 35% and 65%. We also
performed a parallel sequence analysis of four samples, three of them new
patients with index adRP, in which two novel mutations were detected in RHO
(p.Asn73del) and PRPF31 (p.Ile109del).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that genomic LR-PCR amplification together
with NGS is an effective method for analyzing individual patient samples for
mutations in a monogenic heterogeneous disease such as adRP. This approach proved
effective for the parallel analysis of adRP and has been introduced as routine.
Additionally, this approach could be extended to other heterogeneous genetic
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3611935
PMID: 23559859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9102-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438234. Epub 2013
Feb 12.

UHRF2, a ubiquitin E3 ligase, acts as a small ubiquitin-like modifier E3 ligase
for zinc finger protein 131.

Oh Y(1), Chung KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO), a member of the ubiquitin-related protein
family, is covalently conjugated to lysine residues of its substrates in a
process referred to as SUMOylation. SUMOylation occurs through a series of
enzymatic reactions analogous to that of the ubiquitination pathway, resulting in
modification of the biochemical and functional properties of substrates. To date,
four mammalian SUMO isoforms, a single heterodimeric SUMO-activating E1 enzyme
SAE1/SAE2, a single SUMO-conjugating E2 enzyme ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2I
(UBC9), and a few subgroups of SUMO E3 ligases have been identified. Several SUMO
E3 ligases such as topoisomerase I binding, arginine/serine-rich (TOPORS), TNF
receptor-associated factor 7 (TRAF7), and tripartite motif containing 27 (TRIM27)
have dual functions as ubiquitin E3 ligases. Here, we demonstrate that the
ubiquitin E3 ligase UHRF2 also acts as a SUMO E3 ligase. UHRF2 effectively
enhances zinc finger protein 131 (ZNF131) SUMOylation but does not enhance ZNF131
ubiquitination. In addition, the SUMO E3 activity of UHRF2 on ZNF131 depends on
the presence of SET and RING finger-associated and nuclear localization
signal-containing region domains, whereas the critical ubiquitin E3 activity RING
domain is dispensable. Our findings suggest that UHRF2 has independent functional
domains and regulatory mechanisms for these two distinct enzymatic activities.

PMCID: PMC3610983
PMID: 23404503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2012 Nov;26(11):429-38. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21438. Epub 2012 
Sep 12.

TOPORS modulates H2AX discriminating genotoxic stresses.

Seong KM(1), Nam SY, Kim JY, Yang KH, An S, Jin YW, Kim CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effect Research, Radiation Health Research Institute,
Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Co., Ltd., 132-703, Seoul, Korea. bovine@khnp.co.kr

H2AX plays an important role in chromatin reorganization implicated in DNA repair
and apoptosis under various DNA damaging conditions. In this study, the
interaction between TOPORS (topoisomerase I-binding protein) and H2AX was
verified using mammalian cell extracts exposed to diverse DNA damaging stresses
such as ionizing radiation, doxorubicin, camptothecin, and hydrogen peroxide. In 
vitro assays for ubiquitination revealed that TOPORS functions as a novel E3
ligase for H2AX ubiquitination. TOPORS was found to be dissociated from H2AX
proteins when cells were exposed to oxidative stress, but not
replication-inducing DNA damaging stress. The protein stability of H2AX was
decreased when TOPORS was ectopically expressed in cells, and oxidative stresses 
such as hydrogen peroxide and ionizing radiation induced recovery of the H2AX
protein level. Therefore, these biochemical data suggest that TOPORS plays a key 
role in the turnover of H2AX protein, discriminating the type of DNA damaging
stress.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22972498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043701. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Inhibition of PDGF-B induction and cell growth by syndecan-1 involves the
ubiquitin and SUMO-1 ligase, Topors.

Braun KR(1), DeWispelaere AM, Bressler SL, Fukai N, Kenagy RD, Chen L, Clowes AW,
Kinsella MG.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.

Syndecans are receptors for soluble ligands, including heparin-binding growth
factors, and matrix proteins. However, intracellular targets of syndecan-1
(Sdc-1)-mediated signaling are not fully understood. A yeast two-hybrid protein
interaction screening of a mouse embryo library identified the ubiquitin and
SUMO-1 E3 ligase, Topors, as a novel ligand of the Sdc-1 cytoplasmic domain
(S1CD), a finding confirmed by ligand blotting and co-precipitation with Sdc-1
from cell lysates. Deletion mutagenesis identified an 18-amino acid sequence of
Topors required for the interaction with the S1CD. By immunohistochemistry,
Topors and Sdc-1 co-localized near the cell periphery in normal murine mammary
gland (NMuMG) cells in vitro and in mouse embryonic epithelia in vivo. Finally,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Topors demonstrated that Topors is a growth promoter 
for murine arterial smooth muscle cells and is required for the inhibitory effect
of Sdc-1 on cell growth and platelet-derived growth factor-B induction. These
data suggest a novel mechanism for the inhibitory effects of Sdc-1 on cell growth
that involves the interaction between the cytoplasmic domain of Sdc-1 and the
SUMO-1 E3 ligase, Topors.

PMCID: PMC3422340
PMID: 22912899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cells. 2012 Jul;34(1):15-23. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-0001-x. Epub 2012 Jun
25.

Proteomic profiling of differentially expressed proteins from Bax inhibitor-1
knockout and wild type mice.

Li B(1), Reed JC, Kim HR, Chae HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cardiovascular Research Center, Chonbuk
National University, Jeonju 561-182, Korea.

Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) is an anti-apoptotic protein located in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). The role of BI-1 has been studied in different physiopathological
models including ischemia, diabetes, liver regeneration and cancer. However,
fundamental knowledge about the effects of BI-1 deletion on the proteome is
lacking. To further explore this protein, we compared the levels of different
proteins in bi-1 (-/-) and bi-1 (+/+) mouse tissues by two-dimensional
electrophoresis (2-DE) and mass spectrometry (MS). In several bi-1 (-/-) mice,
glucose-regulated protein 75 (GRP75/mortalin/ PBP74/mthsp70), peroxiredoxin6
(Prx6) and fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) showed a pI shift that could be
attributed to post-translational modifications. Selenium-binding protein 2 (SBP2)
and ferritin light chain 1 levels were significantly increased.
Phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein-1 (PEBP-1) was dramatically decreased in
bi-1 (-/-) mice, which was confirmed by Western blotting. The phosphorylation of 
GRP75, Prx6 and FAH were compared between bi-1 (+/+) and bi-1 (-/-) mice using
liver tissue lysates. Of these three proteins, only one exhibited modified
phosphorylation; Tyr phosphorylation of Prx6 was increased in bi-1 (-/-) mice.
Our protein profiling results provide fundamental knowledge about the
physiopathological function of BI-1.

PMCID: PMC3887783
PMID: 22736268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Prim Care Respir J. 2012 Sep;21(3):267-75. doi: 10.4104/pcrj.2012.00039.

Fluticasone furoate nasal spray reduces symptoms of uncomplicated acute
rhinosinusitis: a randomised placebo-controlled study.

Keith PK(1), Dymek A, Pfaar O, Fokkens W, Yun Kirby S, Wu W, Garris C, Topors N, 
Lee LA.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Uncomplicated acute rhinosinusitis (ARS) is usually a self-limiting
inflammatory condition often treated with antibiotics.
AIMS: To assess the safety and efficacy of fluticasone furoate nasal spray (FFNS)
compared with placebo for symptomatic relief of uncomplicated ARS.
METHODS: A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
multicentre, 2-week treatment study of FFNS 110 µg once and twice daily was
undertaken in adults/adolescents.
RESULTS: A statistically significant reduction was seen in the daily major
symptoms score, a composite score of three individual symptoms (nasal
congestion/stuffiness, sinus headache/pressure or facial pain/pressure, and
postnasal drip on a 0-3 scale) by both FFNS doses compared with placebo (least
square mean differences vs. placebo of -0.386 (p=0.008) and -0.357 (p=0.014) for 
once daily and twice daily FFNS, respectively). The differences in median times
to symptom improvement were not statistically significant between each dose of
FFNS (7 days) and placebo (8 days). There were no treatment differences in
antibiotic use for possible fulminant bacterial rhinosinusitis (3% in each
group). The safety profile of FFNS was similar to placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: FFNS reduces symptoms of uncomplicated ARS compared with placebo and
is well tolerated, providing support for withholding antibiotics in selected
patients.

PMID: 22614920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23863. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023863. Epub 2011 Sep 2.

Comprehensively surveying structure and function of RING domains from Drosophila 
melanogaster.

Ying M(1), Huang X, Zhao H, Wu Y, Wan F, Huang C, Jie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Basic Medical College of
Nanchang University, Nanchang, People's Republic of China. yingmuying@ncu.edu.cn

Using a complete set of RING domains from Drosophila melanogaster, all the solved
RING domains and cocrystal structures of RING-containing ubiquitin-ligases
(RING-E3) and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) pairs, we analyzed RING domains
structures from their primary to quarternary structures. The results showed that:
i) putative orthologs of RING domains between Drosophila melanogaster and the
human largely occur (118/139, 84.9%); ii) of the 118 orthologous pairs from
Drosophila melanogaster and the human, 117 pairs (117/118, 99.2%) were found to
retain entirely uniform domain architectures, only Iap2/Diap2 experienced
evolutionary expansion of domain architecture; iii) 4 evolutionary structurally
conserved regions (SCRs) are responsible for homologous folding of RING domains
at the superfamily level; iv) besides the conserved Cys/His chelating zinc ions, 
6 equivalent residues (4 hydrophobic and 2 polar residues) in the SCRs possess
good-consensus and conservation- these 4 SCRs function in the structural
positioning of 6 equivalent residues as determinants for RING-E3 catalysis; v)
members of these RING proteins located nucleus, multiple subcellular
compartments, membrane protein and mitochondrion are respectively 42 (42/139,
30.2%), 71 (71/139, 51.1%), 22 (22/139, 15.8%) and 4 (4/139, 2.9%); vi) CG15104
(Topors) and CG1134 (Mul1) in C3HC4, and CG3929 (Deltex) in C3H2C3 seem to
display broader E2s binding profiles than other RING-E3s; vii) analyzing
intermolecular interfaces of E2/RING-E3 complexes indicate that residues directly
interacting with E2s are all from the SCRs in RING domains. Of the 6 residues, 2 
hydrophobic ones contribute to constructing the conserved hydrophobic core, while
the 2 hydrophobic and 2 polar residues directly participate in E2/RING-E3
interactions. Based on sequence and structural data, SCRs, conserved equivalent
residues and features of intermolecular interfaces were extracted, highlighting
the presence of a nucleus for RING domain fold and formation of catalytic core in
which related residues and regions exhibit preferential evolutionary
conservation.

PMCID: PMC3166285
PMID: 21912646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Genetics. 2011 Nov;189(3):779-93. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.133819. Epub 2011 Sep
6.

Nuclear structure and chromosome segregation in Drosophila male meiosis depend on
the ubiquitin ligase dTopors.

Matsui M(1), Sharma KC, Cooke C, Wakimoto BT, Rasool M, Hayworth M, Hylton CA,
Tomkiel JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Greensboro, North
Carolina 27402, USA.

In many organisms, homolog pairing and synapsis at meiotic prophase depend on
interactions between chromosomes and the nuclear membrane. Male Drosophila lack
synapsis, but nonetheless, their chromosomes closely associate with the nuclear
periphery at prophase I. To explore the functional significance of this
association, we characterize mutations in nuclear blebber (nbl), a gene required 
for both spermatocyte nuclear shape and meiotic chromosome transmission. We
demonstrate that nbl corresponds to dtopors, the Drosophila homolog of the
mammalian dual ubiquitin/small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) ligase Topors.
We show that mutations in dtopors cause abnormalities in lamin localizations,
centriole separation, and prophase I chromatin condensation and also cause
anaphase I bridges that likely result from unresolved homolog connections. Bridge
formation does not require mod(mdg4) in meiosis, suggesting that bridges do not
result from misregulation of the male homolog conjunction complex. At the
ultrastructural level, we observe disruption of nuclear shape, an uneven
perinuclear space, and excess membranous structures. We show that dTopors
localizes to the nuclear lamina at prophase, and also transiently to intranuclear
foci. As a role of dtopors at gypsy insulator has been reported, we also asked
whether these new alleles affected expression of the gypsy-induced mutation ct(6)
and found that it was unaltered in dtopors homozygotes. Our results indicate that
dTopors is required for germline nuclear structure and meiotic chromosome
segregation, but in contrast, is not necessary for gypsy insulator function. We
suggest that dtopors plays a structural role in spermatocyte lamina that is
critical for multiple aspects of meiotic chromosome transmission.

PMCID: PMC3213359
PMID: 21900273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Jun 7;4:49. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-49.

Cell cycle and aging, morphogenesis, and response to stimuli genes are
individualized biomarkers of glioblastoma progression and survival.

Serão NV(1), Delfino KR, Southey BR, Beever JE, Rodriguez-Zas SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma is a complex multifactorial disorder that has swift and 
devastating consequences. Few genes have been consistently identified as
prognostic biomarkers of glioblastoma survival. The goal of this study was to
identify general and clinical-dependent biomarker genes and biological processes 
of three complementary events: lifetime, overall and progression-free
glioblastoma survival.
METHODS: A novel analytical strategy was developed to identify general
associations between the biomarkers and glioblastoma, and associations that
depend on cohort groups, such as race, gender, and therapy. Gene network
inference, cross-validation and functional analyses further supported the
identified biomarkers.
RESULTS: A total of 61, 47 and 60 gene expression profiles were significantly
associated with lifetime, overall, and progression-free survival, respectively.
The vast majority of these genes have been previously reported to be associated
with glioblastoma (35, 24, and 35 genes, respectively) or with other cancers (10,
19, and 15 genes, respectively) and the rest (16, 4, and 10 genes, respectively) 
are novel associations. Pik3r1, E2f3, Akr1c3, Csf1, Jag2, Plcg1, Rpl37a, Sod2,
Topors, Hras, Mdm2, Camk2g, Fstl1, Il13ra1, Mtap and Tp53 were associated with
multiple survival events.Most genes (from 90 to 96%) were associated with
survival in a general or cohort-independent manner and thus the same trend is
observed across all clinical levels studied. The most extreme associations
between profiles and survival were observed for Syne1, Pdcd4, Ighg1, Tgfa,
Pla2g7, and Paics. Several genes were found to have a cohort-dependent
association with survival and these associations are the basis for individualized
prognostic and gene-based therapies. C2, Egfr, Prkcb, Igf2bp3, and Gdf10 had
gender-dependent associations; Sox10, Rps20, Rab31, and Vav3 had race-dependent
associations; Chi3l1, Prkcb, Polr2d, and Apool had therapy-dependent
associations. Biological processes associated glioblastoma survival included
morphogenesis, cell cycle, aging, response to stimuli, and programmed cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Known biomarkers of glioblastoma survival were confirmed, and new
general and clinical-dependent gene profiles were uncovered. The comparison of
biomarkers across glioblastoma phases and functional analyses offered insights
into the role of genes. These findings support the development of more accurate
and personalized prognostic tools and gene-based therapies that improve the
survival and quality of life of individuals afflicted by glioblastoma multiforme.

PMCID: PMC3127972
PMID: 21649900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Mar 1;20(5):975-87. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq543. Epub 2010 Dec
15.

TOPORS, implicated in retinal degeneration, is a cilia-centrosomal protein.

Chakarova CF(1), Khanna H, Shah AZ, Patil SB, Sedmak T, Murga-Zamalloa CA,
Papaioannou MG, Nagel-Wolfrum K, Lopez I, Munro P, Cheetham M, Koenekoop RK, Rios
RM, Matter K, Wolfrum U, Swaroop A, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, UCL, London EC1V 9EL, UK.

We recently reported that mutations in the widely expressed nuclear protein
TOPORS (topoisomerase I-binding arginine/serine rich) are associated with
autosomal dominant retinal degeneration. However, the precise localization and a 
functional role of TOPORS in the retina remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
TOPORS is a novel component of the photoreceptor sensory cilium, which is a
modified primary cilium involved with polarized trafficking of proteins. In
photoreceptors, TOPORS localizes primarily to the basal bodies of connecting
cilium and in the centrosomes of cultured cells. Morpholino-mediated silencing of
topors in zebrafish embryos demonstrates in another species a comparable retinal 
problem as seen in humans, resulting in defective retinal development and failure
to form outer segments. These defects can be rescued by mRNA encoding human
TOPORS. Taken together, our data suggest that TOPORS may play a key role in
regulating primary cilia-dependent photoreceptor development and function.
Additionally, it is well known that mutations in other ciliary proteins cause
retinal degeneration, which may explain why mutations in TOPORS result in the
same phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3033188
PMID: 21159800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Muscle Res Cell Motil. 2010 Dec;31(4):279-88. doi: 10.1007/s10974-010-9230-9.
Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Rapid decrease in active tension generated by C2C12 myotubes after termination of
artificial exercise.

Fujita H(1), Hirano M, Shimizu K, Nagamori E.

Author information: 
(1)Toyota Central R&D Labs Incorporation, Yokomichi, Nagakute, Aichi, 480-1192,
Japan.

We found that the active tension of C2C12 myotubes that had been subjected to
artificial exercise for ~10 days decreased rapidly after termination of the
artificial exercise. When differentiated C2C12 myotubes were subjected to
continuous 1 Hz artificial exercise for ~10 days, the active tension increased to
~4× compared to that before application of the artificial exercise, as reported
previously. On termination of artificial exercise, the active tension decreased
rapidly, the level reaching that before application of the artificial exercise
within 8 h. Concomitant with the decrease in the active tension, an increase in
the amount of ubiquitinated proteins was observed. Real time RT-PCR revealed that
the expression of several genes associated with atrophy, namely Smc6, Vegfa,
Jarid2, Kitl, Cds2, Inmt, Fasn, Neurl, Topors, and Cul2, were also changed after 
termination of artificial exercise. These results indicate that termination of
artificial exercise induced atrophy-like responses of C2C12 myotubes. Here we
found that during the decrease in active tension, the sarcomere structure,
especially the thin filament structure, decayed rapidly after termination of
artificial exercise. On reapplication of the artificial exercise, the active
tension was restored rapidly, within 8 h, concomitant with reformation of the
sarcomere structure. These results indicate that disassembly of the sarcomere
structure may be one of the reasons for the active tension decrease during disuse
muscle atrophy.

PMID: 21120590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Apr 29;11:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-31.

Deficiency of the dual ubiquitin/SUMO ligase Topors results in genetic
instability and an increased rate of malignancy in mice.

Marshall H(1), Bhaumik M, Aviv H, Moore D, Yao M, Dutta J, Rahim H, Gounder M,
Ganesan S, Saleem A, Rubin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 195
Little Albany Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

BACKGROUND: Topors is a nuclear protein that co-localizes with promyelocytic
leukemia bodies and has both ubiquitin and SUMO E3 ligase activity. Expression
studies implicated Topors as a tumor suppressor in various malignancies. To gain 
insight into the function of Topors, we generated a Topors-deficient mouse
strain.
RESULTS: Mice homozygous for a mutant Topors allele exhibited a high rate of
perinatal mortality and decreased lifespan. In addition, heterozygotes were found
to have an increased incidence of malignancy, involving a variety of tissues.
Consistent with this finding, primary embryonic fibroblasts lacking Topors
exhibited an increased rate of malignant transformation, associated with
aneuploidy and defective chromosomal segregation. While loss of Topors did not
alter sensitivity to DNA-damaging or microtubule-targeting agents, cells lacking 
Topors exhibited altered pericentric heterochromatin, manifested by
mislocalization of HP1alpha and an increase in transcription from pericentric
major satellite DNA. Topors-deficient cells exhibited a transcriptional profile
similar to that of cells treated with histone deacetylase inhibitors, and were
resistant to the anti-proliferative effects of the histone deacetylase inhibitor 
trichostatin A.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a unique role for Topors in the maintenance of
genomic stability and pericentric heterochromatin, as well as in cellular
sensitivity to histone deacetylase inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC2873312
PMID: 20429939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 26;37(4):503-15. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.01.018.

SUMOylation-dependent localization of IKKepsilon in PML nuclear bodies is
essential for protection against DNA-damage-triggered cell death.

Renner F(1), Moreno R, Schmitz ML.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrichstrasse 24,
Justus-Liebig-University, 35392 Giessen, Germany.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 26;37(4):453-4.

The IKK-related kinase IKKepsilon contributes to the antiviral response and can
function as an oncogene that is frequently amplified in breast cancer. Here we
report on an additional role of IKKepsilon as a mediator protecting from
DNA-damage-induced cell death. Genotoxic stress allows for kinase-dependent entry
of IKKepsilon into the nucleus, where IKKepsilon-dependent PML phosphorylation is
a prerequisite for retention of this kinase in PML nuclear bodies. Within these
subnuclear structures IKKepsilon inducibly colocalizes with TOPORS, which
functions as a SUMO E3 ligase mediating SUMOylation of IKKepsilon at lysine 231. 
SUMO modification of IKKepsilon is required to trigger phosphorylation of nuclear
substrates including NF-kappaB p65, thereby contributing to the antiapoptotic
function of NF-kappaB in response to DNA damage.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20188669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochem Soc Trans. 2010 Feb;38(Pt 1):34-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0380034.

SUMO and ubiquitin paths converge.

Denuc A(1), Marfany G.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Avda.
Diagonal, 645, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

One of the more rapidly expanding fields in cell signalling nowadays is the
characterization of proteins conjugated to Ub (ubiquitin) or Ub-like peptides,
such as SUMO (small Ub-related modifier). The reversible covalent attachment of
these small peptides remodels the target protein, providing new protein-protein
interaction interfaces, which can be dynamically regulated given a set of enzymes
for conjugation and deconjugation. First, ubiquitination was thought to be merely
relegated to the control of protein turnover and degradation, whereas the
attachment of SUMO was involved in the regulation of protein activity and
function. However, the boundaries between the protein fates related to these tag 
molecules are becoming more and more fuzzy, as either the differences between
mono-, multi- and poly-modifications or the lysine residue used for growth of the
poly-chains is being dissected. The Ub and SUMO pathways are no longer separated,
and many examples of this cross-talk are found in the literature, involving
different cellular processes ranging from DNA repair and genome stability, to the
regulation of protein subcellular localization or enzyme activity. Here, we
review several cases in which SUMOylation and ubiquitination intersect, showing
also that the same protein can be conjugated to SUMO and Ub for antagonistic,
synergistic or multiple outcomes, illustrating the intricacy of the cellular
signalling networks. Ub and SUMO have met and are now applying for new regulatory
roles in the cell.

PMID: 20074031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jul;37(6):3023-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9871-1. Epub 2009
Oct 11.

Plk1 phosphorylation of Topors is involved in its degradation.

Yang X(1), Li H, Deng A, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.
xiaoming4444@gmail.com

Topors is a DNA topoisomerase I- and p53-binding protein, and mainly functions as
a p53 regulator. Accumulating evidence also supports the notion that Topors plays
the role as a negative regulator of cell growth, and possibly as a tumor
suppressor. Here, we demonstrated that Topors is also involved in normal mitotic 
progression, since Topors depletion delays mitotic entry and affects mitotic
progression. Furthermore, Topors is degradated in response to the activation of
the spindle checkpoint. Significantly, Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1)-associated
phosphorylation of Topors at S718 is essential for nocodazole-induced degradation
of Topors.

PMID: 19821153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18588-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C109.001560. Epub
2009 May 27.

Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of Topors regulates p53 stability.

Yang X(1), Li H, Zhou Z, Wang WH, Deng A, Andrisani O, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.

Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) overexpression is associated with tumorigenesis by an
unknown mechanism. Likewise, Plk1 was suggested to act as a negative regulator of
tumor suppressor p53, but the mechanism remains to be determined. Herein, we have
identified topoisomerase I-binding protein (Topors), a p53-binding protein, as a 
Plk1 target. We show that Plk1 phosphorylates Topors on Ser(718) in vivo.
Significantly, expression of a Plk1-unphosphorylatable Topors mutant (S718A)
leads to a dramatic accumulation of p53 through inhibition of p53 degradation.
Topors is an ubiquitin and small ubiquitin-like modifier ubiquitin-protein
isopeptide ligase (SUMO E3) ligase. Plk1-mediated phosphorylation of Topors
inhibits Topors-mediated sumoylation of p53, whereas p53 ubiquitination is
enhanced, leading to p53 degradation. These results demonstrate that Plk1
modulates Topors activity in suppressing p53 function and identify a likely
mechanism for the tumorigenic potential of Plk1.

PMCID: PMC2707202
PMID: 19473992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ophthalmic Genet. 2009 Jun;30(2):96-8. doi: 10.1080/13816810802695543.

Mutations in TOPORS: a rare cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa in
continental Europe?

Schob C(1), Orth U, Gal A, Kindler S, Chakarova CF, Bhattacharya SS, Rüther K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.

Mutations in TOPORS cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP).
Examination of 160 adRP patients from continental Europe revealed nine exonic
single nucleotide variants, eight of which reside in the coding region; three
synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; c.2319T > C, c.2991T > C and
c.1560A > G), three nonsynonymous SNPs (c.58C > T/p.P20S, c.74C >G/p.S25W and
c.1730C > A/p.S577Y) and two novel missense mutations (c.1205A > C/p.Q402P and
c.1818T > G/p.S606R). Whether the latter two variants represent adRP causing
mutations awaits further analysis.

PMID: 19373681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Acta Ophthalmol. 2010 May;88(3):323-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2008.01465.x.
Epub 2009 Jan 30.

Autosomal dominant pericentral retinal dystrophy caused by a novel missense
mutation in the TOPORS gene.

Selmer KK(1), Grøndahl J, Riise R, Brandal K, Braaten O, Bragadottir R, Undlien
DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
k.k.selmer@medisin.uio.no <k.k.selmer@medisin.uio.no>

PURPOSE: This study aimed to identify the genetic cause of autosomal dominant
pericentral retinal dystrophy (adPRD) in a large Norwegian family with 35
affected members.
METHODS: The family was characterized by clinical ophthalmological examination
along with fundus photography, dark adaptometry and electroretinography. We
performed a genome-wide linkage analysis followed by sequencing of a candidate
gene to identify the mutation causing the disease.
RESULTS: The ophthalmological examinations revealed an atypical form of retinitis
pigmentosa (RP), which we prefer to call adPRD. Compared with classical RP, this 
phenotype has a favourable prognosis. Linkage analysis showed a linkage peak
covering the most recently reported adRP gene TOPORS. This gene was sequenced in 
19 family members and a novel missense mutation, c.1205a>c, resulting in an amino
acid substitution p.Q402P, was detected in all affected members. The mutation
showed complete co-segregation with the disease in this family, with a LOD score 
of 7.3. It is located in a highly conserved region and alignment with the
appropriate DNA sequence from other species shows complete conservation of this
amino acid. The mutation was not detected in 207 healthy, unrelated controls of
Norwegian origin.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a novel mutation in the TOPORS gene co-segregating with a
distinct phenotype of adPRD in a large Norwegian family.

PMID: 19183411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochemistry. 2008 Dec 30;47(52):13887-96. doi: 10.1021/bi801904q.

Identification of phosphorylation sites of TOPORS and a role for serine 98 in the
regulation of ubiquitin but not SUMO E3 ligase activity.

Park HJ(1), Zheng H, Kulkarni D, Kerrigan J, Pungaliya P, Saleem A, Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Medicine, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, 195 Little Albany Street, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

TOPORS is the first example of a protein that possesses both ubiquitin and SUMO
E3 ligase activity. The ubiquitination activity maps to a conserved RING domain
in the N-terminal region of the protein, which is not required for sumoylation
activity. Similar to other E3 ligases, it is likely that the ubiquitin and
sumoylation activities of TOPORS are regulated by post-translational
modifications. Therefore, we employed mass spectrometry to identify
post-translational modifications of TOPORS. Several putative phosphorylated
regions were identified in conserved regions of the protein. We investigated the 
role of phosphorylation of serine 98, which is adjacent to the RING domain, in
both cells and in vitro. Mutation of serine 98 to aspartic acid resulted in an
increase in the ubiquitin ligase activity of TOPORS both in cells and in vitro.
In addition, this mutation increased the binding of TOPORS to the E2 enzyme
UbcH5a both in vitro and in cells. Conversely, a phospho-deficient mutant (S98A) 
exhibited little change in ubiquitin ligase activity compared to wild-type
TOPORS, both in cells and in vitro. Neither of the mutants affected the
localization of TOPORS to punctate nuclear regions. In addition, neither mutant
affected the SUMO ligase activity of TOPORS in cells or in vitro. Molecular
modeling studies support a role for serine 98 in regulating TOPORS-E2
interactions. Our findings indicate that phosphorylation of serine 98 regulates
the ubiquitin but not the SUMO ligase activity of TOPORS, consistent with a
potential binary switch function for TOPORS in protein ubiquitination versus
sumoylation.

PMID: 19053840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Feb 15;179(4):279-87. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200802-320OC. Epub 2008 Nov 14.

Cigarette smoke induces cellular senescence via Werner's syndrome protein
down-regulation.

Nyunoya T(1), Monick MM, Klingelhutz AL, Glaser H, Cagley JR, Brown CO, Matsumoto
E, Aykin-Burns N, Spitz DR, Oshima J, Hunninghake GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Occupational Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. toru-nyunoya@uiowa.edu

RATIONALE: Werner's syndrome is a genetic disorder that causes premature aging
due to loss-of-function mutations in a gene encoding a member of the RecQ
helicase family. Both Werner's syndrome and cigarette smoking accelerate aging.
No studies have examined the effect of cigarette smoke on Werner's syndrome
protein.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the role of Werner's syndrome protein in cigarette
smoke-induced cellular senescence.
METHODS: Cellular senescence and amounts of Werner's syndrome protein were
measured in fibroblasts isolated from patients with emphysema and compared with
age-matched nonsmokers. The in vitro effects of cigarette smoke on amounts of
Werner's syndrome protein, function, and senescence were also evaluated in
primary human lung fibroblasts and epithelial cells.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Cultured lung fibroblasts isolated from patients
with emphysema exhibited a senescent phenotype accompanied by a decrease in
Werner's syndrome protein. Cigarette smoke extract decreased Werner's syndrome
protein in cultured fibroblasts and epithelial cells. Werner's syndrome
protein-deficient fibroblasts were more susceptible to cigarette smoke-induced
cellular senescence and cell migration impairment. In contrast, exogenous
overexpression of Werner's syndrome protein attenuated the cigarette smoke
effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Cigarette smoke induces cellular senescence and cell migration
impairment via Werner's syndrome protein down-regulation. Rescue of Werner's
syndrome protein down-regulation may represent a potential therapeutic target for
smoking-related diseases.

PMCID: PMC2643077
PMID: 19011155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Vis. 2008 May 19;14:922-7.

Mutations in the TOPORS gene cause 1% of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

Bowne SJ(1), Sullivan LS, Gire AI, Birch DG, Hughbanks-Wheaton D, Heckenlively
JR, Daiger SP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas Health Science Center, Human Genetics Center, School
of Public Health, Houston, TX 77030, USA. sara.j.bowne@uth.tmc.edu

PURPOSE: The purpose of this project was to determine if mutations, including
large insertions or deletions, in the recently identified RP31 gene topoisomerase
I-binding arginine-serine rich (RS) protein (TOPORS), cause an appreciable
fraction of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP).
METHODS: An adRP cohort of 215 families was used to determine the frequency of
TOPORS mutations. We looked for mutations in TOPORS by testing 89 probands from
the cohort without mutations in other known adRP genes. Mutation detection was
performed by fluorescent capillary sequencing and by multiplex ligation probe
amplification.
RESULTS: Two different TOPORS mutations, p.Glu808X and p.Arg857GlyfsX9, were each
identified in one proband. Patients with these mutations exhibited clinical signs
typical of advanced adRP. No large deletions or insertions of TOPORS were
identified in our study.
CONCLUSIONS: Point mutations and small insertions or deletions in TOPORS cause
approximately 1% of adRP. Large deletions or insertions of TOPORS are not an
appreciable cause of adRP. Contrary to previous reports, no distinct clinical
phenotype was seen in these patients.

PMCID: PMC2391085
PMID: 18509552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Trends Biochem Sci. 2008 May;33(5):201-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2008.02.001. Epub
2008 Apr 9.

A SIM-ultaneous role for SUMO and ubiquitin.

Perry JJ(1), Tainer JA, Boddy MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins (Ubls) share a beta-GRASP fold and have key
roles in cellular growth and suppression of genome instability. Despite their
common fold, SUMO and ubiquitin are classically portrayed as distinct, and they
can have antagonistic roles. Recently, a new family of proteins, the small
ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)-targeted ubiquitin ligases (STUbLs), which
directly connect sumoylation and ubiquitylation, has been discovered. Uniquely,
STUbLs use SUMO-interaction motifs (SIMs) to recognize their sumoylated targets. 
STUbLs are global regulators of protein sumoylation levels, and cells lacking
STUbLs display genomic instability and hypersensitivity to genotoxic stress. The 
human STUbL, RNF4, is implicated in several diseases including cancer,
highlighting the importance of characterizing the cellular functions of STUbLs.

PMID: 18403209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2008 Feb;5(1):121-35. doi: 10.1586/14789450.5.1.121.

Ubiquitin proteolytic system: focus on SUMO.

Wilson VG(1), Heaton PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial & Molecular Pathogenesis, College of Medicine, Texas
A&M Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA.
wilson@medicine.tamhsc.edu

The small ubiquitin-like modifier proteins (Smt3 in yeast and SUMOs 1-4 in
vertebrates) are members of the ubiquitin super family. Like ubiquitin, the SUMOs
are protein modifiers that are covalently attached to the epsilon-amino group of 
lysine residues in the substrates. The application of proteomics to the SUMO
field has greatly expanded both the number of known targets and the number of
identified target lysines. As new refinements of proteomic techniques are
developed and applied to sumoylation, an explosion of novel data is likely in the
next 5 years. This ability to examine sumoylated proteins globally, rather than
individually, will lead to new insights into both the functions of the individual
SUMO types, and how dynamic changes in overall sumoylation occur in response to
alterations in cellular environment. In addition, there is a growing appreciation
for the existence of cross-talk mechanisms between the sumoylation and
ubiquitinylation processes. Rather than being strictly parallel, these two
systems have many points of intersection, and it is likely that the coordination 
of these two systems is a critical contributor to the regulation of many
fundamental cellular events.

PMCID: PMC3467698
PMID: 18282128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 22;283(8):4834-40. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Ubiquitination by TOPORS regulates the prostate tumor suppressor NKX3.1.

Guan B(1), Pungaliya P, Li X, Uquillas C, Mutton LN, Rubin EH, Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA.

The NKX3.1 gene located at 8p21.2 encodes a homeodomain-containing transcription 
factor that acts as a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor in prostate cancer.
Diminished protein expression of NKX3.1 has been observed in prostate cancer
precursors and carcinomas. TOPORS is a ubiquitously expressed E3 ubiquitin ligase
that can ubiquitinate tumor suppressor p53. Here we report interaction between
NKX3.1 and TOPORS. NKX3.1 can be ubiquitinated by TOPORS in vitro and in vivo,
and overexpression of TOPORS leads to NKX3.1 proteasomal degradation in prostate 
cancer cells. Conversely, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of TOPORS
leads to an increased steady-state level and prolonged half-life of NKX3.1. These
data establish TOPORS as a negative regulator of NKX3.1 and implicate TOPORS in
prostate cancer progression.

PMID: 18077445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. FEBS Lett. 2007 Nov 27;581(28):5418-24. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

The E3 ligase Topors induces the accumulation of polysumoylated forms of DNA
topoisomerase I in vitro and in vivo.

Hammer E(1), Heilbronn R, Weger S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Charité Campus Benjamin Franklin, Free University of
Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203 Berlin, Germany.

Human Topors has originally been identified as binding partner of p53 and DNA
topoisomerase I (TOP1). It can function as both an ubiquitin and SUMO-1 E3 ligase
for p53. Here we demonstrate that Topors enhances the formation of high-molecular
weight SUMO-1 conjugates of TOP1 in a reconstituted in vitro system and also in
human osteosarcoma cells, similar to treatment with CPT. In contrast to the
situation observed with p53, overall sumoylation levels were rather unaffected.
Experiments with TOP1 point mutants strongly suggest that the high-molecular
weight conjugates represent SUMO-1 chains formed on a limited number of SUMO-1
acceptor sites.

PMID: 17976381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Nov;81(5):1098-103. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Mutations in TOPORS cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa with
perivascular retinal pigment epithelium atrophy.

Chakarova CF(1), Papaioannou MG, Khanna H, Lopez I, Waseem N, Shah A, Theis T,
Friedman J, Maubaret C, Bujakowska K, Veraitch B, Abd El-Aziz MM, Prescott de Q, 
Parapuram SK, Bickmore WA, Munro PM, Gal A, Hamel CP, Marigo V, Ponting CP,
Wissinger B, Zrenner E, Matter K, Swaroop A, Koenekoop RK, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, UK.

We report mutations in the gene for topoisomerase I-binding RS protein (TOPORS)
in patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) linked to
chromosome 9p21.1 (locus RP31). A positional-cloning approach, together with the 
use of bioinformatics, identified TOPORS (comprising three exons and encoding a
protein of 1,045 aa) as the gene responsible for adRP. Mutations that include an 
insertion and a deletion have been identified in two adRP-affected families--one 
French Canadian and one German family, respectively. Interestingly, a distinct
phenotype is noted at the earlier stages of the disease, with an unusual
perivascular cuff of retinal pigment epithelium atrophy, which was found
surrounding the superior and inferior arcades in the retina. TOPORS is a RING
domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase and localizes in the nucleus in speckled
loci that are associated with promyelocytic leukemia bodies. The ubiquitous
nature of TOPORS expression and a lack of mutant protein in patients are highly
suggestive of haploinsufficiency, rather than a dominant negative effect, as the 
molecular mechanism of the disease and make rescue of the clinical phenotype
amenable to somatic gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC2265653
PMID: 17924349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Proteome Res. 2007 Oct;6(10):3918-23. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

TOPORS functions as a SUMO-1 E3 ligase for chromatin-modifying proteins.

Pungaliya P(1), Kulkarni D, Park HJ, Marshall H, Zheng H, Lackland H, Saleem A,
Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 195
Little Albany Street, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

TOPORS is the first example of a protein with both ubiquitin and SUMO-1 E3 ligase
activity and has been implicated as a tumor suppressor in several different
malignancies. To gain insight into the cellular role of TOPORS, a proteomic
screen was performed to identify candidate sumoylation substrates. The results
indicate that many of the putative substrates are involved in chromatin
modification or transcriptional regulation. Transfection studies confirmed
mammalian Sin3A as a sumoylation substrate for TOPORS. These findings suggest
that TOPORS may function as a tumor suppressor by regulating mSin3A and other
proteins involved in chromatin modification.

PMID: 17803295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 21;26(4):1068-80. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Death effector domain DEDa, a self-cleaved product of caspase-8/Mch5,
translocates to the nucleus by binding to ERK1/2 and upregulates procaspase-8
expression via a p53-dependent mechanism.

Yao Z(1), Duan S, Hou D, Heese K, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui,
People's Republic of China.

Activation of the apical caspase-8 is crucial to the extrinsic apoptotic pathway.
Although the death effector domain (DED) of caspase-8 has been reported to be
involved in death-inducing signaling complex formation, the detailed mechanism of
how DED functions in regulating apoptosis remains largely unknown. Here, we
demonstrate that the prodomain of the caspase-8/Mch5 can be further cleaved
between two tandemly repeated DEDs (DEDa-DEDb) at the amino-acid residue Asp129
by caspase-8 itself. The DEDa fragment generated from the endogenous caspase-8
was detected in isolated nucleoli upon treatment with TRAIL (tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand). Cleaved DEDa appears to translocate
into the nucleus by association with extracellular signal-regulated protein
kinases-1/2 (ERK1/2). Elimination of ERK1/2 expression by RNA interference
resulted in a significant attenuation of nuclear entry of DEDa and reduced
caspase-8-dependent apoptosis. In the nucleus, DEDa interacts with TOPORS, a p53 
and topoisomerase I binding protein, and possibly displaces p53 from TOPORS,
allowing p53 to stimulate caspase-8 gene expression. In summary, we postulate a
positive feedback loop involving DEDa, which enables the continual replenishment 
of procaspase-8 during apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC1852837
PMID: 17290218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2006;44(3):463-74.

CGI-55 interacts with nuclear proteins and co-localizes to p80-coilin
positive-coiled bodies in the nucleus.

Lemos TA(1), Kobarg J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular Estrutural, Laboratório Nacional de Luz
Síncrotron, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

The human protein CGI-55 has been described as a chromo-helicase-DNA-binding
domain protein (CHD)-3 interacting protein and was also found to interact with
the 3'-region of the plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 mRNA. Here, we used 
CGI-55 as a "bait" in a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified eight interacting 
proteins: Daxx, Topoisomerase I binding RS (Topors), HPC2, UBA2, TDG, and protein
inhibitor of activated STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription)
(PIAS)-1, -3, and -y. These proteins are either structurally or functionally
associated with promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies (PML-NBs), protein
sumoylation, or the regulation of transcription. The interactions of CGI-55 with 
Daxx, Topors, PIASy, and UBA2 were confirmed by in vivo colocalization
experiments in HeLa cells, by using green (GFP) and red fluorescence fusion
proteins. A mapping study of the CGI-55 binding site for these proteins revealed 
three distinct patterns of interaction. The fact that CGI-55-GFP has been
localized in cytoplasm and nucleus in a dotted manner, and its interaction with
proteins associated with PML-NBs, suggested that CGI-55 might be associated with 
nuclear bodies. Although Daxx and Topors co-localized with promyelocytic leukemia
protein (PML), CGI-55 itself as well as PIASy and UBA2 showed only little
co-localization with PML. However, we observed that CGI-55 localizes to the
nucleolus and co-localizes with p80-coilin positive nuclear-coiled bodies.

PMID: 16679534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell. 2005 Oct 7;20(1):105-16.

The ubiquitin ligase dTopors directs the nuclear organization of a chromatin
insulator.

Capelson M(1), Corces VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 North Charles Street,
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Chromatin insulators are gene regulatory elements implicated in the establishment
of independent chromatin domains. The gypsy insulator of D. melanogaster confers 
its activity through a protein complex that consists of three known components,
Su(Hw), Mod(mdg4)2.2, and CP190. We have identified a factor, Drosophila
Topoisomerase I-interacting RS protein (dTopors) that interacts with the
insulator protein complex and is required for gypsy insulator function. In the
absence of Mod(mdg4)2.2, nuclear clustering of insulator complexes is disrupted
and insulator activity is compromised. Overexpression of dTopors in the
mod(mdg4)2.2 null mutant rescues insulator activity and restores the formation of
nuclear insulator bodies. dTopors associates with the nuclear lamina, and
mutations in lamin disrupt dTopors localization as well as nuclear organization
and activity of the gypsy insulator. Thus, dTopors appears to be involved in the 
establishment of chromatin organization through its ability to mediate the
association of insulator complexes with a fixed nuclear substrate.

PMID: 16209949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. FEBS Lett. 2005 Sep 12;579(22):5007-12.

Topors acts as a SUMO-1 E3 ligase for p53 in vitro and in vivo.

Weger S(1), Hammer E, Heilbronn R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Department of Virology, Charité Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Free University of Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203 Berlin,
Germany. stefan.weger@charite.de

Human Topors, which was originally identified as cellular binding partner of DNA 
topoisomerase I and of p53, has recently been shown to function as an ubiquitin
E3 ligase for p53 in a manner dependent on its N'-terminally located RING finger.
Here, we demonstrate that Topors also enhances the conjugation of the small
ubiquitin-like modifier 1 (SUMO-1) to p53 in vivo and in a reconstituted in vitro
system. The Topors SUMO-1 E3 ligase activity does not depend upon its RING finger
motif. In HeLa cells, Topors induced p53 sumoylation was accompanied by an
increase in endogenous p53 protein levels. Furthermore, Topors enhances the
sumoylation of a variety of other, yet unidentified, cellular proteins.

PMID: 16122737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cancer Res. 2005 May 15;65(10):4088-96.

High-resolution genome-wide mapping of genetic alterations in human glial brain
tumors.

Bredel M(1), Bredel C, Juric D, Harsh GR, Vogel H, Recht LD, Sikic BI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Clinical Sciences Research, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5151, USA.
mbredel@stanford.edu

High-resolution genome-wide mapping of exact boundaries of chromosomal
alterations should facilitate the localization and identification of genes
involved in gliomagenesis and may characterize genetic subgroups of glial brain
tumors. We have done such mapping using cDNA microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization technology to profile copy number alterations across 42,000 mapped 
human cDNA clones, in a series of 54 gliomas of varying histogenesis and tumor
grade. This gene-by-gene approach permitted the precise sizing of critical
amplicons and deletions and the detection of multiple new genetic aberrations. It
has also revealed recurrent patterns of occurrence of distinct chromosomal
aberrations as well as their interrelationships and showed that gliomas can be
clustered into distinct genetic subgroups. A subset of detected alterations was
shown predominantly associated with either astrocytic or oligodendrocytic tumor
phenotype. Finally, five novel minimally deleted regions were identified in a
subset of tumors, containing putative candidate tumor suppressor genes (TOPORS,
FANCG, RAD51, TP53BP1, and BIK) that could have a role in gliomagenesis.

PMID: 15899798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncogene. 2005 May 12;24(21):3385-96.

topors, a p53 and topoisomerase I-binding RING finger protein, is a coactivator
of p53 in growth suppression induced by DNA damage.

Lin L(1), Ozaki T, Takada Y, Kageyama H, Nakamura Y, Hata A, Zhang JH, Simonds
WF, Nakagawara A, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The RING family zinc-finger protein topors (topoisomerase I-binding protein)
binds not only topoisomerase I, but also p53 and the AAV-2 Rep78/68 proteins.
topors maps to human chromosome 9p21, which contains candidate tumor suppressor
genes implicated in small cell lung cancers. In this study, we isolated the
murine counterpart of topors and investigated its impact on p53 function. The
deduced amino-acid sequence of mouse topors exhibits extensive similarity to
human topors. Overexpressed myc-tagged topors associates with and stabilizes p53,
and enhances the p53-dependent transcriptional activities of p21(Waf1), MDM2 and 
Bax promoters and elevates endogenous p21(Waf1) mRNA levels. Overexpression of
topors consequently results in the suppression of cell growth by cell cycle
arrest and/or by the induction of apoptosis. Taken together, these studies
identify topors as a positive regulator of p53. The expression of topors is
induced by exposure to the genotoxic reagents cisplatin and camptothecin, a DNA
topoisomerase I inhibitor. We therefore postulate that topors mediates
p53-dependent cellular responses induced by DNA damage, suggesting its
physiological role as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 15735665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Oncol. 2005 Mar;26(3):641-8.

DJ-1 restores p53 transcription activity inhibited by Topors/p53BP3.

Shinbo Y(1), Taira T, Niki T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0812, Japan.

DJ-1 is a multi-functional protein that plays roles in transcriptional regulation
and anti-oxidative stress, and loss of its function is thought to result in onset
of Parkinson's disease. Here, we report that DJ-1 bound to Topors/p53BP3, a ring 
finger protein binding to both topoisomerase I and p53, in vitro and in vivo and 
that both proteins were colocalized in cells. DJ-1 and p53 were then found to be 
sumoylated by Topors in cells. It was also found that DJ-1 bound to p53 in vitro 
and in vivo and that colocalization with and its binding to p53 were stimulated
by UV irradiation of cells. Transcription activity of p53 was found to be
abrogated by Topors concomitant with sumoylation of p53 in a dose-dependent
manner, and DJ-1 restored its repressed activity by releasing the sumoylated form
of p53. These findings suggest that DJ-1 positively regulates p53 through
Topors-mediated sumoylation.

PMID: 15703819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Lung Cancer. 2004 Oct;46(1):21-8.

Expression of LUN gene that encodes a novel RING finger protein is correlated
with development and progression of non-small cell lung cancer.

Oyanagi H(1), Takenaka K, Ishikawa S, Kawano Y, Adachi Y, Ueda K, Wada H, Tanaka 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Shogoin-kawahara-cho 54, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

LUN is a novel RING finger protein that is highly expressed in the lung and might
be a transcriptional regulator of E-cadherin [J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 14004].
It might be possible that LUN plays important roles in the development and
progression of lung cancer through regulating expression of E-cadherin, but no
clinical study on LUN expression has been reported. In the present study, we
quantitatively examined gene expression of the LUN in surgical specimens resected
from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. In normal lung tissues, the LUN
gene expression was down-regulated in smokers (the mean LUN/GAPDH ratios, 0.222
for non-smokers and 0.144 for smokers; P = 0.030). In addition, the mean
LUN/GAPDH ratio in lung cancer tissues was significantly lower than that in
normal lung tissues (0.072 versus 0.162; P < 0.001). In addition, the LUN gene
expression was slightly down-regulated along with progression of primary tumors, 
and strongly down-regulated along with nodal metastases (the mean LUN/GAPDH
ratios, 0.091 for pN0, 0.073 for pN1, and 0.034 for pN2 diseases; P = 0.001).
These results suggested that LUN might play important roles in inhibition of
nodal metastases as well as in suppression of smoking-related oncogenesis in
NSCLC.

PMID: 15364129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36440-4. Epub 2004 Jul 9.

Topors functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase with specific E2 enzymes and
ubiquitinates p53.

Rajendra R(1), Malegaonkar D, Pungaliya P, Marshall H, Rasheed Z, Brownell J, Liu
LF, Lutzker S, Saleem A, Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

The human topoisomerase I- and p53-binding protein topors contains a highly
conserved, N-terminal C3HC4-type RING domain that is homologous to the RING
domains of known E3 ubiquitin ligases. We demonstrate that topors functions in
vitro as a RING-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase with the E2 enzymes UbcH5a, UbcH5c,
and UbcH6 but not with UbcH7, CDC34, or UbcH2b. Additional studies indicate that 
a conserved tryptophan within the topors RING domain is required for
ubiquitination activity. Furthermore, both in vitro and cellular studies
implicate p53 as a ubiquitination substrate for topors. Similar to MDM2,
overexpression of topors results in a proteasome-dependent decrease in p53
protein expression in a human osteosarcoma cell line. These results are similar
to the recent finding that a Drosophila topors orthologue ubiquitinates the Hairy
transcriptional repressor and suggest that topors functions as a ubiquitin ligase
for multiple transcription factors.

PMID: 15247280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 8;23(31):5293-300.

The topoisomerase I- and p53-binding protein topors is differentially expressed
in normal and malignant human tissues and may function as a tumor suppressor.

Saleem A(1), Dutta J, Malegaonkar D, Rasheed F, Rasheed Z, Rajendra R, Marshall
H, Luo M, Li H, Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Topors was identified recently as a human protein that binds to topoisomerase I
and p53. Topors contains a highly conserved RING domain and localizes in
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies. Relatively little is known regarding
topors expression patterns or function. We now demonstrate that topors mRNA and
protein are widely expressed in normal human tissues. By contrast, topors mRNA
and protein levels are decreased or undetectable in colon adenocarcinomas
relative to normal colon tissue, and expression of the topors protein is not
detectable in several colon cancer cell lines. The human TOPORS gene is located
on chromosome 9p21, with loss of heterozygosity in this region frequently
observed in several different malignancies. While we were unable to detect loss
of heterozygosity of the TOPORS gene in 16 sporadic colon cancer cases, increased
methylation of a CpG island in the TOPORS promoter was evident in colon
adenocarcinoma specimens relative to matched normal tissues. Additional studies
indicate that forced expression of topors inhibits cellular proliferation and is 
associated with an accumulation of cells in the G(0)/G(1) phase of the cell
cycle. This effect is independent of the topors RING domain and maps to a
C-terminal region of the protein. These results suggest that topors functions as 
a negative regulator of cell growth, and possibly as a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 15107820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17126-33. Epub 2004 Feb 9.

Drosophila Topors is a RING finger-containing protein that functions as a
ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase for the hairy basic helix-loop-helix
repressor protein.

Secombe J(1), Parkhurst SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Transcriptional repression plays an essential role in many aspects of metazoan
development. Drosophila hairy is a primary pair-rule gene encoding a basic
helix-loop-helix class transcriptional repressor that is required for proper
segmentation. Previous characterization of Hairy-binding proteins has implicated 
two different classes of histone deacetylase as mediators of Hairy repression.
Here, we present the characterization of a novel Hairy-interacting protein
(dTopors) that binds specifically to the basic region of Hairy, but does not
affect the ability of Hairy to bind DNA. By reducing the gene dose of dtopors, we
demonstrate that it acts genetically as an antagonist of Hairy-mediated
transcriptional repression. Consistent with this genetic interaction, we show
that that recombinant dTopors protein possesses ubiquitin-protein isopeptide
ligase activity in vitro and that dTopors mediates Hairy polyubiquitination and
can lead to Hairy degradation. This work provides the first evidence that
regulated proteolysis of Hairy is required for correct segmentation.

PMID: 14871887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Oct 15;290(1):13-27.

The DNA topoisomerase I binding protein topors as a novel cellular target for
SUMO-1 modification: characterization of domains necessary for subcellular
localization and sumolation.

Weger S(1), Hammer E, Engstler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Infectious Diseases, Free University of
Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 27, 12203 Berlin, Germany. weger@ukbf.fu-berlin.de

Over the past years, modification by covalent attachment of SUMO (small
ubiquitin-like modifier) has been demonstrated for of a number of cellular and
viral proteins. While increasing evidence suggests a role for SUMO modification
in the regulation of protein-protein interactions and/or subcellular
localization, most SUMO targets are still at large. In this report we show that
Topors, a Topoisomerase I and p53 interacting protein of hitherto unknown
function, presents a novel cellular target for SUMO-1 modification. In a yeast
two-hybrid system, Topors interacted with both SUMO-1 and the SUMO-1 conjugating 
enzyme UBC9. Multiple SUMO-1 modified forms of Topors could be detected after
cotransfection of exogenous SUMO-1 and Topors induced the colocalization of a YFP
tagged SUMO-1 protein in a speckled pattern in the nucleus. A subset of these
Topors' nuclear speckles were closely associated with the PML nuclear bodies
(POD, ND10). A central domain comprising Topors residues 437 to 574 was
sufficient for both sumolation and localization to nuclear speckles. One SUMO-1
acceptor site at lysine residue 560 could be identified within this region.
However, sumolation-deficient Topors mutants showed that sumolation obviously is 
not required for localization to nuclear speckles.

PMID: 14516784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Jul 15;277(2):152-60.

The topoisomerase I-binding RING protein, topors, is associated with
promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies.

Rasheed ZA(1), Saleem A, Ravee Y, Pandolfi PP, Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick,
New Jersey 08903-2681, USA.

We previously identified topors as a topoisomerase I-binding protein that
localizes in punctate nuclear regions when expressed as a GFP fusion protein. We 
now demonstrate that both the GFP-topors fusion protein and endogenous topors are
associated with promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies in exponentially
growing HeLa cells. Studies using isogenic PML+/+ and PML-/- murine embryonic
fibroblasts indicate that the punctate nuclear localization of topors is
dependent on PML. A basic C-terminal region but not the N-terminal RING domain of
topors is required for the punctate nuclear localization of this protein.
Additional studies indicate that topors, but not PML, rapidly relocalizes from
nuclear bodies to the nucleoplasm in cells exposed to the transcription inhibitor
dichloro-1-beta-d-ribofuranolsylbenzimidazole or to the topoisomerase I-targeting
drug camptothecin. These results identify topors as a new member of the group of 
proteins that associate dynamically with PML nuclear bodies and suggest that
topors may be involved in the cellular response to camptothecin.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12083797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Gen Virol. 2002 Mar;83(Pt 3):511-6.

Topors, a p53 and topoisomerase I binding protein, interacts with the
adeno-associated virus (AAV-2) Rep78/68 proteins and enhances AAV-2 gene
expression.

Weger S(1), Hammer E, Heilbronn R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Infektionsmedizin, Abteilung Virologie, Freie Universität Berlin,
Hindenburgdamm 27, D-12203 Berlin, Germany.

The adeno-associated virus type 2 (AAV-2) Rep proteins are essential for AAV DNA 
replication and regulation of AAV gene expression. We have identified a cellular 
protein interacting with Rep78 and Rep68 in yeast two-hybrid analysis and in GST 
pull-down assays. This protein has recently been described as both a p53 (p53BP3)
and a topoisomerase I interacting protein (Topors). It contains an
arginine/serine-rich domain, a RING finger domain and five PEST sequences. A
minimal sequence sufficient for interaction with Rep was mapped to Topors amino
acids 871 to 917. We show that the same region is also involved in the
interaction with p53. Rep sequences involved in interaction with Topors were
mapped to Rep amino acids 172 to 481. Overexpression of Topors stimulated AAV
gene expression in the absence of helper virus, suggesting a function of Topors
as a transcriptional regulator.

PMID: 11842245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14004-13. Epub 2001 Jan 25.

Cloning and characterization of LUN, a novel ring finger protein that is highly
expressed in lung and specifically binds to a palindromic sequence.

Chu D(1), Kakazu N, Gorrin-Rivas MJ, Lu HP, Kawata M, Abe T, Ueda K, Adachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Clinical Chemistry, Institute for Chemical Research,
Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan.

We isolated cDNAs encoding a novel RING finger protein (LUN), the mRNAs of which 
were expressed at high levels in the lung. In situ hybridization revealed that
LUN mRNAs were expressed in the alveolar epithelium of the lung. The LUN gene
locus was assigned to chromosome 9p21, which contains candidate tumor suppressor 
genes associated with loss of heterozygosity in more than 86% of small cell lung 
cancers. We clarified that LUN is localized to the nucleus and reveals
Zn(2+)-dependent DNA binding activity. The region from amino acids 51 to 374 of
LUN is responsible for DNA binding. Furthermore, we identified a novel
palindromic binding consensus (5'-TCCCAGCACTTTGGGA-3') for the LUN binding.
Interestingly, this LUN binding palindromic sequence is found in the upstream
transcriptional regulatory region of the E-cadherin gene and two intervening
regions of the talin gene. Our results suggested that LUN might be an important
trans-acting transcriptional regulator for lung cancer-associated genes including
E-cadherin and talin genes.

PMID: 11278651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Gene. 1999 Jul 22;235(1-2):93-101.

Identification of a novel gene encoding a p53-associated protein.

Zhou R(1), Wen H, Ao SZ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry,
Chinese Academy of Science, Shanghai 200031, People's Republic of China.

p53 exerts important physiological functions in cell-cycle control, gene
regulation, cell differentiation, apoptosis and tumor suppression by interacting 
with many cellular proteins. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we screened a
HeLa cDNA library and identified a novel gene encoding a p53-binding protein
(p53BP3). The full-length cDNA of p53BP3 was isolated from a HeLalambdagt10 cDNA 
library. This predicted protein was composed of 815 amino acids. Sequence
analysis indicated that p53BP3 contained two bipartite nuclear localization
signals and was confirmed to be a nuclear protein. FISH mapping results showed
that this novel gene was located at human chromosome 12, region p11.2-p12.1.
Northern blot analysis suggested that p53BP3 was broadly expressed in human
tissues. A further study showed that p53BP3 had a homologue in mouse.

PMID: 10415337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jun 15;27(12):2538-44.

Interaction between human topoisomerase I and a novel RING finger/arginine-serine
protein.

Haluska P Jr(1), Saleem A, Rasheed Z, Ahmed F, Su EW, Liu LF, Rubin EH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

The N-terminus of human topoisomerase I participates in the binding of this
enzyme to helicases and other proteins. Using the N-terminal 250 amino acids of
human topoisomerase I and a yeast two-hybrid/ in vitro binding screen, a novel
arginine-serine-rich peptide was identified as a human topoisomerase I-binding
protein. The corresponding full-length protein, named topors, contains a
consensus RING zinc finger domain and nuclear localization signals in addition to
the arginine-serine-rich region. The RING finger domain of topors is homologous
to a similar domain in a family of viral proteins that are involved in the
regulation of viral transcription. When expressed in HeLa cells as a green
fluorescent protein fusion, topors localizes in the nucleus in a punctate pattern
and co-immunoprecipitates with topoisomerase I. These data suggest that topors is
involved in trans-cription, possibly recruiting topoisomerase I to RNA polymerase
II transcriptional complexes.

PMCID: PMC148458
PMID: 10352183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


