
1. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Jun 16;11:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-169.

The dynamics of vertebrate homeobox gene evolution: gain and loss of genes in
mouse and human lineages.

Zhong YF(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS,
UK.

Erratum in
    BMC Evol Biol. 2011;11:204.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox genes are a large and diverse group of genes, many of which 
play important roles in transcriptional regulation during embryonic development. 
Comparison of homeobox genes between species may provide insights into the
evolution of developmental mechanisms.
RESULTS: Here we report an extensive survey of human and mouse homeobox genes
based on their most recent genome assemblies, providing the first comprehensive
analysis of mouse homeobox genes and updating an earlier survey of human homeobox
genes. In total we recognize 333 human homeobox loci comprising 255 probable
genes and 78 probable pseudogenes, and 324 mouse homeobox loci comprising 279
probable genes and 45 probable pseudogenes (accessible at
http://homeodb.zoo.ox.ac.uk). Comparison to partial genome sequences from other
species allows us to resolve which differences are due to gain of genes and which
are due to gene losses.
CONCLUSIONS: We find there has been much more homeobox gene loss in the rodent
evolutionary lineage than in the primate lineage. While humans have lost only the
Msx3 gene, mice have lost Ventx, Argfx, Dprx, Shox, Rax2, LOC647589, Tprx1 and
Nanognb. This analysis provides insight into the patterns of homeobox gene
evolution in the mammals, and a step towards relating genomic evolution to
phenotypic evolution.

PMCID: PMC3141429
PMID: 21679462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gene. 2007 Jan 31;387(1-2):7-14. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Annotation, nomenclature and evolution of four novel homeobox genes expressed in 
the human germ line.

Booth HA(1), Holland PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK.

The homeobox genes comprise a large gene superfamily characterised by a conserved
DNA motif encoding the homeodomain. Most homeodomain proteins function as
transcription factors, and many have important roles in embryonic development and
cell differentiation. Here we describe, annotate and name four novel homeobox
genes in the human genome: ARGFX, DPRX, TPRX1 and DUXA. Each has generated
multiple retrotransposed (processed) pseudogenes; these are reliable indicators
of germ-line expression because only in germ-line cells can retrotransposition
result in inheritance to the next generation. The retrotransposed sequences were 
exploited here as a novel means to deduce exon-intron boundaries. All four novel 
genes show accelerated rates of protein sequence evolution. This fast rate of
sequence change may be connected with roles in human reproductive biology.
Deducing the evolutionary origins of these genes is not straightforward, but we
propose that TPRX1, DPRX and DUXA are highly divergent derivatives of the CRX
gene, itself a member of the Otx homeobox gene family.

PMID: 17005330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


