
1. Epigenetics. 2016 Mar 30:0. [Epub ahead of print]

ATRX binds to atypical chromatin domains at the 3' exons of zinc finger genes to 
preserve H3K9me3 enrichment.

Valle-García D(1,)(2), Qadeer ZA(1,)(3), McHugh DS(1), Ghiraldini FG(1),
Chowdhury AH(1), Hasson D(1), Dyer MA(4), Recillas-Targa F(2), Bernstein
E(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Oncological Sciences and Dermatology , Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai , New York , NY 10029 , USA . (2)b Instituto de
Fisiología Celular, Departamento de Genética Molecular , Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México , México DF 04510 , México . (3)c Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai , New York , NY
10029 , USA . (4)d Department of Developmental Neurobiology , St Jude Children's 
Research Hospital , Memphis , Tennessee 38105 , USA .

ATRX is a SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler proposed to govern genomic stability
through the regulation of repetitive sequences, such as rDNA, retrotransposons,
and pericentromeric and telomeric repeats. However, few direct ATRX target genes 
have been identified and high-throughput genomic approaches are currently lacking
for ATRX. Here we present a comprehensive ChIP-sequencing study of ATRX in
multiple human cell lines, in which we identify the 3' exons of zinc finger genes
(ZNFs) as a new class of ATRX targets. These 3' exonic regions encode the zinc
finger motifs, which can range from 1-40 copies per ZNF gene and share large
stretches of sequence similarity. These regions often contain an atypical
chromatin signature: they are transcriptionally active, contain high levels of
H3K36me3, and are paradoxically enriched in H3K9me3. We find that these ZNF 3'
exons are co-occupied by SETDB1, TRIM28, and ZNF274, which form a complex with
ATRX. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated loss-of-function studies demonstrate (i) a reduction
of H3K9me3 at the ZNF 3' exons in the absence of ATRX and ZNF274 and, (ii)
H3K9me3 levels at atypical chromatin regions are particularly sensitive to ATRX
loss compared to other H3K9me3-occupied regions. As a consequence of ATRX or
ZNF274 depletion, cells with reduced levels of H3K9me3 show increased levels of
DNA damage, suggesting that ATRX binds to the 3' exons of ZNFs to maintain their 
genomic stability through preservation of H3K9me3.

PMID: 27029610  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Genom Data. 2016 Feb 4;7:250-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.01.019. eCollection
2016.

Genome-wide analysis of KAP1, the 7SK snRNP complex, and RNA polymerase II.

McNamara RP(1), Guzman C(1), Reeder JE(2), D'Orso I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The transition of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from transcription initiation into
productive elongation in eukaryotic cells is regulated by the P-TEFb kinase,
which phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of paused Pol II at promoter-proximal 
regions. Our recent study found that P-TEFb (in an inhibited state bound to the
7SK snRNP complex) interacts with the KAP1/TRIM28 transcriptional regulator, and 
that KAP1 and the 7SK snRNP co-occupy most gene promoters containing paused Pol
II. Here we provide a detailed experimental description and analysis of the
ChIP-seq datasets that have been deposited into Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO):
GS72622, so that independent groups can replicate and expand upon these findings.
We propose these datasets would provide valuable information for researchers
studying mechanisms of transcriptional regulation including Pol II pausing and
pause release.

PMCID: PMC4778668
PMID: 26981421  [PubMed]


3. Cell. 2016 Jan 28;164(3):353-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.025.

Trim28 Haploinsufficiency Triggers Bi-stable Epigenetic Obesity.

Dalgaard K(1), Landgraf K(2), Heyne S(1), Lempradl A(1), Longinotto J(1), Gossens
K(1), Ruf M(1), Orthofer M(3), Strogantsev R(4), Selvaraj M(1), Lu TT(1), Casas
E(5), Teperino R(1), Surani MA(6), Zvetkova I(7), Rimmington D(7), Tung YC(7),
Lam B(7), Larder R(7), Yeo GS(7), O'Rahilly S(7), Vavouri T(5), Whitelaw E(8),
Penninger JM(3), Jenuwein T(1), Cheung CL(9), Ferguson-Smith AC(4), Coll AP(7),
Körner A(2), Pospisilik JA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, 79108
Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Women's and Child Health, Center for
Pediatric Research Leipzig, University Hospital for Children & Adolescents,
University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment 
Center (IFB) Adiposity Diseases, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)IMBA, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences,1030 Vienna, Austria. (4)Department of Genetics, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK. (5)Institute for Predictive and Personalized
Medicine of Cancer (IMPPC) and Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute, Can
Ruti Campus, Ctra de Can Rutí, Cami de les Escoles s/n, Badalona 08916,
Barcelona, Spain. (6)Wellcome Trust Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute,
University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK; Department of 
Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing
Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK; Wellcome Trust-MRC Stem Cell Institute, University
of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (7)University of
Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC Metabolic Diseases Unit,
Welcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. (8)Department of Genetics, La Trobe Institute for
Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia.
(9)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Centre for Genomic Sciences, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (10)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, Stübeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
pospisilik@ie-freiburg.mpg.de.

More than one-half billion people are obese, and despite progress in genetic
research, much of the heritability of obesity remains enigmatic. Here, we
identify a Trim28-dependent network capable of triggering obesity in a
non-Mendelian, "on/off" manner. Trim28(+/D9) mutant mice exhibit a bi-modal
body-weight distribution, with isogenic animals randomly emerging as either
normal or obese and few intermediates. We find that the obese-"on" state is
characterized by reduced expression of an imprinted gene network including Nnat, 
Peg3, Cdkn1c, and Plagl1 and that independent targeting of these alleles
recapitulates the stochastic bi-stable disease phenotype. Adipose tissue
transcriptome analyses in children indicate that humans too cluster into distinct
sub-populations, stratifying according to Trim28 expression, transcriptome
organization, and obesity-associated imprinted gene dysregulation. These data
provide evidence of discrete polyphenism in mouse and man and thus carry
important implications for complex trait genetics, evolution, and medicine. VIDEO
ABSTRACT.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4735019
PMID: 26824653  [PubMed - in process]


4. APMIS. 2016 Jan;124(1-2):105-15. doi: 10.1111/apm.12495.

The role of human endogenous retroviruses in brain development and function.

Mortelmans K(1), Wang-Johanning F(1), Johanning GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Biology Section, Biosciences Division, SRI International, Menlo
Park, CA, USA.

Endogenous retroviral sequences are spread throughout the genome of all humans,
and make up about 8% of the genome. Despite their prevalence, the function of
human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) in humans is largely unknown. In this
review we focus on the brain, and evaluate studies in animal models that address 
mechanisms of endogenous retrovirus activation in the brain and central nervous
system (CNS). One such study in mice found that TRIM28, a protein critical for
mouse early development, regulates transcription and silencing of endogenous
retroviruses in neural progenitor cells. Another intriguing finding in human
brain cells and mouse models was that endogenous retrovirus HERV-K appears to be 
protective against neurotoxins. We also report on studies that associate HERVs
with human diseases of the brain and CNS. There is little doubt of an association
between HERVs and a number of CNS diseases. However, a cause and effect
relationship between HERVs and these diseases has not yet been established.

© 2016 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26818265  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2016 Jan 13. pii: 027441. [Epub ahead of print]

Erase-Maintain-Establish: Natural Reprogramming of the Mammalian Epigenome.

Leseva M(1), Knowles BB(2), Messerschmidt DM(3), Solter D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Developmental Epigenetics and Disease, Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, A*STAR, 138673 Singapore. (2)Emerita, The Jackson Laboratory,
Bar Harbor, Maine 04609. (3)Department for Developmental Epigenetics and Disease,
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, 138673 Singapore
Danielm@imcb.a-star.edu.sg davorsolter@mac.com. (4)Emeritus Member and Director, 
Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, 79180 Freiburg, Germany
Danielm@imcb.a-star.edu.sg davorsolter@mac.com.

The genetic information is largely identical across most cell types in a given
organism but the epigenome, which controls expression of the genome, is cell
type- and context-dependent. Although most mature mammalian cells appear to have 
a stable, heritable epigenome, a dynamic intricate process reshapes it as these
cells transition from soma to germline and back again. During normal
embryogenesis, primordial germ cells, of somatic origin, are set aside to become 
gametes. In doing so their genome is reprogrammed-that is, the epigenome of
specific regions is replaced in a sex-specific fashion as they terminally
differentiate into oocytes or spermatocytes in the gonads. Upon union of these
gametes, reprogramming of the new organism's epigenome is initiated, which
eventually leads, through pluripotent cells, to the cell lineages required for
proper embryonic development to a sexually mature adult. This never-ending cycle 
of birth and rebirth is accomplished through methylation and demethylation of
specific genomic sites within the gametes and pluripotent cells of an organism.
This enigmatic process of natural epigenomic reprogramming is now being dissected
in vivo, focusing on specific genomic regions-that is, imprinted genes and
retrotransposons, where TRIM28 molecular complexes appear to guide the transition
from gamete to embryo.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 26763985  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Nat Commun. 2015 Dec 16;6:10191. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10191.

Transcriptional elongation requires DNA break-induced signalling.

Bunch H(1), Lawney BP(2), Lin YF(3), Asaithamby A(3), Murshid A(1), Wang YE(2),
Chen BP(3), Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (2)Center for Cancer
Computational Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02130,
USA. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

We have previously shown that RNA polymerase II (Pol II) pause release and
transcriptional elongation involve phosphorylation of the factor TRIM28 by the
DNA damage response (DDR) kinases ATM and DNA-PK. Here we report a significant
role for DNA breaks and DDR signalling in the mechanisms of transcriptional
elongation in stimulus-inducible genes in humans. Our data show the enrichment of
TRIM28 and <U+03B3>H2AX on serum-induced genes and the important function of DNA-PK for 
Pol II pause release and transcriptional activation-coupled DDR signalling on
these genes. <U+03B3>H2AX accumulation decreases when P-TEFb is inhibited, confirming
that DDR signalling results from transcriptional elongation. In addition,
transcriptional elongation-coupled DDR signalling involves topoisomerase II
because inhibiting this enzyme interferes with Pol II pause release and <U+03B3>H2AX
accumulation. Our findings propose that DDR signalling is required for effective 
Pol II pause release and transcriptional elongation through a novel mechanism
involving TRIM28, DNA-PK and topoisomerase II.

PMCID: PMC4703865
PMID: 26671524  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Nov 13. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25433. [Epub ahead of print]

BET Protein BRDT Complexes with HDAC1, PRMT5 and TRIM28 and Functions in
Transcriptional Repression During Spermatogenesis.

Wang L(1), Wolgemuth DJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY, 10032. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032. (3)Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032. (4)Herbert Irving Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 10032.

The expression of BRDT, a member of the BET sub-family of double
bromodomain-containing proteins, is restricted to the male germ line,
specifically to pachytene-diplotene spermatocytes and early spermatids. We
previously showed that loss of the first bromodomain of BRDT by targeted
mutagenesis (Brdt(<U+0394>BD1) ) resulted in sterility and abnormalities in
spermiogenesis, but little is known about BRDT's function at the molecular level.
As part of studies designed to identify BRDT-interacting proteins we stably
introduced a FLAG-tagged BRDT cDNA into 293T cells, which do not normally express
BRDT. Affinity-purification of FLAG-tagged BRDT complexes indicated that BRDT has
novel interactions with the histone deacetylase HDAC1, the arginine-specific
histone methyltransferase 5 PRMT5, and the Tripartite motif-containing 28 protein
TRIM28. Immunofluorescent microscopy revealed that BRDT co-localized with each of
these proteins in round spermatids and co-immunoprecipitation of testicular
extracts showed that these proteins interact with BRDT. Furthermore, they bind
the promoter of H1t, a putative target of BRDT-containing complexes. This binding
of H1t was lost in mice expressing the Brdt(<U+0394>BD1) mutant protein and
concomitantly, H1t expression was elevated in round spermatids. Our study reveals
a role for BRDT-containing complexes in the repression of gene expression in vivo
that correlates with dramatic effects on chromatin remodeling and the progression
of spermiogenesis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26565999  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 10;13(6):1194-205. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.078. Epub
2015 Oct 29.

TRIM28 Controls Genomic Imprinting through Distinct Mechanisms during and after
Early Genome-wide Reprogramming.

Alexander KA(1), Wang X(1), Shibata M(1), Clark AG(1), García-García MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. Electronic address: garciamj@cornell.edu.

Genomic imprinting depends on the establishment and maintenance of DNA
methylation at imprinting control regions. However, the mechanisms by which these
heritable marks influence allele-specific expression are not fully understood. By
analyzing maternal, zygotic, maternal-zygotic, and conditional Trim28 mutants, we
found that the transcription factor TRIM28 controls genomic imprinting through
distinct mechanisms at different developmental stages. During early genome-wide
reprogramming, both maternal and zygotic TRIM28 are required for the maintenance 
of methylation at germline imprints. However, in conditional Trim28 mutants,
Gtl2-imprinted gene expression was lost despite normal methylation levels at the 
germline IG-DMR. These results provide evidence that TRIM28 controls imprinting
after early embryonic reprogramming through a mechanism other than the
maintenance of germline imprints. Additionally, our finding that secondary
imprints were hypomethylated in TRIM28 mutants uncovers a requirement of TRIM28
after genome-wide reprogramming for interpreting germline imprints and regulating
DNA methylation at imprinted gene promoters.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4644443
PMID: 26527006  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Neurooncol. 2015 Oct 18. [Epub ahead of print]

TRIM28 as an independent prognostic marker plays critical roles in glioma
progression.

Qi ZX(1), Cai JJ(1), Chen LC(1), Yue Q(1), Gong Y(2), Yao Y(3), Mao Y(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 12 Wulumuqi
Middle Road, Shanghai, 200040, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, 12 Wulumuqi Middle Road, Shanghai, 200040, China.
gongyan8811@sina.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan
University, 12 Wulumuqi Middle Road, Shanghai, 200040, China. yu_yao03@126.com.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.

Tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins are involved in tumorigenesis. Here, we examined
the expression, biological function, and clinical significance of tripartite
motif containing 28 (TRIM28) in glioma, a locally aggressive brain tumor. First, 
TRIM28 expression was significantly higher in glioma (n = 138) than in non-glioma
controls (n = 6). TRIM28 expression was positively correlated with tumor
malignancy, and associated with poor overall survival (OS) and progression-free
survival (PFS). Notably, TRIM28 expression was negatively correlated with p21
expression in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). A multivariate
analysis that included relevant measures indicated that high TRIM28 expression is
an independent prognostic factor for poor OS and PFS in GBM patients. In
experiments with cultured glioma cells, down-regulating TRIM28 with shRNA
increased p21 expression, and induced cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase. In a
xenograft model, down-regulating TRIM28 suppressed tumor growth. These results
indicate that over-expression of TRIM28 is associated with poor outcome in glioma
patients.

PMID: 26476730  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Cell. 2015 Sep 24;163(1):230-45. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.037. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

Systematic identification of factors for provirus silencing in embryonic stem
cells.

Yang BX(1), El Farran CA(2), Guo HC(3), Yu T(2), Fang HT(1), Wang HF(2),
Schlesinger S(4), Seah YF(1), Goh GY(5), Neo SP(6), Li Y(7), Lorincz MC(8),
Tergaonkar V(9), Lim TM(10), Chen L(3), Gunaratne J(11), Collins JJ(12), Goff
SP(13), Daley GQ(14), Li H(15), Bard FA(16), Loh YH(17).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Cell Fates Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore.
(2)Epigenetics and Cell Fates Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department 
of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543,
Singapore. (3)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (5)Membrane Traffic Laboratory, A(*)STAR
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore
138673, Singapore. (6)Quantitative Proteomics Group, A(*)STAR Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673,
Singapore. (7)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Laboratory of NF-<U+03BA>B
Signaling, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Life
Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z3,
Canada. (9)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Laboratory of NF-<U+03BA>B
Signaling, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077,
Singapore. (10)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. (11)Quantitative Proteomics Group,
A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos,
Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(12)Department of Biological Engineering, Synthetic Biology Center, Institute for
Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA
02139, USA; Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (13)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
New York, NY 10032, USA. (14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA; Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (15)Center for Individualized Medicine, Department of
Molecular Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA. (16)Membrane Traffic Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular
and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 119077, Singapore. (17)Epigenetics and Cell Fates
Laboratory, A(*)STAR Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive
Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic address:
yhloh@imcb.a-star.edu.sg.

Comment in
    Cell. 2015 Sep 24;163(1):30-2.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) repress the expression of exogenous proviruses and
endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Here, we systematically dissected the cellular
factors involved in provirus repression in embryonic carcinomas (ECs) and ESCs by
a genome-wide siRNA screen. Histone chaperones (Chaf1a/b), sumoylation factors
(Sumo2/Ube2i/Sae1/Uba2/Senp6), and chromatin modifiers (Trim28/Eset/Atf7ip) are
key determinants that establish provirus silencing. RNA-seq analysis uncovered
the roles of Chaf1a/b and sumoylation modifiers in the repression of ERVs.
ChIP-seq analysis demonstrates direct recruitment of Chaf1a and Sumo2 to ERVs.
Chaf1a reinforces transcriptional repression via its interaction with members of 
the NuRD complex (Kdm1a, Hdac1/2) and Eset, while Sumo2 orchestrates the provirus
repressive function of the canonical Zfp809/Trim28/Eset machinery by sumoylation 
of Trim28. Our study reports a genome-wide atlas of functional nodes that mediate
proviral silencing in ESCs and illuminates the comprehensive, interconnected, and
multi-layered genetic and epigenetic mechanisms by which ESCs repress
retroviruses within the genome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4686136
PMID: 26365490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 11;5:13951. doi: 10.1038/srep13951.

Proteomic analysis of embryonic kidney development: Heterochromatin proteins as
epigenetic regulators of nephrogenesis.

Dihazi GH(1), Jahn O(2,)(3), Tampe B(1), Zeisberg M(1), Müller C(1,)(4), Müller
GA(1), Dihazi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Georg-August University Göttingen, 
Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany. (2)Proteomics Group,
Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine, Hermann-Rein-Strasse 3, D-37075
Göttingen, Germany. (3)Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Research Center for
Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany. 
(4)Section for Transplantation- Immunology and Immunohematology, ZMF,
Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, Germany.

Elucidation of the mechanisms underlying the nephrogenesis will boost enormously 
the regenerative medicine. Here we performed 2-D gel-based comparative proteome
analyses of rat embryonic kidney from different developmental stages. Out of 288 
non-redundant identified proteins, 102 were common in all developmental stages.
86% of the proteins found in E14 and E16 were identical, in contrast only 37% of 
the identified proteins overlap between E14 and P1. Bioinformatics analysis
suggests developmental stage-specific pathway activation and highlighted
heterochromatin protein 1 (Cbx1, Cbx3, Cbx5) and Trim28 as potential key players 
in nephrogenesis. These are involved in the epigenetic regulation of gene
silencing and were down-regulated in the course of kidney development. Trim28 is 
a potential epigenetic regulator of the branching inhibitor Bmp4. Silencing of
Trim28 in cultured kidneys resulted in branching arrest. In contrast knockdown of
Cbx5 was associated with abnormal ureteric bud growth and slight impairment of
branching. ChIP analysis showed that the H3K9me3 distribution on Bmp4 promoters
at E14 and E19 inversely correlate with mRNA expression levels. The concentrated 
expression-pattern of heterochromatin proteins and the negative impact of their
silencing on kidney development, suggest an important role in reciprocal and
inductive signaling between the ureteric bud and the metanephric mesenchyme.

PMCID: PMC4566080
PMID: 26359909  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(22):11347-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02008-15. Epub 2015 Sep 2.

STAT3 Regulates Lytic Activation of Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus.

King CA(1), Li X(2), Barbachano-Guerrero A(3), Bhaduri-McIntosh S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, New York, USA kingch@upstate.edu
sumita.bhaduri-mcintosh@stonybrookmedicine.edu. (2)Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook University School of Medicine,
Stony Brook, New York, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, New York, USA. (4)Division of Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, Stony Brook,
New York, USA Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, New York, USA kingch@upstate.edu
sumita.bhaduri-mcintosh@stonybrookmedicine.edu.

Lytic activation of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) from latency
is a critical contributor to pathogenesis and progression of KSHV-mediated
disease. Development of targeted treatment strategies and improvement of
lytic-phase-directed oncolytic therapies, therefore, hinge on gaining a better
understanding of latency-to-lytic-phase transition. A key observation in that
regard, also common to other herpesviruses, is the partial permissiveness of
latently infected cells to lytic-cycle-inducing agents. Here, we address the
molecular basis of why only some KSHV-infected cells respond to lytic stimuli.
Since cellular signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is
constitutively active in KSHV-associated cancers, KSHV activates STAT3, and STAT3
has been found to regulate lytic activation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-infected 
cells, we asked if STAT3 contributes similarly to the life cycle of KSHV. We
found that high levels of STAT3 correlate with the refractory state at the
single-cell level under conditions of both spontaneous and induced lytic
activation; importantly, STAT3 also regulates lytic susceptibility. Further,
knockdown of STAT3 suppresses the cellular transcriptional corepressor
Krüppel-associated box domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1; also known as TRIM28), 
and suppression of KAP1 activates lytic genes, including the viral lytic switch
RTA, thereby linking STAT3 via KAP1 to regulation of the balance between lytic
and latent cells. These findings, taken together with those from EBV-infected
and, more recently, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)-infected cells, cement the
contribution of host STAT3 to persistence of herpesviruses and simultaneously
reveal an important lead to devise strategies to improve lytic-phase-directed
therapies for herpesviruses.IMPORTANCE: Lytic activation of the cancer-causing
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is vital to its life cycle and
causation of disease. Like other herpesviruses, however, a substantial fraction
of latently infected cells are resistant to lytic-phase-inducing stimuli.
Investigating the molecular basis for this refractory state is essential for
understanding how the virus persists and how it causes disease and to guide
efforts to improve treatment of KSHV-mediated diseases. We found that, like two
other herpesviruses, EBV and HSV-1, KSHV exploits the cellular transcription
factor STAT3 to regulate the susceptibility of latently infected cells to lytic
triggers. These findings highlight a common STAT3-centered strategy used by
herpesviruses to maintain persistence in their hosts while also revealing a key
molecule to pursue while devising methods to improve herpesvirus
lytic-phase-directed therapies.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645641
PMID: 26339061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Mol Biol. 2015 Aug 21;16:14. doi: 10.1186/s12867-015-0040-x.

TRIM28 as a novel transcriptional elongation factor.

Bunch H(1), Calderwood SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Center for Life Sciences, 3 Blackfan circle, Boston, MA, 
02115, USA. hbunch@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Center for Life
Sciences, 3 Blackfan circle, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu.

TRIM28 is a multidomain protein with versatile functions in transcription and DNA
repair. Recently it was shown that this factor plays unanticipated roles in
transcriptional elongation. TRIM28 was shown to stabilize the pausing of RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) close to the transcriptional start site in many
unactivated genes, permitting Pol II accumulation and readying genes for
induction. In addition, the factor was shown to respond rapidly to signals
accompanying transcriptional activation permitting the productive elongation of
RNA by previously paused Pol II. We discuss here critical regulatory mechanisms
of TRIM28 in transcriptional control and DNA repair that may illuminate the novel
roles of this factor in pausing and elongation of Pol II.

PMCID: PMC4545989
PMID: 26293668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Mass Spectrom (Chichester, Eng). 2015;21(2):65-77. doi: 10.1255/ejms.1362.

Ultraviolet matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry for phosphopeptide analysis with a solidified ionic liquid matrix.

Mukherjee G(1), Claudia Röwer C(2), Koy C(3), Protzel C(4), Lorenz P(5), Thiesen 
HJ(6), Hakenberg OW(7), Glocker MO(8).

Author information: 
(1)Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Germany..
gargee.mukherjee@uni-rostock.de. (2)Proteome Center Rostock, University of
Rostock, Germany.. claudia.roewer@uni-rostock.de. (3)Proteome Center Rostock,
University of Rostock, Germany.. cornelia.koy@uni-rostock.de. (4)Urology Clinic
and Polyclinic, University Medicine Rostock, Germany..
chris.protzel@med.uni-rostock.de. (5)Institute of Immunology, University Medicine
Rostock, Germany.. peter.lorenz@med.uni-rostock.de. (6)Institute of Immunology,
University Medicine Rostock, Germany.. hans-juergen.thiesen@med.uni-rostock.de.
(7)Urology Clinic and Polyclinic, University Medicine Rostock, Germany.
oliver.hakenberg@med.uni- rostock.de. (8)Proteome Center Rostock, University of
Rostock, Germany.. michael.glocker@med.uni-rostock.de.

A solidified ionic liquid matrix (SILM) consisting of 3-aminoquinoline,
a-cyano-4- hydroxycinnamic acid and ammonium dihydrogen phosphate combines the
benefits of liquid and solid MALDI matrices and proves to be well suitable for
phosphopeptide analysis using MALDI-MS in the low femtomole range. Desalting and 
buffer exchange that typically follow after phosphopeptide elution from metal
oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC) materials can be omitted. Shifting the
pH from acidic to basic during target preparation causes slow matrix
crystallization and homogeneous embedding of the analyte molecules, forming a
uniform preparation from which (phospho)peptides can be ionized in high yields
over long periods of time. The novel combination of MOAC-based phosphopeptide
enrichment with SILM preparation has been developed with commercially available
standard phosphopeptides and with a-casein as phosphorylated standard protein.
The applicability of the streamlined phosphopeptide analysis procedure to cell
biological and clinical samples has been tested (i) using affinity-enriched
endogenous TRIM28 from cell cultures and (ii) by analysis of a two-dimensional
gel-separated protein spot from a bladder cancer sample.

PMID: 26181280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. FEBS Lett. 2015 Jul 8;589(15):2019-25. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.013. Epub
2015 Jun 19.

ZNF10 inhibits HIV-1 LTR activity through interaction with NF-<U+03BA>B and Sp1 binding 
motifs.

Nishitsuji H(1), Sawada L(2), Sugiyama R(3), Takaku H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Chiba Institute of Technology, 
2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan; Research Center for Hepatitis
and Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Chiba
272-8516, Japan. Electronic address: lbnishitsuji@hospk.ncgm.go.jp. (2)Department
of Life and Environmental Sciences, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1
Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan. (3)Department of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma,
Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan; Department of Virology II, National Institute
of Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8640, Japan.
(4)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Chiba Institute of Technology, 
2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan; Research Institute, Chiba
Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
Electronic address: hiroshi.takaku@it-chiba.ac.jp.

Kruppel-associated box-containing zinc finger (KRAB-ZNF) genes constitute the
single largest gene family of transcriptional repressors in the genomes of higher
organisms. In this study, we isolated 52 cDNA clones of KRAB-ZFPs from U1 cell
lines and screened them to identify which were capable of regulating HIV-1 gene
expression. We identified 5 KRAB-ZFPs that suppressed <U+2A7E>50% of HIV-1 LTR. Of the 5
identified KRAB-ZFPs, the expression of ZNF10 significantly enhanced the
transcriptional repression activity of the LTR compared with other ZNFs. In
addition, the depletion of endogenous ZNF10 led to the activation of HIV-1 LTR.
The repressor activity of ZNF10 was required for TRIM28, SETDB1 and HP1-gamma
binding. These results indicate that ZNF10 could be involved in a potent
intrinsic antiretroviral defense.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26096782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Acta Biol Hung. 2015 Jun;66(2):161-8. doi: 10.1556/018.66.2015.2.3.

Establishment of stable cell line for inducing KAP1 protein expression.

Liu X(1), Khan MA, Cheng J, Wei C, Zhang L, Fu J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Epigenetics and Oncology, The Research Center for
Preclinical Medicine, Luzhou Medical College , 3-319, Zhongshan road, Luzhou,
Sichuan 646000 , P. R. China.

Generation of the stable cell lines is a highly efficient tool in functional
studies of certain genes or proteins, where the particular genes or proteins are 
inducibly expressed. The KRAB-associated protein-1 (KAP1) is an important
transcription regulatory protein, which is investigated in several molecular
biological studies. In this study, we have aimed to generate a stable cell line
for inducing KAP1 expression. The recombinant plasmid pcDNA5/FRT/TO-KAP1 was
constructed at first, which was then transfected into Flp-InT-REx-HEK293 cells 
to establish an inducible pcDNA5/FRT/TO-KAP1-HEK293 cell line. The Western blot
analysis showed that the protein level of KAP1 is over-expressed in the
established stable cell line by doxycycline induction, both dose and time
dependently. Thus we have successfully established stable
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-KAP1-HEK293 cell line, which can express KAP1 inducibly. This
inducible cell line might be very useful for KAP1 functional studies.

PMID: 26081272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;35(16):2851-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01064-14. Epub 2015 Jun 
8.

TRIM28 Is an E3 Ligase for ARF-Mediated NPM1/B23 SUMOylation That Represses
Centrosome Amplification.

Neo SH(1), Itahana Y(1), Alagu J(1), Kitagawa M(1), Guo AK(1), Lee SH(1), Tang
K(2), Itahana K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer & Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Division of Structural Biology Biochemistry, 
School of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Nanyang Technological
University, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Cancer & Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
koji.itahana@duke-nus.edu.sg.

The tumor suppressor ARF enhances the SUMOylation of target proteins; however,
the physiological function of ARF-mediated SUMOylation has been unclear due to
the lack of a known, associated E3 SUMO ligase. Here we uncover TRIM28/KAP1 as a 
novel ARF-binding protein and SUMO E3 ligase for NPM1/B23. ARF and TRIM28
cooperate to SUMOylate NPM1, a nucleolar protein that regulates centrosome
duplication and genomic stability. ARF-mediated SUMOylation of NPM1 was
attenuated by TRIM28 depletion and enhanced by TRIM28 overexpression.
Coexpression of ARF and TRIM28 promoted NPM1 centrosomal localization by
enhancing its SUMOylation and suppressed centrosome amplification; these
functions required the E3 ligase activity of TRIM28. Conversely, depletion of ARF
or TRIM28 increased centrosome amplification. ARF also counteracted oncogenic
Ras-induced centrosome amplification. Centrosome amplification is often induced
by oncogenic insults, leading to genomic instability. However, the mechanisms
employed by tumor suppressors to protect the genome are poorly understood. Our
findings suggest a novel role for ARF in maintaining genome integrity by
facilitating TRIM28-mediated SUMOylation of NPM1, thus preventing centrosome
amplification.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4508312
PMID: 26055329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(15):7874-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00895-15. Epub 2015 May 20.

Activated Nrf2 Interacts with Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Latency
Protein LANA-1 and Host Protein KAP1 To Mediate Global Lytic Gene Repression.

Gjyshi O(1), Roy A(1), Dutta S(1), Veettil MV(1), Dutta D(1), Chandran B(2).

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois, USA. (2)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research
Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chicago Medical School, 
Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois,
USA bala.chandran@rosalindfranklin.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is etiologically associated with
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and multicentric
Castleman's disease. We have previously shown that KSHV utilizes the host
transcription factor Nrf2 to aid in infection of endothelial cells and
oncogenesis. Here, we investigate the role of Nrf2 in PEL and PEL-derived cell
lines and show that KSHV latency induces Nrf2 protein levels and transcriptional 
activity through the COX-2/PGE2/EP4/PKC<U+03B6> axis. Next-generation sequencing of KSHV
transcripts in the PEL-derived BCBL-1 cell line revealed that knockdown of this
activated Nrf2 results in global elevation of lytic genes. Nrf2 inhibition by the
chemical brusatol also induces lytic gene expression. Both Nrf2 knockdown and
brusatol-mediated inhibition induced KSHV lytic reactivation in BCBL-1 cells. In 
a series of follow-up experiments, we characterized the mechanism of
Nrf2-mediated regulation of KSHV lytic repression during latency. Biochemical
assays showed that Nrf2 interacted with KSHV latency-associated nuclear antigen 1
(LANA-1) and the host transcriptional repressor KAP1, which together have been
shown to repress lytic gene expression. Promoter studies showed that although
Nrf2 alone induces the open reading frame 50 (ORF50) promoter, its association
with LANA-1 and KAP1 abrogates this effect. Interestingly, LANA-1 is crucial for 
efficient KAP1/Nrf2 association, while Nrf2 is essential for LANA-1 and KAP1
recruitment to the ORF50 promoter and its repression. Overall, these results
suggest that activated Nrf2, LANA-1, and KAP1 assemble on the ORF50 promoter in a
temporal fashion. Initially, Nrf2 binds to and activates the ORF50 promoter
during early de novo infection, an effect that is exploited during latency by
LANA-1-mediated recruitment of the host transcriptional repressor KAP1 on Nrf2.
Cell death assays further showed that Nrf2 and KAP1 knockdown induce significant 
cell death in PEL cell lines. Our studies suggest that Nrf2 modulation through
available oral agents is a promising therapeutic approach in the treatment of
KSHV-associated malignancies.IMPORTANCE: KS and PEL are aggressive
KSHV-associated malignancies with moderately effective, highly toxic
chemotherapies. Other than ganciclovir and alpha interferon (IFN-a) prophylaxis, 
no KSHV-associated chemotherapy targets the underlying infection, a major
oncogenic force. Hence, drugs that selectively target KSHV infection are
necessary to eradicate the malignancy while sparing healthy cells. We recently
showed that KSHV infection of endothelial cells activates the transcription
factor Nrf2 to promote an environment conducive to infection and oncogenesis.
Nrf2 is modulated through several well-tolerated oral agents and may be an
important target in KSHV biology. Here, we investigate the role of Nrf2 in PEL
and demonstrate that Nrf2 plays an important role in KSHV gene expression, lytic 
reactivation, and cell survival by interacting with the host transcriptional
repressor KAP1 and the viral latency-associated protein LANA-1 to mediate global 
lytic gene repression and thus cell survival. Hence, targeting Nrf2 with
available therapies is a viable approach in the treatment of KSHV malignancies.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4505678
PMID: 25995248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 3;462(3):201-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.108. Epub 2015 May 7.

Identification and characterization of a nuclear localization signal of TRIM28
that overlaps with the HP1 box.

Moriyama T(1), Sangel P(1), Yamaguchi H(2), Obuse C(3), Miyamoto Y(1), Oka M(4), 
Yoneda Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nuclear Transport Dynamics, National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, Health and Nutrition (NIBIOHN), Osaka 567-0085, Japan. (2)School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (3)Graduate School of Life
Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 001-0021, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Nuclear
Transport Dynamics, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and
Nutrition (NIBIOHN), Osaka 567-0085, Japan; Laboratory of Biomedical Innovation, 
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan. Electronic address: moka@nibiohn.go.jp. (5)National Institutes of
Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition (NIBIOHN), Osaka 567-0085, Japan;
Laboratory of Biomedical Innovation, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Electronic address:
y-yoneda@nibiohn.go.jp.

Tripartite motif-containing 28 (TRIM28) is a transcription regulator, which forms
a repressor complex containing heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1). Here, we report
identification of a nuclear localization signal (NLS) within the 462-494 amino
acid region of TRIM28 that overlaps with its HP1 binding site, HP1 box.
GST-pulldown experiments revealed the interaction of the arginine-rich TRIM28 NLS
with various importin a subtypes (a1, a2 and a4). In vitro transport assay
demonstrated that nuclear localization of GFP-TRIM28 NLS is mediated by importin 
as, in conjunction with importin ß1 and Ran. Further, we demonstrated that HP1
and importin as compete for binding to TRIM28. Together, our findings suggest
that importin a has an essential role in the nuclear delivery and preferential
HP1 interaction of TRIM28.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25960296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(15):7465-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00711-15. Epub 2015 May 6.

LMP1-Induced Sumoylation Influences the Maintenance of Epstein-Barr Virus Latency
through KAP1.

Bentz GL(1), Moss CR 2nd(2), Whitehurst CB(3), Moody CA(4), Pagano JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Mercer
University School of Medicine, Macon, Georgia, USA bentz_GL@mercer.edu
joseph_pagano@med.unc.edu. (2)Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Mercer
University School of Medicine, Macon, Georgia, USA. (3)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA. (4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
bentz_GL@mercer.edu joseph_pagano@med.unc.edu.

As a herpesvirus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) establishes a latent infection that
can periodically undergo reactivation, resulting in lytic replication and the
production of new infectious virus. Latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1), the
principal viral oncoprotein, is a latency-associated protein implicated in
regulating viral reactivation and the maintenance of latency. We recently found
that LMP1 hijacks the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 via its C-terminal activating 
region-3 (CTAR3) and induces the sumoylation of cellular proteins. Because
protein sumoylation can promote transcriptional repression, we hypothesized that 
LMP1-induced protein sumoylation induces the repression of EBV lytic promoters
and helps maintain the viral genome in its latent state. We now show that with
inhibition of LMP1-induced protein sumoylation, the latent state becomes less
stable or leakier in EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines. The cells are
also more sensitive to viral reactivation induced by irradiation, which results
in the increased production and release of infectious virus, as well as increased
susceptibility to ganciclovir treatment. We have identified a target of
LMP1-mediated sumoylation that contributes to the maintenance of latency in this 
context: KRAB-associated protein-1 (KAP1). LMP1 CTAR3-mediated sumoylation
regulates the function of KAP1. KAP1 also binds to EBV OriLyt and immediate early
promoters in a CTAR3-dependent manner, and inhibition of sumoylation processes
abrogates the binding of KAP1 to these promoters. These data provide an
additional line of evidence that supports our findings that CTAR3 is a distinct
functioning regulatory region of LMP1 and confirm that LMP1-induced sumoylation
may help stabilize the maintenance of EBV latency.IMPORTANCE: Epstein-Barr virus 
(EBV) latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1) plays an important role in the maintenance
of viral latency. Previously, we documented that LMP1 targets cellular proteins
to be modified by a ubiquitin-like protein (SUMO). We have now identified a
function for this LMP1-induced modification of cellular proteins in the
maintenance of EBV latency. Because latently infected cells have to undergo viral
reactivation in order to be vulnerable to antiviral drugs, these findings
identify a new way to increase the rate of EBV reactivation, which increases cell
susceptibility to antiviral therapies.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4505653
PMID: 25948750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):844-6. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034420.

Oncogenic MAGEA-TRIM28 ubiquitin ligase downregulates autophagy by ubiquitinating
and degrading AMPK in cancer.

Pineda CT(1), Potts PR.

Author information: 
(1)a Departments of Physiology, Pharmacology, and Biochemistry; UT Southwestern ;
Dallas , TX , USA.

Autophagy is commonly altered in cancer and has a complicated, but important role
in regulation of tumor growth. Autophagy is often tumor suppressive in the early 
stages of cancer development, but contributes to the late stages of tumor growth.
Because of this, putative oncogenes that modulate autophagy signaling are
especially interesting. Here we discuss our recent work detailing the function of
the MAGEA-TRIM28 ubiquitin ligase as an oncogene product that targets
PRKAA1/AMPKa1 for ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation. Degradation
of AMPK, a master cellular energy sensor and regulator, by MAGEA-TRIM28 results
in significantly reduced autophagy and changes in cellular metabolism, including 
upregulation of MTOR signaling. Overall, expression of MAGEA3 (or MAGEA6) and
degradation of AMPK is sufficient to induce transformation of normal cells and
promote multiple hallmarks of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4509443 [Available on 2016-05-06]
PMID: 25945414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 21;3(11):e970025. eCollection 2014.

Ectopic expression of embryonic stem cell and other developmental genes in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Litvinov IV(1), Netchiporouk E(1), Cordeiro B(1), Zargham H(1), Pehr K(1),
Gilbert M(2), Zhou Y(3), Moreau L(1), Woetmann A(4), Ødum N(4), Kupper TS(5),
Sasseville D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal, QC
Canada. (2)Division of Dermatology; Université Laval ; Québec City, QC Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science; University of British Columbia ;
Vancouver, BC Canada. (4)Department of International Health, Immunology, and
Microbiology; University of Copenhagen ; Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Department of
Dermatology; Harvard Skin Disease Research Center; Brigham and Women's Hospital; 
Harvard University ; Boston, MA USA.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a potentially devastating malignancy. The
pathogenesis of this cancer remains poorly elucidated. Previous studies focused
on analysis of expression and function of known oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. However, emerging reports highlight that it is also important to analyze
the expression of genes that are ectopically expressed in CTCL (e.g., embryonic
stem cell genes (ESC), cancer testis (CT) genes, etc.). Currently, it is not
known whether ESC genes are expressed in CTCL. In the current work, we analyze by
RT-PCR the expression of 26 ESC genes, many of which are known to regulate
pluripotency and promote cancer stem cell-like phenotype, in a historic cohort of
60 patients from Boston and in a panel of 11 patient-derived CTCL cell lines and 
compare such expression to benign inflammatory dermatoses that often clinically
mimic CTCL. Our findings document that many critical ESC genes including NANOG,
SOX2, OCT4 (POU5F1) and their upstream and downstream signaling members are
expressed in CTCL. Similarly, polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) genes (i.e.,
EZH2, EED, and SUZ12) are also expressed in CTCL lesional skin. Furthermore,
select ESC genes (OCT4, EED, TCF3, THAP11, CHD7, TIP60, TRIM28) are
preferentially expressed in CTCL samples when compared to benign skin biopsies.
Our work suggests that ESC genes are ectopically expressed together with CT
genes, thymocyte development genes and B cell-specific genes and may be working
in concert to promote tumorigenesis. Specifically, while ESC genes may be
promoting cancer stem cell-like phenotype, CT genes may be contributing to
aneuploidy and genomic instability by producing aberrant chromosomal
translocations. Further analysis of ESC expression and function in this cancer
will greatly enhance our fundamental understanding of CTCL and will help us
identify novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4368148
PMID: 25941598  [PubMed]


23. Nature. 2015 Jun 11;522(7555):240-4. doi: 10.1038/nature14345. Epub 2015 May 4.

Histone H3.3 is required for endogenous retroviral element silencing in embryonic
stem cells.

Elsässer SJ(1), Noh KM(2), Diaz N(2), Allis CD(2), Banaszynski LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Ave, Cambridge CB2 0QH, 
UK [2] Science for Life Laboratory, Division of Translational Medicine and
Chemical Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska
Institutet, S-171 21 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and
Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York
10065, USA. (3)1] Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, The
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Cecil
H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Science and Children's Medical
Center Research Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Transposable elements comprise roughly 40% of mammalian genomes. They have an
active role in genetic variation, adaptation and evolution through the
duplication or deletion of genes or their regulatory elements, and transposable
elements themselves can act as alternative promoters for nearby genes, resulting 
in non-canonical regulation of transcription. However, transposable element
activity can lead to detrimental genome instability, and hosts have evolved
mechanisms to silence transposable element mobility appropriately. Recent studies
have demonstrated that a subset of transposable elements, endogenous retroviral
elements (ERVs) containing long terminal repeats (LTRs), are silenced through
trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 9 (H3K9me3) by ESET (also known as SETDB1 
or KMT1E) and a co-repressor complex containing KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1; 
also known as TRIM28) in mouse embryonic stem cells. Here we show that the
replacement histone variant H3.3 is enriched at class I and class II ERVs,
notably those of the early transposon (ETn)/MusD family and intracisternal A-type
particles (IAPs). Deposition at a subset of these elements is dependent upon the 
H3.3 chaperone complex containing a-thalassaemia/mental retardation syndrome
X-linked (ATRX) and death-domain-associated protein (DAXX). We demonstrate that
recruitment of DAXX, H3.3 and KAP1 to ERVs is co-dependent and occurs upstream of
ESET, linking H3.3 to ERV-associated H3K9me3. Importantly, H3K9me3 is reduced at 
ERVs upon H3.3 deletion, resulting in derepression and dysregulation of adjacent,
endogenous genes, along with increased retrotransposition of IAPs. Our study
identifies a unique heterochromatin state marked by the presence of both H3.3 and
H3K9me3, and establishes an important role for H3.3 in control of ERV
retrotransposition in embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4509593
PMID: 25938714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 23;10(4):e0123935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123935.
eCollection 2015.

KAP1 Deacetylation by SIRT1 Promotes Non-Homologous End-Joining Repair.

Lin YH(1), Yuan J(2), Pei H(3), Liu T(4), Ann DK(5), Lou Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Graduate School,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America. (2)Research Center for
Translational Medicine, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias of the Ministry of Education of China East
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of 
Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China. (4)Division of Oncology Research, Department 
of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Irell and Manella Graduate School of 
Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte,
California, United States of America.

Homologous recombination and non-homologous end joining are two major DNA
double-strand-break repair pathways. While HR-mediated repair requires a
homologous sequence as the guiding template to restore the damage site precisely,
NHEJ-mediated repair ligates the DNA lesion directly and increases the risk of
losing nucleotides. Therefore, how a cell regulates the balance between HR and
NHEJ has become an important issue for maintaining genomic integrity over time.
Here we report that SIRT1-dependent KAP1 deacetylation positively regulates NHEJ.
We show that up-regulation of KAP1 attenuates HR efficiency while promoting NHEJ 
repair. Moreover, SIRT1-mediated KAP1 deacetylation further enhances the effect
of NHEJ by stabilizing its interaction with 53BP1, which leads to increased 53BP1
focus formation in response to DNA damage. Taken together, our study suggests a
SIRT1-KAP1 regulatory mechanism for HR-NHEJ repair pathway choice.

PMCID: PMC4408008
PMID: 25905708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 28;35(4):513-27. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.111. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Tyr99 phosphorylation determines the regulatory milieu of tumor suppressor p73.

Satija YK(1), Das S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf
Ali Marg, New Delhi, India.

p73 is a member of the p53 tumor suppressor family, which mediates genotoxic
stress response by triggering cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Similar to p53,
p73 is maintained at very low levels, but it gets rapidly induced upon genotoxic 
stress. Mounting evidences demonstrate that p73 is primarily regulated
posttranslationally. However, the molecular mechanisms which determine its
stability and activity discerningly under normal and stress conditions are still 
not well understood. Here, we employed a proteomics approach to identify
differential interactors of p73 under normal and genotoxic stress conditions. We 
report here that TRIM28, an E3 ligase, interacts with p73 and targets it for
proteasomal degradation under normal conditions. Genotoxic stress-induced
phosphorylation of p73 at tyrosine 99 residue by c-abl kinase leads to abrogation
of this interaction thereby promoting p73 stabilization. Furthermore, the
phosphorylated form of p73 specifically interacts with MED15, which serves as a
transcriptional coactivator and leads to activation of proarrest, proapoptotic
and anti-metastatic genes. RNAi-mediated abrogation of TRIM28 expression
facilitates p73-mediated tumor suppression in mouse tumor models, whereas
disruption of MED15 expression abrogates p73 tumor suppressor and anti-metastatic
functions. These findings provide new insights into the pivotal role of Tyr99
phosphorylation in determining p73 levels and functions.

PMID: 25893286  [PubMed - in process]


26. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 5;290(23):14381-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.631945. Epub 2015
Apr 16.

The WTX Tumor Suppressor Interacts with the Transcriptional Corepressor TRIM28.

Kim WJ(1), Wittner BS(1), Amzallag A(1), Brannigan BW(1), Ting DT(2), Ramaswamy
S(2), Maheswaran S(3), Haber DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 and. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 and From the 
Departments of Medicine and. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and 
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 and Surgery.
(4)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129 and From the Departments of Medicine and Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815
Haber@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

WTX encodes a tumor suppressor implicated in the pediatric kidney cancer Wilms
tumor and in mesenchymal differentiation with potentially distinct functions in
the cytoplasm, at the plasma membrane, and in the nucleus. Although modulating
components of the WNT signaling pathway is a proposed function for cytoplasmic
and membrane-bound WTX, its nuclear properties are not well understood. Here we
report that the transcriptional corepressor TRIM28 is the major binding partner
for nuclear WTX. WTX interacted with the coiled coil domain of TRIM28 required
for its binding to Krüppel-associated box domains of transcription factors and
for its chromatin recruitment through its own coiled coil and proline-rich
domains. Knockdown of endogenous WTX reduced the recruitment of TRIM28 to a
chromatinized reporter sequence and its ability to repress a target transcript.
In mouse embryonic stem cells where TRIM28 plays a major role in repressing
endogenous retroviruses and long interspersed elements, knockdown of either
TRIM28 or WTX combined with single molecule RNA sequencing revealed a highly
significant shared set of differentially regulated transcripts, including
derepression of non-coding repetitive sequences and their neighboring protein
encoding genes (p < 1e-20). In mesenchymal precursor cells, depletion of WTX and 
TRIM28 resulted in analogous ß-catenin-independent defects in adipogenic and
osteogenic differentiation, and knockdown of WTX reduced TRIM28 binding to Ppar<U+03B3> 
promoter. Together, the physical and functional interaction between WTX and
TRIM28 suggests that the nuclear fraction of WTX plays a role in epigenetic
silencing, an effect that may contribute to its function as a regulator of
cellular differentiation and tumorigenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505506 [Available on 2016-06-05]
PMID: 25882849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 10;15:13. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0060-2.

DNA methylation dynamics at imprinted genes during bovine pre-implantation embryo
development.

O'Doherty AM(1,)(2), Magee DA(3), O'Shea LC(4), Forde N(5), Beltman ME(6), Mamo
S(7), Fair T(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin, Ireland. alan.odoherty@ucd.ie. (2)School of Medicine and Medical
Sciences, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
alan.odoherty@ucd.ie. (3)College of Agriculture, Health and Natural Resources,
Animal Science, University of Connecticut, Connecticut, USA.
david.magee@uconn.edu. (4)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland. lynne.oshea@ucd.ie. (5)School of
Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin,
Ireland. niamh.forde@ucd.ie. (6)School of Agriculture and Food Science,
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland. marijke.beltman@ucd.ie.
(7)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin, Ireland. solomon.mamo@ucd.ie. (8)School of Agriculture and Food Science, 
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland. trudee.fair@ucd.ie.

BACKGROUND: In mammals, maternal differentially methylated regions (DMRs) acquire
DNA methylation during the postnatal growth stage of oogenesis, with paternal
DMRs acquiring DNA methylation in the perinatal prospermatagonia. Following
fusion of the male and female gametes, it is widely accepted that murine DNA
methylation marks at the DMRs of imprinted genes are stable through embryogenesis
and early development, until they are reprogrammed in primordial germ cells.
However, the DNA methylation dynamics at DMRs of bovine imprinted genes during
early stages of development remains largely unknown. The objective of this
investigation was to analyse the methylation dynamics at imprinted gene DMRs
during bovine embryo development, from blastocyst stage until implantation.
RESULTS: To this end, pyrosequencing technology was used to quantify DNA
methylation at DMR-associated CpG dinucleotides of six imprinted bovine genes
(SNRPN, MEST, IGF2R, PLAGL1, PEG10 and H19) using bisulfite-modified genomic DNA 
isolated from individual blastocysts (Day 7); ovoid embryos (Day 14); filamentous
embryos (Day 17) and implanting conceptuses (Day 25). For all genes, the degree
of DNA methylation was most variable in Day 7 blastocysts compared to later
developmental stages (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Furthermore, mining of RNA-seq transcriptomic
data and western blot analysis revealed a specific window of expression of DNA
methylation machinery genes (including DNMT3A, DNMT3B, TRIM28/KAP1 and DNMT1) and
proteins (DNMT3A, DNMT3A2 and DNMT3B) by bovine embryos coincident with imprint
stabilization.
CONCLUSION: The findings of this study suggest that the DNA methylation status of
bovine DMRs might be variable during the early stages of embryonic development,
possibly requiring an active period of imprint stabilization.

PMCID: PMC4363183
PMID: 25881176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Elife. 2015 Apr 7;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06068.

Release of human cytomegalovirus from latency by a KAP1/TRIM28 phosphorylation
switch.

Rauwel B(1), Jang SM(1), Cassano M(1), Kapopoulou A(1), Barde I(1), Trono D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a highly prevalent pathogen that induces
life-long infections notably through the establishment of latency in
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). Bouts of reactivation are normally controlled by 
the immune system, but can be fatal in immuno-compromised individuals such as
organ transplant recipients. Here, we reveal that HCMV latency in human CD34(+)
HSC reflects the recruitment on the viral genome of KAP1, a master co-repressor, 
together with HP1 and the SETDB1 histone methyltransferase, which results in
transcriptional silencing. During lytic infection, KAP1 is still associated with 
the viral genome, but its heterochromatin-inducing activity is suppressed by
mTOR-mediated phosphorylation. Correspondingly, HCMV can be forced out of latency
by KAP1 knockdown or pharmacological induction of KAP1 phosphorylation, and this 
process can be potentiated by activating NFkB with TNF-a. These results suggest
new approaches both to curtail CMV infection and to purge the virus from organ
transplants.

PMCID: PMC4384640
PMID: 25846574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 7;11(1):149-63. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.005. Epub 2015
Mar 26.

The nuclear oncogene SET controls DNA repair by KAP1 and HP1 retention to
chromatin.

Kalousi A(1), Hoffbeck AS(1), Selemenakis PN(2), Pinder J(3), Savage KI(4),
Khanna KK(4), Brino L(1), Dellaire G(3), Gorgoulis VG(5), Soutoglou E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), UMR
7104 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UdS, INSERM U964, BP
10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, Strasbourg, France. (2)Molecular Carcinogenesis
Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, University of 
Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece. (3)Departments of Pathology and Biochemistry &
Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, B3H 4R2 Halifax, NS, Canada; Beatrice
Hunter Cancer Research Institute, B3H 4R2 Halifax, NS, Canada. (4)QIMR Berghofer 
Medical Research Institute, QLD 4006 Herston, Australia. (5)Molecular
Carcinogenesis Group, Department of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine,
University of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece; Faculty Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, M13 9PL
Manchester, UK; Biomedical Research Foundation, Academy of Athens, 11527 Athens, 
Greece. (6)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
(IGBMC), UMR 7104 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UdS,
INSERM U964, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, Strasbourg, France. Electronic
address: evisou@igbmc.fr.

Cells experience damage from exogenous and endogenous sources that endanger
genome stability. Several cellular pathways have evolved to detect DNA damage and
mediate its repair. Although many proteins have been implicated in these
processes, only recent studies have revealed how they operate in the context of
high-ordered chromatin structure. Here, we identify the nuclear oncogene SET
(I2PP2A) as a modulator of DNA damage response (DDR) and repair in chromatin
surrounding double-strand breaks (DSBs). We demonstrate that depletion of SET
increases DDR and survival in the presence of radiomimetic drugs, while
overexpression of SET impairs DDR and homologous recombination (HR)-mediated DNA 
repair. SET interacts with the Kruppel-associated box (KRAB)-associated
co-repressor KAP1, and its overexpression results in the sustained retention of
KAP1 and Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) on chromatin. Our results are consistent
with a model in which SET-mediated chromatin compaction triggers an inhibition of
DNA end resection and HR.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25818296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Dev. 2015 Mar 1;29(5):513-25. doi: 10.1101/gad.254532.114.

A KAP1 phosphorylation switch controls MyoD function during skeletal muscle
differentiation.

Singh K(1), Cassano M(2), Planet E(2), Sebastian S(1), Jang SM(2), Sohi G(1),
Faralli H(1), Choi J(3), Youn HD(3), Dilworth FJ(4), Trono D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada; (2)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; (4)Sprott Center for Stem
Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ontario K1H 8L6, Canada didier.trono@epfl.ch jdilworth@ohri.ca. (5)School of Life
Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland; didier.trono@epfl.ch jdilworth@ohri.ca.

The transcriptional activator MyoD serves as a master controller of myogenesis.
Often in partnership with Mef2 (myocyte enhancer factor 2), MyoD binds to the
promoters of hundreds of muscle genes in proliferating myoblasts yet activates
these targets only upon receiving cues that launch differentiation. What
regulates this off/on switch of MyoD function has been incompletely understood,
although it is known to reflect the action of chromatin modifiers. Here, we
identify KAP1 (KRAB [Krüppel-like associated box]-associated protein 1)/TRIM28
(tripartite motif protein 28) as a key regulator of MyoD function. In myoblasts, 
KAP1 is present with MyoD and Mef2 at many muscle genes, where it acts as a
scaffold to recruit not only coactivators such as p300 and LSD1 but also
corepressors such as G9a and HDAC1 (histone deacetylase 1), with promoter
silencing as the net outcome. Upon differentiation, MSK1-mediated phosphorylation
of KAP1 releases the corepressors from the scaffold, unleashing transcriptional
activation by MyoD/Mef2 and their positive cofactors. Thus, our results reveal
KAP1 as a previously unappreciated interpreter of cell signaling, which modulates
the ability of MyoD to drive myogenesis.

© 2015 Singh et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4358404
PMID: 25737281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell. 2015 Feb 12;160(4):715-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.034.

Degradation of AMPK by a cancer-specific ubiquitin ligase.

Pineda CT(1), Ramanathan S(1), Fon Tacer K(1), Weon JL(1), Potts MB(2), Ou YH(2),
White MA(2), Potts PR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (3)Department of Physiology, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA;
Departments of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address:
ryan.potts@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2015 May 18;25(10):R418-20.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a master sensor and regulator of cellular 
energy status. Upon metabolic stress, AMPK suppresses anabolic and promotes
catabolic processes to regain energy homeostasis. Cancer cells can occasionally
suppress the growth-restrictive AMPK pathway by mutation of an upstream
regulatory kinase. Here, we describe a widespread mechanism to suppress AMPK
through its ubiquitination and degradation by the cancer-specific
MAGE-A3/6-TRIM28 ubiquitin ligase. MAGE-A3 and MAGE-A6 are highly similar
proteins normally expressed only in the male germline but frequently re-activated
in human cancers. MAGE-A3/6 are necessary for cancer cell viability and are
sufficient to drive tumorigenic properties of non-cancerous cells. Screening for 
targets of MAGE-A3/6-TRIM28 revealed that it ubiquitinates and degrades AMPKa1.
This leads to inhibition of autophagy, activation of mTOR signaling, and
hypersensitization to AMPK agonists, such as metformin. These findings elucidate 
a germline mechanism commonly hijacked in cancer to suppress AMPK.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25679763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Dec 26;16(1):363-77. doi: 10.3390/ijms16010363.

High levels of KAP1 expression are associated with aggressive clinical features
in ovarian cancer.

Cui Y(1), Yang S(2), Fu X(3), Feng J(4), Xu S(5), Ying G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China.
cuiyanfen@163.com. (2)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
300060, China. hbyangshaobin@163.com. (3)Department of Gynecology Cancer,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. fxhappy@126.com. (4)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. j_w_feng@163.com. (5)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. slxu@sibs.ac.cn. (6)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. yingguoguang@tijmu.edu.cn.

KAP1 is an universal corepressor for Kruppel-associated box zinc finger proteins 
in both normal and tumor cells. In this study, the biological function and
clinical significance of KAP1 expression in ovarian cancer were investigated.
Immunohistological staining of KAP1 was evaluated in 111 patients with ovarian
epithelial cancer, 15 with ovarian borderline tumor, and 20 normal ovarian
tissue. The correlations of KAP1 expression with clinicopathological features
were studied. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazard modeling were
used to assess overall survival to analyze the effect of KAP1 expression on the
prognosis of ovarian cancer. The positive rates of KAP1 were significantly higher
in ovarian epithelial cancer (55.7%) and borderline tumor (20.0%) than in normal 
ovarian tissue (5.0%) (all p < 0.01). KAP1 expression correlated significantly
with clinical stage (<U+03C7>2 = 14.57, p < 0.0001), pathological grade (<U+03C7>2 = 6.06, p = 
0.048) and metastases (<U+03C7>2 =10.38, p = 0.001). Patients with high KAP 1 levels
showed poor survival (p < 0.0001). Multivariate analysis showed that KAP1 high
expression was an independent predictor for ovarian cancer patients (hazard ratio
= 0.463; 95% confidence interval = 0.230-0.9318, p = 0.031). Functionally,
depletion of KAP1 by siRNA inhibited ovarian cancer cell proliferation, cell
migration. KAP1 expression correlated with aggressive clinical features in
ovarian cancer. High KAP1 expression was a prognostic factor of ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4307251
PMID: 25548895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Rep. 2015 Jan 6;10(1):20-8. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.004. Epub 2014 Dec
24.

TRIM28 represses transcription of endogenous retroviruses in neural progenitor
cells.

Fasching L(1), Kapopoulou A(2), Sachdeva R(1), Petri R(1), Jönsson ME(1), Männe
C(1), Turelli P(2), Jern P(3), Cammas F(4), Trono D(2), Jakobsson J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Experimental Medical
Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund
University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. (2)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala
University, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden. (4)IRCM, Institut de Recherche en
Cancérologie de Montpellier, INSERM, U896, Université Montpellier; Institut
Régional du Cancer Montpellier, Montpellier 34298, France. (5)Laboratory of
Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center and Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University, 221 84 Lund,
Sweden. Electronic address: johan.jakobsson@med.lu.se.

TRIM28 is a corepressor that mediates transcriptional silencing by establishing
local heterochromatin. Here, we show that deletion of TRIM28 in neural progenitor
cells (NPCs) results in high-level expression of two groups of endogenous
retroviruses (ERVs): IAP1 and MMERVK10C. We find that NPCs use TRIM28-mediated
histone modifications to dynamically regulate transcription and silencing of
ERVs, which is in contrast to other somatic cell types using DNA methylation. We 
also show that derepression of ERVs influences transcriptional dynamics in NPCs
through the activation of nearby genes and the expression of long noncoding RNAs.
These findings demonstrate a unique dynamic transcriptional regulation of ERVs in
NPCs. Our results warrant future studies on the role of ERVs in the healthy and
diseased brain.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4434221
PMID: 25543143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Dec;53(4):559-65. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2014.09.003.

Gene expression of cumulus cells in women with poor ovarian response after
dehydroepiandrosterone supplementation.

Tsui KH(1), Lin LT(2), Horng HC(3), Chang R(4), Huang BS(5), Cheng JT(6), Wang
PH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National
Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacy
and Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Tajen University, Pingtung
County, Taiwan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kaohsiung Veterans
General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Su-Ao and Yuanshan
Branch, Ilan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National
Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of Gynecology, 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National
Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, National Yang-Ming University Hospital, Ilan, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Biological Science, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: tusya@mail.nsysu.edu.tw. (7)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan;
Division of Gynecology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
National Yang-Ming University Hospital, Ilan, Taiwan; Immunology Center, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, China 
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
phwang@vghtpe.gov.tw.

OBJECTIVE: Our previous study showed the potential benefits of
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) supplementation in women with a poor ovarian
response (POR). Because the connection between cumulus cells (CCs) and oocytes is
a key step for oocyte maturation, we supposed that altered gene expression of CCs
in women with POR after DHEA supplementation might favor oocyte maturation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Women with POR treated with flexible daily
gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles at 
The Reproductive Center in Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
between January 2013 and October 2013 were enrolled for this prospective study.
CCs were isolated during IVF before and after DHEA (CPH-Formulation, Oakdale, CA,
USA) supplementation. Nine genes of isolated CCs, including hyaluronan synthase
(HAS2), versican (VCAN), thrombospondin 1 (THBS1), runt-related transcription
factor 2 (RUNX2), chromobox homolog 3 (CBX3), tripartite motif-containing 28
(TRIM28), B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2), BCL2-associated X protein (BAX), and ankyrin 
repeat domain 57 (ANKRD57), were compared.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in the expression of genes in women
with POR before and after DHEA supplementation (all p < 0.05). All genes related 
to extracellular matrix (ECM) formation, including HAS2, VCAN, and THBS1, were
upregulated. By contrast, all genes involving cell development, differentiation, 
and apoptosis regulation were downregulated. Unknown function gene ANKRD57 was
also downregulated after DHEA supplementation. Although expressions of both BCL2 
and BAX were decreased in women with POR after DHEA supplementation compared to
those before treatment, the ratio of BCL2 and BAX was significantly increased in 
women with POR after DHEA supplementation, suggesting that DHEA supplementation
might activate the antiapoptosis process of CCs, which might be beneficial to the
improvement of ovarian function in women with POR.
CONCLUSION: The study showed that DHEA therapy positively affected the gene
expression of CCs in women with POR, and provided evidence to support the
positive effect of DHEA supplementation on women with POR.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25510701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;75(2):344-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1561. Epub
2014 Nov 24.

KAP1 promotes proliferation and metastatic progression of breast cancer cells.

Addison JB(1), Koontz C(1), Fugett JH(1), Creighton CJ(2), Chen D(3), Farrugia
MK(1), Padon RR(1), Voronkova MA(1), McLaughlin SL(1), Livengood RH(4), Lin
CC(1), Ruppert JM(1), Pugacheva EN(1), Ivanov AV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and Department of Biochemistry, West Virginia
University, Morgantown, West Virginia. (2)Department of Medicine and Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center Division of Biostatistics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas. (3)Division of Preventive Medicine and UAB Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (4)Department
of Pathology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia. (5)Mary Babb
Randolph Cancer Center and Department of Biochemistry, West Virginia University, 
Morgantown, West Virginia. aivanov@hsc.wvu.edu.

KAP1 (TRIM28) is a transcriptional regulator in embryonic development that
controls stem cell self-renewal, chromatin organization, and the DNA damage
response, acting as an essential corepressor for KRAB family zinc finger proteins
(KRAB-ZNF). To gain insight into the function of this large gene family, we
developed an antibody that recognizes the conserved zinc fingers linker region
(ZnFL) in multiple KRAB-ZNF. Here, we report that the expression of many KRAB-ZNF
along with active SUMOlyated KAP1 is elevated widely in human breast cancers.
KAP1 silencing in breast cancer cells reduced proliferation and inhibited the
growth and metastasis of tumor xenografts. Conversely, KAP1 overexpression
stimulated cell proliferation and tumor growth. In cells where KAP1 was silenced,
we identified multiple downregulated genes linked to tumor progression and
metastasis, including EREG/epiregulin, PTGS2/COX2, MMP1, MMP2, and CD44, along
with downregulation of multiple KRAB-ZNF proteins. KAP1-dependent stabilization
of KRAB-ZNF required direct interactions with KAP1. Together, our results show
that KAP1-mediated stimulation of multiple KRAB-ZNF contributes to the growth and
metastasis of breast cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4297582
PMID: 25421577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 24;9(11):e113688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113688.
eCollection 2014.

TRIM28 and ß-actin identified via nanobody-based reverse proteomics approach as
possible human glioblastoma biomarkers.

Jovcevska I(1), Zupanec N(1), Kocevar N(1), Cesselli D(2), Podergajs N(3), Stokin
CL(4), Myers MP(5), Muyldermans S(6), Ghassabeh GH(7), Motaln H(3), Ruaro ME(2), 
Bourkoula E(2), Turnek TL(3), Komel R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Centre for Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. (2)Department of Medical 
and Biological Sciences (DSMB), University of Udine, Udine, Italy. (3)Department 
of Genetic Toxicology and Cancer Biology, National Institute of Biology (NIB),
Ljubljana, Slovenia. (4)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. (5)International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy. (6)Cellular and Molecular 
Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium; Structural
Biology Research Center, VIB, Brussels, Belgium. (7)Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium; Nanobody Service
Facility, VIB, Brussels, Belgium.

Malignant gliomas are among the rarest brain tumours, and they have the worst
prognosis. Grade IV astrocytoma, known as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), is a
highly lethal disease where the standard therapies of surgery, followed by
radiation and chemotherapy, cannot significantly prolong the life expectancy of
the patients. Tumour recurrence shows more aggressive form compared to the
primary tumour, and results in patient survival from 12 to 15 months only.
Although still controversial, the cancer stem cell hypothesis postulates that
cancer stem cells are responsible for early relapse of the disease after surgical
intervention due to their high resistance to therapy. Alternative strategies for 
GBM therapy are thus urgently needed. Nanobodies are single-domain
antigen-binding fragments of heavy-chain antibodies, and together with classical 
antibodies, they are part of the camelid immune system. Nanobodies are small and 
stable, and they share a high degree of sequence identity to the human heavy
chain variable domain, and these characteristics offer them advantages over
classical antibodies or antibody fragments. We first immunised an alpaca with a
human GBM stem-like cell line prepared from primary GBM cultures. Next, a
nanobody library was constructed in a phage-display vector. Using nanobody
phage-display technology, we selected specific GBM stem-like cell binders through
a number of affinity selections, using whole cell protein extracts and membrane
protein-enriched extracts from eight different GBM patients, and membrane
protein-enriched extracts from two established GBM stem-like cell lines (NCH644
and NCH421K cells). After the enrichment, periplasmic extract ELISA was used to
screen for specific clones. These nanobody clones were recloned into the pHEN6
vector, expressed in Escherichia coli WK6, and purified using immobilised metal
affinity chromatography and size-exclusion chromatography. Specific
nanobody:antigen pairs were obtained and mass spectrometry analysis revealed two 
proteins, TRIM28 and ß-actin, that were up-regulated in the GBM stem-like cells
compared to the controls.

PMCID: PMC4242679
PMID: 25419715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Yi Chuan. 2014 Oct;36(10):959-64. doi: 10.3724/SP.J.1005.2014.0959.

[The roles of maternal-effect proteins in the maintenance of genomic imprints].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma X(1), Zhang S(2), Yang S(3), Wang X(3), Zhu Y(3), Li Z(2), Luan W(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. College of Animal Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Animal
Production and Production Quality and Security, Ministry of Education, Jilin
Agricultural University, Changchun 130118, China; 2. College of Veterinary
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China; (2)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China. (3)College of Animal Science
and Technology, Key Laboratory of Animal Production and Production Quality and
Security, Ministry of Education, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118,
China.

Genomic imprinting is a mechanism of differentially epigenetic modification that 
restricts monoallelic expression to either the maternally or paternally inherited
copy of the gene during gametogenesis. Imprinted methylation undergoes a process 
of erasure, acquisition, and maintenance during gametogenesis and early
embryogenesis. Disruptions in any of these steps may lead to imprinting
disorders, resulting in the aberrant development of embryogenesis, placentation
and postnatal growth. Recent studies have shown that maternal-effect proteins are
important for the regulation of imprinted gene during the development of
preimplantation embryos. In order to obtain a better understanding for the
mechanism of maternal-effect proteins in the maintenance of genomic imprints, the
recent study progress of maternal-effect proteins, such as DPPA3, ZFP57, TRIM28
and DNMT1, are summarized, and the regulation mechanism of these maternal-effect 
proteins for genomic imprints are discussed.

PMID: 25406243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 23;56(2):323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.09.006. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Oxidative stress diverts tRNA synthetase to nucleus for protection against DNA
damage.

Wei N(1), Shi Y(1), Truong LN(2), Fisch KM(2), Xu T(1), Gardiner E(1), Fu G(1),
Hsu YS(1), Kishi S(3), Su AI(2), Wu X(2), Yang XL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical Physiology and Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Department 
of Metabolism and Aging, The Scripps Research Institute, 130 Scripps Way,
Jupiter, FL 33458, USA. (4)Departments of Chemical Physiology and Cell and
Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: xlyang@scripps.edu.

Tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (TyrRS) is known for its essential aminoacylation
function in protein synthesis. Here we report a function for TyrRS in DNA damage 
protection. We found that oxidative stress, which often downregulates protein
synthesis, induces TyrRS to rapidly translocate from the cytosol to the nucleus. 
We also found that angiogenin mediates or potentiates this stress-induced
translocalization. The nuclear-localized TyrRS activates transcription factor
E2F1 to upregulate the expression of DNA damage repair genes such as BRCA1 and
RAD51. The activation is achieved through direct interaction of TyrRS with TRIM28
to sequester this vertebrate-specific epigenetic repressor and its associated
HDAC1 from deacetylating and suppressing E2F1. Remarkably, overexpression of
TyrRS strongly protects against UV-induced DNA double-strand breaks in zebrafish,
whereas restricting TyrRS nuclear entry completely abolishes the protection.
Therefore, oxidative stress triggers an essential cytoplasmic enzyme used for
protein synthesis to translocate to the nucleus to protect against DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC4224670
PMID: 25284223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 2014 Dec 11;516(7530):242-5. doi: 10.1038/nature13760. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

An evolutionary arms race between KRAB zinc-finger genes ZNF91/93 and SVA/L1
retrotransposons.

Jacobs FM(1), Greenberg D(2), Nguyen N(3), Haeussler M(4), Ewing AD(5), Katzman
S(4), Paten B(4), Salama SR(6), Haussler D(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California
Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA [2] [3] Swammerdam Institute for
Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1098 XH, The Netherlands
(F.M.J.J.); Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco,
California 94158, USA (D.G.); Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland,
Queensland 4101, Australia (A.D.E.). (2)1] Center for Biomolecular Science and
Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064,
USA [2] Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA [3] [4] Swammerdam Institute for Life
Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1098 XH, The Netherlands (F.M.J.J.);
Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, California 94158, 
USA (D.G.); Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, Queensland 4101, 
Australia (A.D.E.). (3)1] Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA [2]
Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
California 95064, USA. (4)Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA. (5)1]
Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, University of California Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA [2] Swammerdam Institute for Life
Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1098 XH, The Netherlands (F.M.J.J.);
Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, San Francisco, California 94158, 
USA (D.G.); Mater Research Institute, University of Queensland, Queensland 4101, 
Australia (A.D.E.). (6)1] Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering,
University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA [2] Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
California 95064, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Nov 10;31(3):257-8.

Throughout evolution primate genomes have been modified by waves of
retrotransposon insertions. For each wave, the host eventually finds a way to
repress retrotransposon transcription and prevent further insertions. In mouse
embryonic stem cells, transcriptional silencing of retrotransposons requires KAP1
(also known as TRIM28) and its repressive complex, which can be recruited to
target sites by KRAB zinc-finger (KZNF) proteins such as murine-specific ZFP809
which binds to integrated murine leukaemia virus DNA elements and recruits KAP1
to repress them. KZNF genes are one of the fastest growing gene families in
primates and this expansion is hypothesized to enable primates to respond to
newly emerged retrotransposons. However, the identity of KZNF genes battling
retrotransposons currently active in the human genome, such as SINE-VNTR-Alu
(SVA) and long interspersed nuclear element 1 (L1), is unknown. Here we show that
two primate-specific KZNF genes rapidly evolved to repress these two distinct
retrotransposon families shortly after they began to spread in our ancestral
genome. ZNF91 underwent a series of structural changes 8-12 million years ago
that enabled it to repress SVA elements. ZNF93 evolved earlier to repress the
primate L1 lineage until ~12.5 million years ago when the L1PA3-subfamily of
retrotransposons escaped ZNF93's restriction through the removal of the
ZNF93-binding site. Our data support a model where KZNF gene expansion limits the
activity of newly emerged retrotransposon classes, and this is followed by
mutations in these retrotransposons to evade repression, a cycle of events that
could explain the rapid expansion of lineage-specific KZNF genes.

PMCID: PMC4268317
PMID: 25274305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e108907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108907.
eCollection 2014.

Pre- and postovulatory aging of murine oocytes affect the transcript level and
poly(A) tail length of maternal effect genes.

Dankert D(1), Demond H(2), Trapphoff T(3), Heiligentag M(3), Rademacher K(2),
Eichenlaub-Ritter U(3), Horsthemke B(2), Grümmer R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Essen, Germany. (2)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen,
University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Institute of Gene
Technology/Microbiology, University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany.

Maternal effect genes code for oocyte proteins that are important for early
embryogenesis. Transcription in oocytes does not take place from the onset of
meiotic progression until zygotic genome activation. During this period, protein 
levels are regulated posttranscriptionally, for example by poly(A) tail length.
Posttranscriptional regulation may be impaired in preovulatory and postovulatory 
aged oocytes, caused by delayed ovulation or delayed fertilization, respectively,
and may lead to developmental defects. We investigated transcript levels and
poly(A) tail length of ten maternal effect genes in in vivo- and in vitro-
(follicle culture) grown oocytes after pre- and postovulatory aging. Quantitative
RT-PCR was performed using random hexamer-primed cDNA to determine total
transcript levels and oligo(dT)16-primed cDNA to analyze poly(A) tail length.
Transcript levels of in vivo preovulatory-aged oocytes remained stable except for
decreases in Brg1 and Tet3. Most genes investigated showed a tendency towards
increased poly(A) content. Polyadenylation of in vitro preovulatory-aged oocytes 
was also increased, along with transcript level declines of Trim28, Nlrp2, Nlrp14
and Zar1. In contrast to preovulatory aging, postovulatory aging of in vivo- and 
in vitro-grown oocytes led to a shortening of poly(A) tails. Postovulatory aging 
of in vivo-grown oocytes resulted in deadenylation of Nlrp5 after 12 h, and
deadenylation of 4 further genes (Tet3, Trim28, Dnmt1, Oct4) after 24 h.
Similarly, transcripts of in vitro-grown oocytes were deadenylated after 12 h of 
postovulatory aging (Tet3, Trim28, Zfp57, Dnmt1, Nlrp5, Zar1). This impact of
aging on poly(A) tail length may affect the timed translation of maternal effect 
gene transcripts and thereby contribute to developmental defects.

PMCID: PMC4182777
PMID: 25271735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 23;5:5011. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6011.

SIRT6 represses LINE1 retrotransposons by ribosylating KAP1 but this repression
fails with stress and age.

Van Meter M(1), Kashyap M(1), Rezazadeh S(1), Geneva AJ(1), Morello TD(1),
Seluanov A(1), Gorbunova V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14627,
USA.

L1 retrotransposons are an abundant class of transposable elements that pose a
threat to genome stability and may have a role in age-related pathologies such as
cancer. Recent evidence indicates that L1s become more active in somatic tissues 
during the course of ageing; however the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon
remain unknown. Here we report that the longevity regulating protein, SIRT6, is a
powerful repressor of L1 activity. Specifically, SIRT6 binds to the 5'-UTR of L1 
loci, where it mono-ADP ribosylates the nuclear corepressor protein, KAP1, and
facilitates KAP1 interaction with the heterochromatin factor, HP1a, thereby
contributing to the packaging of L1 elements into transcriptionally repressive
heterochromatin. During the course of ageing, and also in response to DNA damage,
however, we find that SIRT6 is depleted from L1 loci, allowing the activation of 
these previously silenced retroelements.

PMCID: PMC4185372
PMID: 25247314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. World J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 26;5(3):308-20. doi: 10.4331/wjbc.v5.i3.308.

KAPtain in charge of multiple missions: Emerging roles of KAP1.

Cheng CT(1), Kuo CY(1), Ann DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chun-Ting Cheng, Ching-Ying Kuo, David K Ann, Department of Molecular
Pharmacology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA 91010-3000,
United States.

KAP1/TRIM28/TIF1ß was identified nearly twenty years ago as a universal
transcriptional co-repressor because it interacts with a large KRAB-containing
zinc finger protein (KRAB-ZFP) transcription factor family. Many studies
demonstrate that KAP1 affects gene expression by regulating the transcription of 
KRAB-ZFP-specific loci, trans-repressing as a transcriptional co-repressor or
epigenetically modulating chromatin structure. Emerging evidence suggests that
KAP1 also functions independent of gene regulation by serving as a SUMO/ubiquitin
E3 ligase or signaling scaffold protein to mediate signal transduction. KAP1 is
subjected to multiple post-translational modifications (PTMs), including
serine/tyrosine phosphorylation, SUMOylation, and acetylation, which coordinately
regulate KAP1 function and its protein abundance. KAP1 is involved in multiple
aspects of cellular activities, including DNA damage response, virus replication,
cytokine production and stem cell pluripotency. Moreover, knockout of KAP1
results in embryonic lethality, indicating that KAP1 is crucial for embryonic
development and possibly impacts a wide-range of (patho)physiological
manifestations. Indeed, studies from conditional knockout mouse models reveal
that KAP1-deficiency significantly impairs vital physiological processes, such as
immune maturation, stress vulnerability, hepatic metabolism, gamete development
and erythropoiesis. In this review, we summarize and evaluate current literatures
involving the biochemical and physiological functions of KAP1. In addition,
increasing studies on the clinical relevance of KAP1 in cancer will also be
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4160525
PMID: 25225599  [PubMed]


43. Oncol Rep. 2014 Nov;32(5):1845-52. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3425. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Identification of copy number variation-driven genes for liver cancer via
bioinformatics analysis.

Lu X(1), Ye K(1), Zou K(1), Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200120, P.R. China.

To screen out copy number variation (CNV)-driven differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) in liver cancer and advance our understanding of the pathogenesis, an
integrated analysis of liver cancer-related CNV data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) and gene expression data from EBI Array Express database were performed.
The DEGs were identified by package limma based on the cut-off of |log2
(fold-change)|>0.585 and adjusted p-value<0.05. Using hg19 annotation information
provided by UCSC, liver cancer-related CNVs were then screened out. TF-target
gene interactions were also predicted with information from UCSC using DAVID
online tools. As a result, 25 CNV-driven genes were obtained, including
tripartite motif containing 28 (TRIM28) and RanBP-type and C3HC4-type zinc finger
containing 1 (RBCK1). In the transcriptional regulatory network, 8 known
cancer-related transcription factors (TFs) interacted with 21 CNV-driven genes,
suggesting that the other 8 TFs may be involved in liver cancer. These genes may 
be potential biomarkers for early detection and prevention of liver cancer. These
findings may improve our knowledge of the pathogenesis of liver cancer.
Nevertheless, further experiments are still needed to confirm our findings.

PMID: 25174835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):542-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.113. Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Lyn tyrosine kinase promotes silencing of ATM-dependent checkpoint signaling
during recovery from DNA double-strand breaks.

Fukumoto Y(1), Kuki K(2), Morii M(2), Miura T(2), Honda T(2), Ishibashi K(2),
Hasegawa H(2), Kubota S(2), Ide Y(2), Yamaguchi N(2), Nakayama Y(2), Yamaguchi
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. Electronic address:
fukumoto@faculty.chiba-u.jp. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan. Electronic address:
nyama@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

DNA damage activates the DNA damage checkpoint and the DNA repair machinery.
After initial activation of DNA damage responses, cells recover to their original
states through completion of DNA repair and termination of checkpoint signaling. 
Currently, little is known about the process by which cells recover from the DNA 
damage checkpoint, a process called checkpoint recovery. Here, we show that Src
family kinases promote inactivation of ataxia telangiectasia mutated
(ATM)-dependent checkpoint signaling during recovery from DNA double-strand
breaks. Inhibition of Src activity increased ATM-dependent phosphorylation of
Chk2 and Kap1. Src inhibition increased ATM signaling both in G2 phase and during
asynchronous growth. shRNA knockdown of Lyn increased ATM signaling.
Src-dependent nuclear tyrosine phosphorylation suppressed ATM-mediated Kap1
phosphorylation. These results suggest that Src family kinases are involved in
upstream signaling that leads to inactivation of the ATM-dependent DNA damage
checkpoint.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;21(10):876-83. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2878. Epub 2014
Aug 31.

TRIM28 regulates RNA polymerase II promoter-proximal pausing and pause release.

Bunch H(1), Zheng X(2), Burkholder A(3), Dillon ST(4), Motola S(5), Birrane G(6),
Ebmeier CC(7), Levine S(5), Fargo D(8), Hu G(9), Taatjes DJ(7), Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)1] Laboratory of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. [2]. (3)1]
Integrative Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. [2]. 
(4)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Genomics and Proteomics
Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (5)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (6)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. [2] Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
(8)Integrative Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
USA. (9)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is a major checkpoint in 
transcription. An unbiased search for new human proteins that could regulate
paused Pol II at the HSPA1B gene identified TRIM28. In vitro analyses indicated
HSF1-dependent attenuation of Pol II pausing upon TRIM28 depletion, whereas in
vivo data revealed de novo expression of HSPA1B and other known genes regulated
by paused Pol II upon TRIM28 knockdown. These results were supported by
genome-wide ChIP-sequencing analyses of Pol II occupancy that revealed a global
role for TRIM28 in regulating Pol II pausing and pause release. Furthermore, in
vivo and in vitro mechanistic studies suggest that transcription-coupled
phosphorylation regulates Pol II pause release by TRIM28. Collectively, our
findings identify TRIM28 as a new factor that modulates Pol II pausing and
transcriptional elongation at a large number of mammalian genes.

PMCID: PMC4189995
PMID: 25173174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Immunol Lett. 2014 Nov;162(1 Pt B):281-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.08.011. Epub 
2014 Aug 23.

TRIM28/KAP1 regulates senescence.

Santos J(1), Gil J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Campus, London W12 0NN, UK. (2)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC 
Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus, London W12
0NN, UK. Electronic address: jesus.gil@csc.mrc.ac.uk.

Senescence is a highly stable cell cycle arrest which limits the replication of
cells with damaged genomes. The senescence program is activated during aging or
in response to insults like DNA damage or oncogenic signaling. Upon induction of 
senescence, cells undergo profound changes on their transcription program,
chromatin organization, and they secrete a complex mixture of mainly
pro-inflammatory components termed the senescence-associated secretory phenotype 
(SASP). The SASP mediates multiple effects, including reinforcing senescence and 
activating immune surveillance responses. Given the important role that
senescence has in aging, cancer and other pathologies, identifying mechanisms
regulating senescence has therapeutic potential. Here we describe a role for
TRIM28 (also known as KRAB-associated protein 1, KAP1) on mediating
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). TRIM28 accumulates during OIS becoming
phosphorylated on serine 824. To investigate the role of TRIM28, we knocked down 
its expression and observed that the depletion of TRIM28 partially prevented cell
arrest during OIS. While induction of p53 and p21 during OIS, was not affected by
TRIM28 depletion, p16(INK4a) induction was partially prevented. Finally, we
observed that the induction of IL8, IL6 and other SASP components were strongly
suppressed upon TRIM28 depletion. In conclusion, the above-described results show
that TRIM28 regulates senescence and affects the induction of the
senescence-associated secretory phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25160591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Dec 1;563:136-44. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.07.026. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

MAGE proteins regulate KRAB zinc finger transcription factors and KAP1 E3 ligase 
activity.

Xiao TZ(1), Suh Y(2), Longley BJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
Txiao@dermatology.wisc.edu. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (3)Department of
Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI 53706, USA; Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
Electronic address: bjlongley@dermatology.wisc.edu.

Expression of Melanoma AntiGen Encoding (MAGE) genes, particularly MAGE-A3, has
been correlated with aggressive clinical course, the acquisition of resistance to
chemotherapy and poor clinical outcomes of melanoma and other malignancies. MAGE 
proteins bind to KAP1, a gene repressor and ubiquitin E3 ligase which also binds 
KRAB domain containing zinc finger transcription factors (KZNFs), and MAGE
expression may affect KZNF mediated gene regulation. To investigate mechanisms
for these effects, we tested the hypothesis that differences in KRAB domain
composition affect KZNF poly-ubiquitination and determine whether MAGE expression
increases, decreases, or has no effect on KZNFs mediated gene repression. Using
an integrated reporter gene responsive to repression by KRAB domain fusion
proteins, we found that MAGE-A3 relieved KZNF mediated repression and induced
KZNF poly-ubiquitination and degradation in association with expression of the
A+B box KRAB domain. In contrast, MAGE-A3 enhanced KAP1 mediated repression of
KZNFs expressing A or A+b box KRAB domains but caused no increase in
poly-ubiquitination or degradation. MAGE-A3 has no significant impact on KZNFs
with KRAB domains containing the Scan box motif. These data support our
hypothesis by showing that the effects of MAGE-A3 on gene repression depend on
the type of KZNF KRAB domain involved.

PMCID: PMC4221552
PMID: 25107531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Dec;12(12):1818-28. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0167. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

Metastasis-associated protein ribosomal RNA processing 1 homolog B (RRP1B)
modulates metastasis through regulation of histone methylation.

Lee M(1), Dworkin AM(1), Lichtenberg J(1), Patel SJ(1), Trivedi NS(2), Gildea
D(2), Bodine DM(1), Crawford NP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Genome Technology Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)Genetics and Molecular
Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland. crawforn@mail.nih.gov.

Overexpression of ribosomal RNA processing 1 homolog B (RRP1B) induces a
transcriptional profile that accurately predicts patient outcome in breast
cancer. However, the mechanism by which RRP1B modulates transcription is unclear.
Here, the chromatin-binding properties of RRP1B were examined to define how it
regulates metastasis-associated transcription. To identify genome-wide
RRP1B-binding sites, high-throughput ChIP-seq was performed in the human breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 and HeLa cells using antibodies against endogenous
RRP1B. Global changes in repressive marks such as histone H3 lysine 9
trimethylation (H3K9me3) were also examined by ChIP-seq. Analysis of these
samples identified 339 binding regions in MDA-MB-231 cells and 689 RRP1B-binding 
regions in HeLa cells. Among these, 136 regions were common to both cell lines.
Gene expression analyses of these RRP1B-binding regions revealed that
transcriptional repression is the primary result of RRP1B binding to chromatin.
ChIP-reChIP assays demonstrated that RRP1B co-occupies loci with decreased gene
expression with the heterochromatin-associated proteins, tripartite
motif-containing protein 28 (TRIM28/KAP1), and heterochromatin protein 1-a
(CBX5/HP1a). RRP1B occupancy at these loci was also associated with higher
H3K9me3 levels, indicative of heterochromatinization mediated by the TRIM28/HP1a 
complex. In addition, RRP1B upregulation, which is associated with metastasis
suppression, induced global changes in histone methylation.IMPLICATIONS: RRP1B, a
breast cancer metastasis suppressor, regulates gene expression through
heterochromatinization and transcriptional repression, which helps our
understanding of mechanisms that drive prognostic gene expression in human breast
cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4272606
PMID: 25092915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Sep;16(1):8-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Transcriptome analysis in cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cells reveals transcriptional regulation network.

Gan L(1), Schwengberg S(2), Denecke B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Axiogenesis AG, Köln, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.denecke@rwth-aachen.de.

The differentiation to cardiomyocytes is a prerequisite and an important part of 
heart development. A good understanding of the complicated cardiomyocyte
differentiation process benefits cardiogenesis study. Embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), cell lines with infinite ability to proliferate and to be differentiated 
into all cell types of the adult body, are important research tools for
investigation of differentiation and meanwhile good models for developmental
research. In the current study, genome-wide gene expression of ESCs is profiled
through high throughput platform during cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation
and maturation. Gene expression patterns of undifferentiated ESCs and ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes provide a global overview of genes involved in
cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation, whereas marker gene expression profiles
of both ESC-related genes and cardiac-specific genes presented the expression
pattern shift during differentiation in a pure ESC-derived cardiomyocyte cell
culture system. The differentiation and maturation process was completed at day
19 after initiation of differentiation, according to our gene expression profile 
results. Functional analysis of regulated genes reveals over-represented
biological processes, molecular functions and pathways during the differentiation
and maturation process. Finally, transcription factor regulation networks were
engineered based on gene expression data. Within these networks, the number of
identified important regulators (Trim28, E2f4, Foxm1, Myc, Hdac1, Rara, Mef2c,
Nkx2-5, Gata4) and possible key co-regulation modules (Nkx2-5 - Gata4 - Tbx5, Myc
- E2F4) could be expanded. We demonstrate that a more comprehensive picture of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and its regulation can be achieved solely by
studying gene expression patterns. The results from our study contribute to a
better and more accurate understanding of the regulation mechanisms during
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Oct;75:30-9. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.07.011. 
Epub 2014 Jul 15.

DNA double-strand breaks activate ATM independent of mitochondrial dysfunction in
A549 cells.

Kalifa L(1), Gewandter JS(2), Staversky RJ(3), Sia EA(4), Brookes PS(2), O'Reilly
MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, The University of Rochester, Rochester, 
NY 14642, USA. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, The University of Rochester,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, The University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (4)Department of Biology, The University of 
Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, The University 
of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address:
michael_oreilly@urmc.rochester.edu.

Excessive nuclear or mitochondrial DNA damage can lead to mitochondrial
dysfunction, decreased energy production, and increased generation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS). Although numerous cell signaling pathways are activated
when cells are injured, the ataxia telangiectasia mutant (ATM) protein has
emerged as a major regulator of the response to both mitochondrial dysfunction
and nuclear DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Because mitochondrial dysfunction is
often a response to excessive DNA damage, it has been difficult to determine
whether nuclear and/or mitochondrial DNA DSBs activate ATM independent of
mitochondrial dysfunction. In this study, mitochondrial and nuclear DNA DSBs were
generated in the A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line by infecting with
retroviruses expressing the restriction endonuclease PstI fused to a
mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) or nuclear localization sequence (NLS) and
a hemagglutinin antigen epitope tag (HA). Expression of MTS-PstI-HA or
NLS-PstI-HA activated the DNA damage response defined by phosphorylation of ATM, 
the tumor suppressor protein p53 (TP53), KRAB-associated protein (KAP)-1, and
structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC)-1. Phosphorylated ATM and SMC1 were
detected in nuclear fractions, whereas phosphorylated TP53 and KAP1 were detected
in both mitochondrial and nuclear fractions. PstI also enhanced expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and inhibited cell growth. This response to
DNA damage occurred in the absence of detectable mitochondrial dysfunction and
excess production of ROS. These findings reveal that DNA DSBs are sufficient to
activate ATM independent of mitochondrial dysfunction and suggest that the
activated form of ATM and some of its substrates are restricted to the nuclear
compartment, regardless of the site of DNA damage.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4171189
PMID: 25048973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Virol. 2014 Sep;88(18):10680-95. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01176-14. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Ectopic DNMT3L triggers assembly of a repressive complex for retroviral silencing
in somatic cells.

Kao TH(1), Liao HF(1), Wolf D(2), Tai KY(3), Chuang CY(4), Lee HS(1), Kuo HC(5), 
Hata K(6), Zhang X(7), Cheng X(7), Goff SP(2), Ooi SK(8), Bestor TH(9), Lin
SP(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA. (3)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan
University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Biotechnology,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan Genomics Research Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei,
Taiwan. (6)Department of Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for 
Child Health and Development, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of
Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. (8)UCL 
Cancer Institute, Department of Cancer Biology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom. (9)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA. (10)Institute of Biotechnology, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Research Centre for Developmental Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan Centre for
Systems Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
shaupinglin@ntu.edu.tw.

Mammalian genomes are replete with retrotransposable elements, including
endogenous retroviruses. DNA methyltransferase 3-like (DNMT3L) is an epigenetic
regulator expressed in prospermatogonia, growing oocytes, and embryonic stem (ES)
cells. Here, we demonstrate that DNMT3L enhances the interaction of repressive
epigenetic modifiers, including histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), SET domain,
bifurcated 1 (SETDB1), DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), and tripartite
motif-containing protein 28 (TRIM28; also known as TIF1ß and KAP1) in ES cells
and orchestrates retroviral silencing activity with TRIM28 through mechanisms
including, but not limited to, de novo DNA methylation. Ectopic expression of
DNMT3L in somatic cells causes methylation-independent retroviral silencing
activity by recruitment of the TRIM28/HDAC1/SETDB1/DNMT3A/DNMT3L complex to newly
integrated Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV) proviral DNA. Concurrent with 
this recruitment, we also observed the accumulation of histone H3 lysine 9
trimethylation (H3K9me3) and heterochromatin protein 1 gamma (HP1<U+03B3>), as well as
reduced H3K9 and H3K27 acetylation at Mo-MuLV proviral sequences. Ectopic
expression of DNMT3L in late-passage mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) recruited
cytoplasmically localized HDAC1 to the nucleus. The formation of this epigenetic 
modifying complex requires interaction of DNMT3L with DNMT3A as well as with
histone H3. In fetal testes at embryonic day 17.5, endogenous DNMT3L also
enhanced the binding among TRIM28, DNMT3A, SETDB1, and HDAC1. We propose that
DNMT3L may be involved in initiating a cascade of repressive epigenetic
modifications by assisting in the preparation of a chromatin context that further
attracts DNMT3A-DNMT3L binding and installs longer-term DNA methylation marks at 
newly integrated retroviruses.IMPORTANCE: Almost half of the mammalian genome is 
composed of endogenous retroviruses and other retrotransposable elements that
threaten genomic integrity. These elements are usually subject to epigenetic
silencing. We discovered that two epigenetic regulators that lack enzymatic
activity, DNA methyltransferase 3-like (DNMT3L) and tripartite motif-containing
protein 28 (TRIM28), collaborate with each other to impose retroviral silencing. 
In addition to modulating de novo DNA methylation, we found that by interacting
with TRIM28, DNMT3L can attract various enzymes to form a DNMT3L-induced
repressive complex to remove active marks and add repressive marks to histone
proteins. Collectively, these results reveal a novel and pivotal function of
DNMT3L in shaping the chromatin modifications necessary for retroviral and
retrotransposon silencing.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178851
PMID: 24991018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 1;9(7):e101040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101040. eCollection
2014.

Trim28 contributes to EMT via regulation of E-cadherin and N-cadherin in lung
cancer cell lines.

Chen L(1), Muñoz-Antonia T(1), Cress WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL, United States of America.

In previous work, we demonstrated that transcription factor Trim28 (Tripartite
motif containing 28) plays a tumor-suppressor role in early-staged adenocarcinoma
of the lung due to its ability to restrain transcription of cell cycle-regulating
genes. Herein we examine Trim28's role in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) which is strongly implicated in cancer metastasis. We found that
Trim28 plays a role in TGF-ß-induced EMT in non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Silencing Trim28 with inhibitory RNAs alters the expression of numerous EMT
markers, such as E-cadherin and N-cadherin, whereas overexpression of Trim28 has 
an opposite effect. Trim28 expression is induced following TGF-ß treatment at
both protein and mRNA levels. Trim28 deficiency impairs TGF-ß-induced EMT and
decreases cell migration and invasion. Finally, we demonstrate that the
expression of Trim28 affects the acetylation and methylation of histones on
E-cadherin and N-cadherin promoters. These results suggest that Trim28
contributes to EMT and might be important for tumor metastasis in lung cancer.
Taken together with our previous work these results suggest a model in which
Trim28 is a tumor suppressor early in the transformation process in lung cancer, 
but in later stages it functions as an oncogene.

PMCID: PMC4077753
PMID: 24983967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Genes Dev. 2014 Jul 1;28(13):1397-409. doi: 10.1101/gad.241661.114. Epub 2014 Jun
17.

Evolutionally dynamic L1 regulation in embryonic stem cells.

Castro-Diaz N(1), Ecco G(1), Coluccio A(1), Kapopoulou A(1), Yazdanpanah B(1),
Friedli M(1), Duc J(1), Jang SM(1), Turelli P(1), Trono D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2014 Jul 1;28(13):1381-3.

Mobile elements are important evolutionary forces that challenge genomic
integrity. Long interspersed element-1 (L1, also known as LINE-1) is the only
autonomous transposon still active in the human genome. It displays an unusual
pattern of evolution, with, at any given time, a single active L1 lineage
amplifying to thousands of copies before getting replaced by a new lineage,
likely under pressure of host restriction factors, which act notably by silencing
L1 expression during early embryogenesis. Here, we demonstrate that in human
embryonic stem (hES) cells, KAP1 (KRAB [Krüppel-associated box domain]-associated
protein 1), the master cofactor of KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins
(KRAB-ZFPs) previously implicated in the restriction of endogenous retroviruses, 
represses a discrete subset of L1 lineages predicted to have entered the
ancestral genome between 26.8 million and 7.6 million years ago. In mice, we
documented a similar chronologically conditioned pattern, albeit with a much
contracted time scale. We could further identify an L1-binding KRAB-ZFP,
suggesting that this rapidly evolving protein family is more globally responsible
for L1 recognition. KAP1 knockdown in hES cells induced the expression of
KAP1-bound L1 elements, but their younger, human-specific counterparts (L1Hs)
were unaffected. Instead, they were stimulated by depleting DNA
methyltransferases, consistent with recent evidence demonstrating that the
PIWI-piRNA (PIWI-interacting RNA) pathway regulates L1Hs in hES cells.
Altogether, these data indicate that the early embryonic control of L1 is an
evolutionarily dynamic process and support a model in which newly emerged
lineages are first suppressed by DNA methylation-inducing small RNA-based
mechanisms before KAP1-recruiting protein repressors are selected.

© 2014 Castro-Diaz et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4083085
PMID: 24939876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jun 24;111(25):9169-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1403565111. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

DNA double-strand breaks promote methylation of histone H3 on lysine 9 and
transient formation of repressive chromatin.

Ayrapetov MK(1), Gursoy-Yuzugullu O(1), Xu C(2), Xu Y(1), Price BD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; and. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
andInstitute of Radiation Medicine, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Nuclear
Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Tianjin 300192, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; and
brendan_price@dfci.harvard.edu.

Dynamic changes in histone modification are critical for regulating DNA
double-strand break (DSB) repair. Activation of the Tip60 acetyltransferase by
DSBs requires interaction of Tip60 with histone H3 methylated on lysine 9
(H3K9me3). However, how H3K9 methylation is regulated during DSB repair is not
known. Here, we demonstrate that a complex containing kap-1, HP1, and the H3K9
methyltransferase suv39h1 is rapidly loaded onto the chromatin at DSBs. Suv39h1
methylates H3K9, facilitating loading of additional kap-1/HP1/suv39h1 through
binding of HP1's chromodomain to the nascent H3K9me3. This process initiates
cycles of kap-1/HP1/suv39h1 loading and H3K9 methylation that facilitate
spreading of H3K9me3 and kap-1/HP1/suv39h1 complexes for tens of kilobases away
from the DSB. These domains of H3K9me3 function to activate the Tip60
acetyltransferase, allowing Tip60 to acetylate both ataxia telangiectasia-mutated
(ATM) kinase and histone H4. Consequently, cells lacking suv39h1 display
defective activation of Tip60 and ATM, decreased DSB repair, and increased
radiosensitivity. Importantly, activated ATM rapidly phosphorylates kap-1,
leading to release of the repressive kap-1/HP1/suv39h1 complex from the
chromatin. ATM activation therefore functions as a negative feedback loop to
remove repressive suv39h1 complexes at DSBs, which may limit DSB repair.
Recruitment of kap-1/HP1/suv39h1 to DSBs therefore provides a mechanism for
transiently increasing the levels of H3K9me3 in open chromatin domains that lack 
H3K9me3 and thereby promoting efficient activation of Tip60 and ATM in these
regions. Further, transient formation of repressive chromatin may be critical for
stabilizing the damaged chromatin and for remodeling the chromatin to create an
efficient template for the DNA repair machinery.

PMCID: PMC4078803
PMID: 24927542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 25;289(30):20757-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.555672. Epub
2014 Jun 6.

An arginine-rich motif of ring finger protein 4 (RNF4) oversees the recruitment
and degradation of the phosphorylated and SUMOylated Krüppel-associated box
domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1)/TRIM28 protein during genotoxic stress.

Kuo CY(1), Li X(2), Kong XQ(3), Luo C(3), Chang CC(4), Chung Y(2), Shih HM(4), Li
KK(5), Ann DK(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Irell and Manella Graduate
School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, 
California 91010. (2)From the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and. (3)the
Drug Discovery and Design Center, State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, 
Shanghai 201203, China. (4)the Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 11529, Taiwan, and. (5)the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin II Road, Shanghai 200025, China
kli@epigenetic.us. (6)From the Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Irell and
Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City 
of Hope, Duarte, California 91010, dann@coh.org.

Krüppel-associated box domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is a universal
transcriptional corepressor that undergoes multiple posttranslational
modifications (PTMs), including SUMOylation and Ser-824 phosphorylation. However,
the functional interplay of KAP1 PTMs in regulating KAP1 turnover during DNA
damage response remains unclear. To decipher the role and cross-talk of multiple 
KAP1 PTMs, we show here that DNA double strand break-induced KAP1 Ser-824
phosphorylation promoted the recruitment of small ubiquitin-like modifier
(SUMO)-targeted ubiquitin E3 ligase, ring finger protein 4 (RNF4), and subsequent
RNF4-mediated, SUMO-dependent degradation. Besides the SUMO interacting motif
(SIM), a previously unrecognized, but evolutionarily conserved, arginine-rich
motif (ARM) in RNF4 acts as a novel recognition motif for selective target
recruitment. Results from combined mutagenesis and computational modeling studies
suggest that RNF4 utilizes concerted bimodular recognition, namely SIM for
Lys-676 SUMOylation and ARM for Ser(P)-824 of simultaneously phosphorylated and
SUMOylated KAP1 (Ser(P)-824-SUMO-KAP1). Furthermore, we proved that arginines 73 
and 74 within the ARM of RNF4 are required for efficient recruitment to KAP1 or
accelerated degradation of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) under stress. In 
parallel, results of bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays validated
the role of the ARM in recognizing Ser(P)-824 in living cells. Taken together, we
establish that the ARM is required for RNF4 to efficiently target
Ser(P)-824-SUMO-KAP1, conferring ubiquitin Lys-48-mediated proteasomal
degradation in the context of double strand breaks. The conservation of such a
motif may possibly explain the requirement for timely substrate selectivity
determination among a myriad of SUMOylated proteins under stress conditions.
Thus, the ARM dynamically regulates the SIM-dependent recruitment of targets to
RNF4, which could be critical to dynamically fine-tune the abundance of
Ser(P)-824-SUMO-KAP1 and, potentially, other SUMOylated proteins during DNA
damage response.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4110285
PMID: 24907272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genome Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):1260-70. doi: 10.1101/gr.172833.114. Epub 2014 May 30.

Interplay of TRIM28 and DNA methylation in controlling human endogenous
retroelements.

Turelli P(1), Castro-Diaz N(1), Marzetta F(1), Kapopoulou A(1), Raclot C(1), Duc 
J(1), Tieng V(2), Quenneville S(1), Trono D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; (2)Department of
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; didier.trono@epfl.ch.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Jul;15(7):439.

Reverse transcription-derived sequences account for at least half of the human
genome. Although these retroelements are formidable motors of evolution, they can
occasionally cause disease, and accordingly are inactivated during early
embryogenesis through epigenetic mechanisms. In the mouse, at least for
endogenous retroviruses, important mediators of this process are the
tetrapod-specific KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) and their
cofactor TRIM28. The present study demonstrates that KRAB/TRIM28-mediated
regulation is responsible for controlling a very broad range of human-specific
endogenous retroelements (EREs) in human embryonic stem (ES) cells and that it
exerts, as a consequence, a marked effect on the transcriptional dynamics of
these cells. It further reveals reciprocal dependence between TRIM28 recruitment 
at specific families of EREs and DNA methylation. It finally points to the
importance of persistent TRIM28-mediated control of ERE transcriptional impact
beyond their presumed inactivation by DNA methylation.

© 2014 Turelli et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4120080
PMID: 24879559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Med Oncol. 2014 Jul;31(7):25. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0025-5. Epub 2014 May 27.

KAP-1 is overexpressed and correlates with increased metastatic ability and
tumorigenicity in pancreatic cancer.

Yu C(1), Zhan L, Jiang J, Pan Y, Zhang H, Li X, Pen F, Wang M, Qin R, Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biliary-Hepatic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical 
College, 28 Guiyi Street, Guiyang, 550001, Guizhou, China.

This study aimed to investigate the role in metastasis and prognostic value of
KAP-1 in pancreatic cancer (PC). The expression of KAP-1 was analyzed by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, and
immunohistochemical staining in 91 human PC tissue samples. Capan-2 cells were
transfected with a lentiviral vector expressing KAP-1 (Capan-2/KAP-1) or the
empty vector (Capan-2/vector); cell migration and invasion were assayed in vitro 
using Transwell migration and wound-healing assays, and in vivo using a xenograft
model in nude mice. KAP-1 was found to be overexpressed in human PC, and the
expression of KAP-1 correlated with clinical stage. Overexpression of KAP-1
increased the invasion and migration of Capan-2 cells in vitro. Furthermore,
overexpression of KAP-1 promoted the growth and metastatic ability of PC cells in
a xenograft model in nude mice. Moreover, overexpression of KAP-1 induced the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in PC cells both in vitro and in vivo, as
indicated by increased expression of mesenchymal markers such as vimentin and
decreased expression of E-cadherin. This study indicates that KAP-1 may promote
metastasis in PC by regulating the EMT and suggests that KAP-1 may have potential
as a predictor of metastasis in patients with pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 24861921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;34(15):2811-21. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00441-14. Epub 2014 May 
19.

KAP-1 promotes resection of broken DNA ends not protected by <U+03B3>-H2AX and 53BP1 in 
G1-phase lymphocytes.

Tubbs AT(1), Dorsett Y(1), Chan E(2), Helmink B(1), Lee BS(1), Hung P(1), George 
R(1), Bredemeyer AL(1), Mittal A(3), Pappu RV(3), Chowdhury D(4), Mosammaparast
N(1), Krangel MS(2), Sleckman BP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, Duke University 
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Center for Biological Systems Engineering, Washington University,
St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
sleckman@immunology.wustl.edu.

The resection of broken DNA ends is required for DNA double-strand break (DSB)
repair by homologous recombination (HR) but can inhibit normal repair by
nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), the main DSB repair pathway in G1-phase cells. 
Antigen receptor gene assembly proceeds through DNA DSB intermediates generated
in G1-phase lymphocytes by the RAG endonuclease. These DSBs activate ATM, which
phosphorylates H2AX, forming <U+03B3>-H2AX in flanking chromatin. <U+03B3>-H2AX prevents CtIP
from initiating resection of RAG DSBs. Whether there are additional proteins
required to promote resection of these DNA ends is not known. KRAB-associated
protein 1 (KAP-1) (TRIM28) is a transcriptional repressor that modulates
chromatin structure and has been implicated in the repair of DNA DSBs in
heterochromatin. Here, we show that in murine G1-phase lymphocytes, KAP-1
promotes resection of DSBs that are not protected by H2AX and its downstream
effector 53BP1. In these murine cells, KAP-1 activity in DNA end resection is
attenuated by a single-amino-acid change that reflects a KAP-1 polymorphism
between primates and other mammalian species. These findings establish KAP-1 as a
component of the machinery that can resect DNA ends in G1-phase cells and suggest
that there may be species-specific features to this activity.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135573
PMID: 24842905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Sep;12(9):1267-82. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0652-T.
Epub 2014 May 16.

STAT3-activated GM-CSFRa translocates to the nucleus and protects CLL cells from 
apoptosis.

Li P(1), Harris D(1), Liu Z(1), Rozovski U(1), Ferrajoli A(1), Wang Y(1),
Bueso-Ramos C(2), Hazan-Halevy I(1), Grgurevic S(1), Wierda W(1), Burger J(1),
O'Brien S(1), Faderl S(1), Keating M(1), Estrov Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Leukemia and. (2)Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Departments of Leukemia and
zestrov@mdanderson.org.

Here, it was determined that chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells express the
a subunit, but not the ß subunit, of the granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR/CSF2R). GM-CSFRa was detected on the 
surface, in the cytosol, and in the nucleus of CLL cells via confocal microscopy,
cell fractionation, and GM-CSFRa antibody epitope mapping. Because STAT3 is
frequently activated in CLL and the GM-CSFRa promoter harbors putative STAT3
consensus binding sites, MM1 cells were transfected with truncated forms of the
GM-CSFRa promoter, then stimulated with IL6 to activate STAT3 and to identify
STAT3-binding sites. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and an electoromobility
shift assay (EMSA) confirmed STAT3 occupancy to those promoter regions in both
IL6-stimulated MM1 and CLL cells. Transfection of MM1 cells with STAT3-siRNA or
CLL cells with STAT3-shRNA significantly downregulated GM-CSFRa mRNA and protein 
levels. RNA transcripts, involved in regulating cell survival pathways, and the
proteins KAP1 (TRIM28) and ISG15 coimmunoprecipitated with GM-CSFRa.
GM-CSFRa-bound KAP1 enhanced the transcriptional activity of STAT3, whereas
GM-CSFRa-bound ISG15 inhibited the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Nevertheless, overexpression of
GM-CSFRa protected MM1 cells from dexamethasone-induced apoptosis, and GM-CSFRa
knockdown induced apoptosis in CLL cells, suggesting that GM-CSFRa provides a
ligand-independent survival advantage.IMPLICATIONS: Constitutively, activation of
STAT3 induces the expression of GM-CSFRa that protects CLL cells from apoptosis, 
suggesting that inhibition of STAT3 or GM-CSFRa may benefit patients with CLL.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4163508
PMID: 24836891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(11):7012-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku413. Epub 2014
May 14.

Ligand-dependent corepressor contributes to transcriptional repression by C2H2
zinc-finger transcription factor ZBRK1 through association with KRAB-associated
protein-1.

Calderon MR(1), Verway M(1), Benslama RO(2), Birlea M(3), Bouttier M(1), Dimitrov
V(1), Mader S(2), White JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada
Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et
Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (4)Department 
of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada Department of Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada john.white@mcgill.ca.

We identified a novel interaction between ligand-dependent corepressor (LCoR) and
the corepressor KRAB-associated protein-1 (KAP-1). The two form a complex with
C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor ZBRK1 on an intronic binding site in the
growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible a (GADD45A) gene and a novel site in the
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) gene. Chromatin at both sites is enriched for
histone methyltransferase SETDB1 and histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation, a
repressive epigenetic mark. Depletion of ZBRK1, KAP-1 or LCoR led to elevated
GADD45A and FGF2 expression in malignant and non-malignant breast epithelial
cells, and caused apoptotic death. Loss of viability could be rescued by
simultaneous knockdowns of FGF2 and transcriptional coregulators or by blocking
FGF2 function. FGF2 was not concurrently expressed with any of the
transcriptional coregulators in breast malignancies, suggesting an inverse
correlation between their expression patterns. We propose that ZBRK1, KAP-1 and
LCoR form a transcriptional complex that silences gene expression, in particular 
FGF2, which maintains breast cell viability. Given the broad expression patterns 
of both LCoR and KAP-1 during development and in the adult, this complex may have
several regulatory functions that extend beyond cell survival, mediated by
interactions with ZBRK1 or other C2H2 zinc-finger proteins.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4066800
PMID: 24829459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. DNA Repair (Amst). 2014 Jul;19:163-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2014.03.015. Epub
2014 Apr 19.

Double strand break (DSB) repair in heterochromatin and heterochromatin proteins 
in DSB repair.

Lemaître C(1), Soutoglou E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), UMR
7104 CNRS, UdS, INSERM U964, BP 10142, F-67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, 
France. (2)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire
(IGBMC), UMR 7104 CNRS, UdS, INSERM U964, BP 10142, F-67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de
Strasbourg, France. Electronic address: evisou@igbmc.fr.

Chromosomal translocations are a hallmark of cancer cells and they represent a
major cause of tumorigenesis. To avoid chromosomal translocations, faithful
repair of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) has to be ensured in the context of
high ordered chromatin structure. However, chromatin compaction is proposed to
represent a barrier for DSB repair. Here we review the different mechanisms cells
use to alleviate the heterochromatic barrier for DNA repair. At the same time, we
discuss the activating role of heterochromatin-associated proteins in this
process, therefore proposing that chromatin structure, more than being a simple
barrier, is a key modulator of DNA repair.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24754998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7331-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00596-14. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded LANA interacts with host KAP1 to 
facilitate establishment of viral latency.

Sun R(1), Liang D(1), Gao Y(1), Lan K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Tumor Virology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Unit of Tumor Virology, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
lanke@ips.ac.cn.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) typically displays two different
phases in its life cycle, the default latent phase and the lytic phase. There is 
a short period of lytic gene expression in the early stage of KSHV primary
infection. The factors involved in the shutdown process of lytic gene expression 
are poorly identified. It has been shown that the latency-associated nuclear
antigen (LANA) encoded by KSHV plays an important role in the establishment of
viral latency. In screening, we identified a host protein, Krüppel-associated box
domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1), that bound to LANA. We validated the
interaction between LANA and KAP1 in vivo and in vitro, as well as their
colocalization in the nucleus. We mapped out that LANA interacted with both the
N- and C-terminal domains of KAP1. Based on the interface of LANA-KAP1
interaction determined, we proved that LANA recruited KAP1 to the RTA promoter
region of the KSHV genome. We revealed that KAP1 was involved in transcriptional 
repression by LANA. We found multiple cooccupation sites of LANA and KAP1 on the 
whole KSHV genome by chromatin immunoprecipitation for sequencing (ChIP-seq) and 
demonstrated that LANA-recruited KAP1 played a critical role in the shutdown of
lytic gene expression during the early stage of KSHV primary infection. Taken
together, our data suggest that LANA interacts with KAP1 and represses lytic gene
expression to facilitate the establishment of KSHV latency.IMPORTANCE: Our study 
revealed the mechanism of transcriptional repression by LANA during KSHV primary 
infection, providing new insights into the process of KSHV latency establishment.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054432
PMID: 24741090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6873-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00283-14. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Inhibition of KAP1 enhances hypoxia-induced Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus reactivation through RBP-J<U+03BA>.

Zhang L(1), Zhu C(2), Guo Y(3), Wei F(4), Lu J(5), Qin J(6), Banerjee S(5), Wang 
J(6), Shang H(3), Verma SC(7), Yuan Z(2), Robertson ES(8), Cai Q(9).

Author information: 
(1)MOE& MOH Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic
Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic
of China Department of Clinical Laboratory, Central Hospital of Taizhou City,
Taizhou, People's Republic of China. (2)MOE& MOH Key Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Virology, School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Gynecology,
Key Laboratory of AIDS Immunology of Ministry of Health, First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.
(4)ShengYushou Center of Cell Biology and Immunology, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China. (5)Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Center for Genome Science,
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People's Republic of China. (7)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno,
Nevada, USA. (8)Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA qiliang@fudan.edu.cn erle@upenn.edu. (9)MOE& MOH 
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai 
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China
qiliang@fudan.edu.cn erle@upenn.edu.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) has been frequently implicated in many
cancers as well as viral pathogenesis. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
(KSHV) is linked to several human malignancies. It can stabilize HIF-1a during
latent infection and undergoes lytic replication in response to hypoxic stress.
However, the mechanism by which KSHV controls its latent and lytic life cycle
through the deregulation of HIF-1a is not fully understood. Our previous studies 
showed that the hypoxia-sensitive chromatin remodeler KAP1 was targeted by the
KSHV-encoded latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) to repress expression of
the major lytic replication and transcriptional activator (RTA). Here we further 
report that an RNA interference-based knockdown of KAP1 in KSHV-infected primary 
effusion lymphoma (PEL) cells disrupted viral episome stability and abrogated
sub-G1/G1 arrest of the cell cycle while increasing the efficiency of KSHV lytic 
reactivation by hypoxia or using the chemical
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) or sodium butyrate (NaB). Moreover,
KSHV genome-wide screening revealed that four hypoxia-responsive clusters have a 
high concurrence of both RBP-J<U+03BA> and HIF-1a binding sites (RBS+HRE) within the
same gene promoter and are tightly associated with KAP1. Inhibition of KAP1
greatly enhanced the association of RBP-J<U+03BA> with the HIF-1a complex for driving
RTA expression not only in normoxia but also in hypoxia. These results suggest
that both KAP1 and the concurrence of RBS+HRE within the RTA promoter are
essential for KSHV latency and hypoxia-induced lytic reactivation.IMPORTANCE:
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), a DNA tumor virus, is an
etiological agent linked to several human malignancies, including Kaposi's
sarcoma (KS) and primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). HIF-1a, a key hypoxia-inducible
factor, is frequently elevated in KSHV latently infected tumor cells and
contributes to KSHV lytic replication in hypoxia. The molecular mechanisms of how
KSHV controls the latent and lytic life cycle through deregulating HIF-1a remain 
unclear. In this study, we found that inhibition of hypoxia-sensitive chromatin
remodeler KAP1 in KSHV-infected PEL cells leads to a loss of viral genome and
increases its sensitivity to hypoxic stress, leading to KSHV lytic reactivation. 
Importantly, we also found that four hypoxia-responsive clusters within the KSHV 
genome contain a high concurrence of RBP-J<U+03BA> (a key cellular regulator involved in
Notch signaling) and HIF-1a binding sites. These sites are also tightly
associated with KAP1. This discovery implies that KAP1, RBP-J<U+03BA>, and HIF-1a play
an essential role in KSHV pathogenesis through subtle cross talk which is
dependent on the oxygen levels in the infected cells.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054365
PMID: 24696491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(11):2075-91. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01729-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
31.

KAP1 represses differentiation-inducible genes in embryonic stem cells through
cooperative binding with PRC1 and derepresses pluripotency-associated genes.

Cheng B(1), Ren X, Kerppola TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells express pluripotency-associated genes and repress
differentiation-inducible genes. The activities of these genes are coordinately
reversed during differentiation. The changes in the transcriptome upon
conditional KAP1 knockout in ES cells overlapped with the changes during embryoid
body formation. KAP1 repressed differentiation-inducible genes and derepressed
pluripotency-associated genes in ES cells. KAP1 formed complexes with polycomb
repressive complexes 1 (PRC1) through an interaction that was mediated by the
KAP1 coiled-coil region. KAP1 and PRC1 bound cooperatively at the promoters of
differentiation-inducible genes and repressed their transcription. In contrast,
KAP1 bound the transcribed and flanking sequences of pluripotency-associated
genes, did not enhance PRC1 binding, and derepressed their transcription. KAP1
had opposite effects on differentiation-inducible and pluripotency-associated
gene transcription both in ES cells and in differentiating embryoid bodies. The
region of KAP1 that mediated the interaction with PRC1 was required for KAP1
enhancement of PRC1 binding and for KAP1 repression of transcription at
differentiation-inducible promoters. This region of KAP1 was not required for
KAP1 suppression of PRC1 binding or for KAP1 derepression of transcription at
pluripotency-associated promoters. The opposite effects of KAP1 on the
transcription of differentiation-inducible versus pluripotency-associated genes
contributed to the reciprocal changes in their transcription during
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4019052
PMID: 24687849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Jun;81(6):552-66. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22324. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Transcriptional regulators TRIM28, SETDB1, and TP53 are aberrantly expressed in
porcine embryos produced by in vitro fertilization in comparison to in vivo- and 
somatic-cell nuclear transfer-derived embryos.

Hamm J(1), Tessanne K, Murphy CN, Prather RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri.

In vitro embryo production is important for research in animal reproduction,
embryo transfer, transgenics, and cloning. Yet, in vitro-fertilized (IVF) embryos
are generally developmentally delayed and are inferior to in vivo-derived (IVV)
embryos; this discrepancy is likely a result of aberrant gene expression.
Transcription of three genes implicated to be important in normal preimplantation
embryo development, TRIM28, SETDB1, and TP53, was determined by quanitative PCR
in IVF, somatic-cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), parthenogenetic, and IVV porcine
oocytes and embryos. There was no difference in TRIM28 or SETDB1 abundance
between oocytes matured in vitro versus in vivo (P > 0.05), whereas TP53 levels
were higher in in vitro-matured oocytes. TRIM28 increased from metaphase-II
oocytes to the 4-cell and blastocyst stages in IVF embryos, whereas IVV embryos
showed a reduction in TRIM28 abundance from maturation throughout development.
The relative abundance of TP53 increased by the blastocyst stage in all treatment
groups, but was higher in IVF embryos compared to IVV and SCNT embryos. In
contrast, SETDB1 transcript levels decreased from the 2-cell to blastocyst stage 
in all treatments. For each gene analyzed, SCNT embryos of both hard-to-clone and
easy-to-clone cell lines were more comparable to IVV than IVF embryos. Knockdown 
of TRIM28 also had no effect on blastocyst development or expression of SETDB1 or
TP53. Thus, TRIM28, SETDB1, and TP53 are dynamically expressed in porcine oocytes
and embryos. Furthermore, TRIM28 and TP53 abundances in IVV and SCNT embryos are 
similar, but different from quantities in IVF embryos.

© 2014 The Authors. Molecular Reproduction and Development Published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4235398
PMID: 24659575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell. 2014 Apr 10;54(1):107-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.02.017. Epub 2014 
Mar 20.

Transcriptional repressor ZBTB1 promotes chromatin remodeling and translesion DNA
synthesis.

Kim H(1), Dejsuphong D(1), Adelmant G(2), Ceccaldi R(1), Yang K(1), Marto JA(2), 
D'Andrea AD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA. (2)Blais Proteomic Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02215, USA; Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic
address: alan_dandrea@dfci.harvard.edu.

Timely DNA replication across damaged DNA is critical for maintaining genomic
integrity. Translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) allows bypass of DNA lesions using
error-prone TLS polymerases. The E3 ligase RAD18 is necessary for proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) monoubiquitination and TLS polymerase recruitment;
however, the regulatory steps upstream of RAD18 activation are less understood.
Here, we show that the UBZ4 domain-containing transcriptional repressor ZBTB1 is 
a critical upstream regulator of TLS. The UBZ4 motif is required for PCNA
monoubiquitination and survival after UV damage. ZBTB1 associates with KAP-1, a
transcriptional repressor whose phosphorylation relaxes chromatin after DNA
damage. ZBTB1 depletion impairs formation of phospho-KAP-1 at UV damage sites and
reduces RAD18 recruitment. Furthermore, phosphorylation of KAP-1 is necessary for
efficient PCNA modification. We propose that ZBTB1 is required for localizing
phospho-KAP-1 to chromatin and enhancing RAD18 accessibility. Collectively, our
study implicates a ubiquitin-binding protein in orchestrating chromatin
remodeling during DNA repair.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3989074
PMID: 24657165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Jun 1;15(6):735-41. doi: 10.4161/cbt.28408. Epub 2014 Mar 
11.

High grade glioblastoma is associated with aberrant expression of ZFP57, a
protein involved in gene imprinting, and of CPT1A and CPT1C that regulate fatty
acid metabolism.

Cirillo A(1), Di Salle A(1), Petillo O(1), Melone MA(2), Grimaldi G(3), Bellotti 
A(4), Torelli G(5), De' Santi MS(6), Cantatore G(7), Marinelli A(8), Galderisi
U(9), Peluso G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Bioresources; CNR; Naples, Italy. (2)Institute of
Biomedicine and Bioresources; CNR; Naples, Italy; Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine; Second University of Naples; Naples, Italy. (3)Institute
of Genetics and Biophysics "Adriano Buzzati-Traverso"; CNR; Naples, Italy. (4)UOC
of Neurosurgery; AORN of Caserta; Caserta, Italy. (5)UOC of Neurosurgery; AO
"Rummo"; Benevento, Italy. (6)Neurosurgery Division; PO "Umberto I"; Nocera
Inferiore, Italy. (7)PO "Santa Maria di Loreto Mare"; Napoli, Italy; UO of
Neurosurgery; AOU "San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi di Aragona"; Salerno, Italy.
(8)Department of Endocrinology and Clinical and Molecular Oncology; University
"Federico II"; Naples, Italy. (9)Institute of Biomedicine and Bioresources; CNR; 
Naples, Italy; Department of Experimental Medicine; Second University of Naples; 
Naples, Italy.

The diagnosis of glioblastoma is still based on tumor histology, but emerging
molecular diagnosis is becoming an important part of glioblastoma classification.
Besides the well-known cell cycle-related circuitries that are associated with
glioblastoma onset and development, new insights may be derived by looking at
pathways involved in regulation of epigenetic phenomena and cellular metabolism, 
which may both be highly deregulated in cancer cells. We evaluated if in
glioblastoma patients the high grade of malignancy could be associated with
aberrant expression of some genes involved in regulation of epigenetic phenomena 
and lipid metabolism. We measured the mRNA levels of ZFP57, TRIM28, CPT1A, CPT1B,
and CPT1C in a cohort of 80 patients divided in two groups: grade II and grade
IV. We evidenced that high grade glioblastoma is associated with increased level 
of ZFP57, a protein involved in gene imprinting, and aberrant expression of CPT1A
and CPT1C, regulators of fatty acid oxidation. Our study may pave the way to
identify new markers that could be potentially useful for diagnosis and/or
prognosis of glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4049789
PMID: 24618825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087609. eCollection 
2014.

The B-subdomain of the Xenopus laevis XFIN KRAB-AB domain is responsible for its 
weaker transcriptional repressor activity compared to human ZNF10/Kox1.

Born N(1), Thiesen HJ(1), Lorenz P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Universitätsmedizin Rostock, University of Rostock,
Rostock, Germany.

The Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain interacts with the nuclear hub protein
TRIM28 to initiate or mediate chromatin-dependent processes like transcriptional 
repression, imprinting or suppression of endogenous retroviruses. The prototype
KRAB domain initially identified in ZNF10/KOX1 encompasses two subdomains A and B
that are found in hundreds of zinc finger transcription factors studied in human 
and murine genomes. Here we demonstrate for the first time transcriptional
repressor activity of an amphibian KRAB domain. After sequence correction, the
updated KRAB-AB domain of zinc finger protein XFIN from the frog Xenopus laevis
was found to confer transcriptional repression in reporter assays in Xenopus
laevis A6 kidney cells as well as in human HeLa, but not in the minnow Pimephales
promelas fish cell line EPC. Binding of the XFIN KRAB-AB domain to human TRIM28
was demonstrated in a classical co-immunoprecipitation approach and visualized in
a single-cell compartmentalization assay. XFIN-AB displayed reduced potency in
repression as well as lower strength of interaction with TRIM28 compared to ZNF10
KRAB-AB. KRAB-B subdomain swapping between the two KRAB domains indicated that it
was mainly the KRAB-B subdomain of XFIN that was responsible for its lower
capacity in repression and binding to human TRIM28. In EPC fish cells, ZNF10 and 
XFIN KRAB repressor activity could be partially restored to low levels by adding 
exogenous human TRIM28. In contrast to XFIN, we did not find any transcriptional 
repression activity for the KRAB-like domain of human PRDM9 in HeLa cells. PRDM9 
is thought to harbor an evolutionary older domain related to KRAB whose homologs 
even occur in invertebrates. Our results support the notion that functional bona 
fide KRAB domains which confer transcriptional repression and interact with
TRIM28 most likely co-evolved together with TRIM28 at the beginning of tetrapode 
evolution.

PMCID: PMC3912051
PMID: 24498343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Med Sci (Paris). 2014 Jan;30(1):12-5. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20143001003. Epub 2014 
Jan 24.

[A KRAB/KAP1-miRNA cascade regulates erythropoiesis through stage-specific
control of mitophagy].

[Article in French]

Barde I(1), Rauwel B(1), Marin-Florez RM(2), Corsinotti A(1), Laurenti E(3), Verp
S(1), Offner S(1), Marquis J(1), Kapopoulou A(1), Vanicek J(2), Trono D(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program   (2)School of Basic
Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Suisse.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program   - Adresse
actuelle : Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research, Ontario Cancer
Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network and
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

PMID: 24472449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3701-2. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-531673.

The TRIMming on an erythroid repressor complex.

Baron MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICAHN SCHOOL OF MEDICINE AT MOUNT SINAI.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3798-807.

PMCID: PMC3843231
PMID: 24288404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003750. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003750. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

A unique SUMO-2-interacting motif within LANA is essential for KSHV latency.

Cai Q(1), Cai S, Zhu C, Verma SC, Choi JY, Robertson ES.

Author information: 
(1)MOE & MOH Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, School of Basic
Medical Science, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China ; Department of Microbiology and Abramson Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, United States of America.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) stabilizes hypoxia-inducible
factor a (HIF-1a) during latent infection, and HIF-1a reactivates lytic
replication under hypoxic stress. However, the mechanism utilized by KSHV to
block lytic reactivation with the accumulation of HIF-1a in latency remains
unclear. Here, we report that LANA encoded by KSHV contains a unique
SUMO-interacting motif (LANA(SIM)) which is specific for interaction with SUMO-2 
and facilitates LANA SUMOylation at lysine 1140. Proteomic and
co-immunoprecipitation analysis further reveal that the SUMO-2 modified
transcription repressor KAP1 is a critical factor recruited by LANA(SIM).
Deletion of LANA(SIM) led to functional loss of both LANA-mediated viral episome 
maintenance and lytic gene silencing. Moreover, hypoxia reduced KAP1 SUMOylation 
and resulted in dissociation of both KAP1 and Sin3A repressors from
LANA(SIM)-associated complex. Therefore, the LANA(SIM) motif plays an essential
role in KSHV latency and is a potential drug target against KSHV-associated
cancers.

PMCID: PMC3836728
PMID: 24278015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(3):1825-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02578-13. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

EBP1, a novel host factor involved in primer binding site-dependent restriction
of moloney murine leukemia virus in embryonic cells.

Wang GZ(1), Wolf D, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Program in Cellular, Molecular and Biophysical Studies, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA.

Mouse embryonic cells are unable to support the replication of Moloney murine
leukemia virus (MLV). The integrated viral DNA is transcriptionally silenced,
largely due to binding of host transcriptional repressors to the primer binding
site (PBS) of the provirus. We have previously shown that a PBS DNA-binding
repressor complex contains ZFP809 and TRIM28. Here, we identified ErbB3-binding
protein 1 (EBP1) to be a novel component of the ZFP809-TRIM28 silencing complex
and show that EBP1 depletion reduces PBS-mediated retroviral silencing.

PMCID: PMC3911593
PMID: 24227866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Sep 15;23(18):2170-9. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0326. Epub 2013 
Dec 9.

Identification of Ccr4-not complex components as regulators of transition from
partial to genuine induced pluripotent stem cells.

Kamon M(1), Katano M, Hiraki-Kamon K, Hishida T, Nakachi Y, Mizuno Y, Okazaki Y, 
Suzuki A, Hirasaki M, Ueda A, Nishimoto M, Kato H, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical University , Yamane Hidaka, Saitama, Japan .

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by
defined factors. However, substantial cell numbers subjected to iPSC induction
stray from the main reprogramming route and are immortalized as partial iPSCs.
These partial iPSCs can become genuine iPSCs by exposure to the ground state
condition. However, such conversion is only possible for mouse partial iPSCs, and
it is not applicable to human cells. Moreover, the molecular basis of this
conversion is completely unknown. Therefore, we performed genome-wide screening
with a piggyBac vector to identify genes involved in conversion from partial to
genuine iPSCs. This screening led to identification of Cnot2, one of the core
components of the Ccr4-Not complex. Subsequent analyses revealed that other core 
components, Cnot1 and Cnot3, also contributed to the conversion. Thus, our data
have uncovered a novel role of core components of the Ccr4-Not complex as
regulators of transition from partial to genuine iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC4155419
PMID: 24200330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):381-7. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.150. Epub 2013 Oct
25.

The diversity of zinc-finger genes on human chromosome 19 provides an
evolutionary mechanism for defense against inherited endogenous retroviruses.

Lukic S(1), Nicolas JC(1), Levine AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Simons Center for Systems Biology, Institute for Advanced Study, Einstein
Drive, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are remnants of ancient retroviral infections of
the germ line that can remain capable of replication within the host genome. In
the soma, DNA methylation and repressive chromatin keep the majority of this
parasitic DNA transcriptionally silent. However, it is unclear how the host
organism adapts to recognize and silence novel invading retroviruses that enter
the germ line. Krueppel-Associated Box (KRAB)-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is a
transcriptional regulatory factor that drives the epigenetic repression of many
different loci in mammalian genomes. Here, we use published experimental data to 
provide evidence that human KAP1 is recruited to endogenous retroviral DNA by
KRAB-containing zinc-finger transcription factors (TFs). Many of these
zinc-finger genes exist in clusters associated with human chromosome 19. We
demonstrate that these clusters are located at hotspots for copy number variation
(CNV), generating a large and continuing diversity of zinc-finger TFs with new
generations. These zinc-finger genes possess a wide variety of DNA binding
affinities, but their role as transcriptional repressors is conserved. We also
perform a computational study of the different ERVs that invaded the human genome
during primate evolution. We find candidate zinc-finger repressors that arise in 
the genome for each ERV family that enters the genomes of primates. In
particular, we show that those repressors that gained their binding affinity to
retrovirus sequences at the same time as their targets invaded the human lineage 
are preferentially located on chromosome 19 (P-value: 3 × 10(-3)).

PMCID: PMC3921586
PMID: 24162661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Epigenetics. 2013 Dec;8(12):1268-79. doi: 10.4161/epi.26544. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Human and mouse ZFP57 proteins are functionally interchangeable in maintaining
genomic imprinting at multiple imprinted regions in mouse ES cells.

Takikawa S(1), Wang X(1), Ray C(1), Vakulenko M(1), Bell FT(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute; Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology; Department of Oncological Sciences; Graduate School of Biological
Sciences; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY USA.

Genomic imprinting is a common epigenetic phenomenon in mammals. Dysregulation of
genomic imprinting has been implicated in a variety of human diseases. ZFP57 is a
master regulator in genomic imprinting. Loss of ZFP57 causes loss of DNA
methylation imprint at multiple imprinted regions in mouse embryos, as well as in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Similarly, mutations in human ZFP57 result in
hypomethylation at many imprinted regions and are associated with transient
neonatal diabetes and other human diseases. Mouse and human Zfp57 genes are
located in the same syntenic block. However, mouse and human ZFP57 proteins only 
display about 50% sequence identity with different number of zinc fingers. It is 
not clear if they share similar mechanisms in maintaining genomic imprinting.
Here we report that mouse and human ZFP57 proteins are functionally
interchangeable. Expression of exogenous wild-type human ZFP57 could maintain DNA
methylation imprint at three imprinted regions in mouse ES cells in the absence
of endogenous mouse ZFP57. However, mutant human ZFP57 proteins containing the
mutations found in human patients could not substitute for endogenous mouse ZFP57
in maintaining genomic imprinting in ES cells. Like mouse ZFP57, human ZFP57 and 
its mutant proteins could bind to mouse KAP1, the universal cofactor for KRAB
zinc finger proteins, in mouse ES cells. Thus, we conclude that mouse and human
ZFP57 are orthologs despite relatively low sequence identity and mouse ES cell
system that we had established before is a valuable system for functional
analyses of wild-type and mutant human ZFP57 proteins.

PMCID: PMC3933488
PMID: 24135613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Reprod Biomed Online. 2013 Dec;27(6):629-36. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2013.06.004.
Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Maternal control of genomic imprint maintenance.

Denomme MM(1), Mann MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Western Ontario,
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Biochemistry, University of Western Ontario, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, London, Ontario, Canada; Children's Health Research Institute, London,
Ontario, Canada N6C 2V5.

Genomic imprinting is a specialized transcriptional phenomenon that employs
epigenetic mechanisms to facilitate parental-specific expression. Perturbations
in parental epigenetic asymmetry can lead to the development of imprinting
disorders, such as Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Angelman syndrome. DNA
methylation is one of the most widely studied epigenetic marks that characterizes
imprinted regions. During gametogenesis and early embryogenesis, imprinted
methylation undergoes a cycle of erasure, acquisition and maintenance. Gamete and
embryo manipulations for the purpose of assisted reproduction are performed
during these reprogramming events and may lead to their disruption. Recent
studies point to the role of maternal-effect proteins in imprinted gene
regulation. Studies are now required to increase understanding of how these
factors regulate genomic imprinting as well as how assisted reproduction
technologies may alter their function.

Copyright © 2013 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24125946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3798-807. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496166. Epub 2013
Oct 3.

TRIM28 is essential for erythroblast differentiation in the mouse.

Hosoya T(1), Clifford M, Losson R, Tanabe O, Engel JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Nov 28;122(23):3701-2.

In previous mass spectrometry and coimmune precipitation studies, we identified
tripartite motif-containing 28 (TRIM28; also known as transcriptional
intermediary factor1ß and Krüppel-associated box-associated protein-1) as a
cofactor that specifically copurified with an NR2C1/NR2C2 (TR2/TR4) orphan
nuclear receptor heterodimer that previous studies had implicated as an
embryonic/fetal ß-type globin gene repressor. TRIM28 has been characterized as a 
transcriptional corepressor that can associate with many different transcription 
factors and can play functional roles in multiple tissues and cell types. Here,
we tested the contribution of TRIM28 to globin gene regulation and erythropoiesis
using a conditional loss-of-function in vivo model. We discovered that Trim28
genetic loss in the adult mouse leads to defective immature erythropoiesis in the
bone marrow and consequently to anemia. We further found that TRIM28 controls
erythropoiesis in a cell-autonomous manner by inducibly deleting Trim28
exclusively in hematopoietic cells. Finally, in the absence of TRIM28, we
observed increased apoptosis as well as diminished expression of multiple
erythroid transcription factors and heme biosynthetic enzymes in immature
erythroid cells. Thus, TRIM28 is essential for the cell-autonomous development of
immature erythroblasts in the bone marrow.

PMCID: PMC3843238
PMID: 24092935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Science. 2013 Sep 6;341(6150):1110-2. doi: 10.1126/science.1240617.

Single-cell DNA-methylation analysis reveals epigenetic chimerism in
preimplantation embryos.

Lorthongpanich C(1), Cheow LF, Balu S, Quake SR, Knowles BB, Burkholder WF,
Solter D, Messerschmidt DM.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Group, Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Singapore.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2013 Nov;10(11):1060.

Epigenetic alterations are increasingly recognized as causes of human cancers and
disease. These aberrations are likely to arise during genomic reprogramming in
mammalian preimplantation embryos, when their epigenomes are most vulnerable.
However, this process is only partially understood because of the experimental
inaccessibility of early-stage embryos. Here, we introduce a methodologic
advance, probing single cells for various DNA-methylation errors at multiple
loci, to reveal failed maintenance of epigenetic mark results in chimeric mice,
which display unpredictable phenotypes leading to developmental arrest. Yet we
show that mouse pronuclear transfer can be used to ameliorate such reprogramming 
defects. This study not only details the epigenetic reprogramming dynamics in
early mammalian embryos but also suggests diagnostic and potential future
therapeutic applications.

PMID: 24009393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 22;8(8):e73033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073033. eCollection
2013.

Loss of ZBRK1 contributes to the increase of KAP1 and promotes KAP1-mediated
metastasis and invasion in cervical cancer.

Lin LF(1), Li CF, Wang WJ, Yang WM, Wang DD, Chang WC, Lee WH, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan
City, Taiwan, Republic of China.

ZBRK1, a zinc finger protein that interacts with breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) and
KRAB-ZFP-associated protein 1 (KAP1), has been suggested to serve as a tumor
suppressor via repression of tumor metastasis/invasion. To date, the detailed
molecular mechanisms for how BRCA1 and KAP1 participate in ZBRK1-mediated
transcriptional repression, metastasis and invasion as well as the associated
clinical relevance remain unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that both the
N- and C-terminal domains of ZBRK1 are important for inhibiting cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in cervical cancer. Specifically, 
the N-terminal KRAB domain of ZBRK1 displayed a more crucial role in inhibiting
metastasis and invasion through modulation of KAP1 function in a
transcriptionally dependent manner. The loss of ZBRK1 results in an increase of
KAP1 expression, which enhanced migration and invasion of cervical cancer cells
both the in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, an inverse correlation of expression
levels was observed between ZBRK1 and KAP1 following tumor progression from in
situ carcinoma to invasive/metastatic cervical cancer specimens. Taken together, 
the current results indicate that a loss of ZBRK1 contributes to the increased
expression of KAP1, potentiating its role to enhance metastasis and invasion.

PMCID: PMC3749996
PMID: 23991171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Nov;41(21):9719-31. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt729. Epub 2013
Aug 22.

Opposing roles for 53BP1 during homologous recombination.

Kakarougkas A(1), Ismail A, Klement K, Goodarzi AA, Conrad S, Freire R, Shibata
A, Lobrich M, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Double Strand Break Repair Laboratory, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 
9RQ, UK, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Southern Alberta
Cancer Research Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada,
Radiation Biology and DNA Repair Laboratory, Darmstadt University of Technology, 
64287 Darmstadt, Germany and Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario de
Canarias, Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Ofra s/n, 38320 La Laguna,
Tenerife, Spain.

Although DNA non-homologous end-joining repairs most DNA double-strand breaks
(DSBs) in G2 phase, late repairing DSBs undergo resection and repair by
homologous recombination (HR). Based on parallels to the situation in G1 cells,
previous work has suggested that DSBs that undergo repair by HR predominantly
localize to regions of heterochromatin (HC). By using H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 to
identify HC regions, we substantiate and extend previous evidence, suggesting
that HC-DSBs undergo repair by HR. Next, we examine roles for 53BP1 and BRCA1 in 
this process. Previous studies have shown that 53BP1 is pro-non-homologous
end-joining and anti-HR. Surprisingly, we demonstrate that in G2 phase, 53BP1 is 
required for HR at HC-DSBs with its role being to promote phosphorylated KAP-1
foci formation. BRCA1, in contrast, is dispensable for pKAP-1 foci formation but 
relieves the barrier caused by 53BP1. As 53BP1 is retained at irradiation-induced
foci during HR, we propose that BRCA1 promotes displacement but retention of
53BP1 to allow resection and any necessary HC modifications to complete HR. In
contrast to this role for 53BP1 in HR in G2 phase, we show that it is dispensable
for HR in S phase, where HC regions are likely relaxed during replication.

PMCID: PMC3834810
PMID: 23969417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1045-59. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.07.006. Epub 2013 
Jul 30.

Zfp819, a novel KRAB-zinc finger protein, interacts with KAP1 and functions in
genomic integrity maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Tan X(1), Xu X, Elkenani M, Smorag L, Zechner U, Nolte J, Engel W, Pantakani DV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Goettingen, Heinrich-Dueker-Weg 12,
37073 Goettingen, Germany.

Pluripotency is maintained by both known and unknown transcriptional regulatory
networks. In the present study, we have identified Zfp819, a KRAB-zinc finger
protein, as a novel pluripotency-related factor and characterized its role in
pluripotent stem cells. We show that Zfp819 is expressed highly in various types 
of pluripotent stem cells but not in their differentiated counterparts. We
identified the presence of non-canonical nuclear localization signals in
particular zinc finger motifs and identified them as responsible for the nuclear 
localization of Zfp819. Analysis of the Zfp819 promoter region revealed the
presence of a transcriptionally active chromatin signature. Moreover, we
confirmed the binding of pluripotency-related factors, Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog to
the distal promoter region of Zfp819, indicating that the expression of this gene
is regulated by a pluripotency transcription factor network. We found that the
expression of endogenous retroviral elements (ERVs) such as Intracisternal A
Particle (IAP) retrotransposons, Long Interspersed Nuclear Elements (LINE1), and 
Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements (SINE B1) is significantly upregulated in
Zfp819-knockdown (Zfp819_KD) cells. In line with the activation of ERVs, we
observed the occurrence of spontaneous DNA damage in Zfp819_KD cells.
Furthermore, we tested whether Zfp819 can interact with KAP1, a KRAB-associated
protein with a transcriptional repression function, and found the interaction
between these two proteins in both in vitro and in vivo experiments. The
challenging of Zfp819_KD cells with DNA damaging agent revealed that these cells 
are inefficient in repairing the damaged DNA, as cells showed presence of <U+03B3>H2A.X 
foci for a prolonged time. Collectively, our study identified Zfp819 as a novel
pluripotency-related factor and unveiled its function in genomic integrity
maintenance mechanisms of mouse embryonic stem cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 23954693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003667. Epub 2013 Aug 
1.

ATM release at resected double-strand breaks provides heterochromatin
reconstitution to facilitate homologous recombination.

Geuting V(1), Reul C, Löbrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Darmstadt University of Technology, Radiation Biology and DNA Repair,
Darmstadt, Germany.

Non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) represent the
two main pathways for repairing DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). During the G2
phase of the mammalian cell cycle, both processes can operate and chromatin
structure is one important factor which determines DSB repair pathway choice. ATM
facilitates the repair of heterochromatic DSBs by phosphorylating and
inactivating the heterochromatin building factor KAP-1, leading to local
chromatin relaxation. Here, we show that ATM accumulation and activity is
strongly diminished at DSBs undergoing end-resection during HR. Such DSBs remain 
unrepaired in cells devoid of the HR factors BRCA2, XRCC3 or RAD51. Strikingly,
depletion of KAP-1 or expression of phospho-mimic KAP-1 allows repair of resected
DSBs in the absence of BRCA2, XRCC3 or RAD51 by an erroneous PARP-dependent
alt-NHEJ process. We suggest that DSBs in heterochromatin elicit initial local
heterochromatin relaxation which is reversed during HR due to the release of ATM 
from resection break ends. The restored heterochromatic structure facilitates HR 
and prevents usage of error-prone alternative processes.

PMCID: PMC3731223
PMID: 23935532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Rep. 2013 Jul 11;4(1):50-8. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Jun
27.

Proviral silencing in embryonic cells is regulated by Yin Yang 1.

Schlesinger S(1), Lee AH, Wang GZ, Green L, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Embryonic cells transcriptionally repress the expression of endogenous and
exogenous retroelements. Trim28, a key player in this silencing, is known to act 
in a large DNA-bound complex, but the other components of the complex are not
fully characterized. Here, we show that the zinc finger protein Yin Yang 1 (YY1) 
is one such component. YY1 binds to the long terminal repeat (LTR) region of both
exogenous and endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Deletion of the YY1-binding site
from the retroviral genome leads to a major loss of silencing in embryonic cells 
and a coordinated loss of repressive histone marks from the proviral chromatin.
Depletion of YY1 protein results in marked upregulation of expression of
exogenous viruses and of selected ERVs. Finally, we report an embryonic
cell-specific interaction between YY1 and Trim28. Our results suggest a major
role for YY1 in the silencing of both exogenous retroviruses and ERVs in
embryonic cells.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3771693
PMID: 23810560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Virol. 2013 Aug;87(15):8779-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02976-12. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus kaposin B induces unique
monophosphorylation of STAT3 at serine 727 and MK2-mediated inactivation of the
STAT3 transcriptional repressor TRIM28.

King CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, New York, USA. kingch@upstate.edu

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is the etiologic agent of primary 
effusion lymphoma (PEL), multicentric Castleman's disease (MCD), and the
inflammation-driven neoplasm Kaposi's sarcoma (KS). A triad of processes,
including abnormal proliferation of endothelial cells, aberrant angiogenesis, and
chronic inflammation, characterize KS lesions. STAT3 is a key transcription
factor governing these processes, and deregulation of STAT3 activity is linked to
a wide range of cancers, including PEL and KS. Using primary human endothelial
cells (ECs), I demonstrate that KSHV infection modulated STAT3 activation in two 
ways: (i) KSHV induced uncoupling of canonical tyrosine (Y) and serine (S)
phosphorylation events while (ii) concomitantly inducing the phosphorylation and 
inactivation of TRIM28 (also known as KAP-1 or TIF-1ß), a newly identified
negative regulator of STAT3 activity. KSHV infection of primary ECs induced
chronic STAT3 activation characterized by a shift from the canonical dual P-STAT3
Y705 S727 form to a mono P-STAT3 S727 form. Expression of the latent protein
kaposin B promoted the unique phosphorylation of STAT3 at S727, in the absence of
Y705, activated the host kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein (MAPKAP) kinase 2 (MK2), and stimulated increased expression of
STAT3-dependent genes, including CCL5, in ECs. TRIM28-mediated repression of
STAT3 is relieved by phosphorylation of S473, and in vitro kinase assays
identified TRIM28 S473 as a bona fide target of MK2. Together, these data suggest
that kaposin B significantly contributes to the chronic inflammatory environment 
that is a hallmark of KS by unique activation of the proto-oncogene STAT3,
coupled with MK2-mediated inactivation of the STAT3 transcriptional repressor
TRIM28.

PMCID: PMC3719813
PMID: 23740979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Jun 4;6(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-15.

Distinct roles of KAP1, HP1 and G9a/GLP in silencing of the two-cell-specific
retrotransposon MERVL in mouse ES cells.

Maksakova IA(1), Thompson PJ, Goyal P, Jones SJ, Singh PB, Karimi MM, Lorincz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, 2350 Health Sciences 
Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3,
Canada. mlorincz@mail.ubc.ca.

BACKGROUND: In mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), transcriptional silencing of
numerous class I and II endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), including IAP, ETn and
MMERVK10C, is dependent upon the H3K9 methyltransferase (KMTase) SETDB1/ESET and 
its binding partner KAP1/TRIM28. In contrast, the H3K9 KMTases G9a and GLP and
HP1 proteins are dispensable for this process. Intriguingly, MERVL retroelements 
are actively transcribed exclusively in the two-cell (2C) embryo, but the
molecular basis of silencing of these class III ERVs at later developmental
stages has not been systematically addressed.
RESULTS: Here, we characterized the roles of these chromatin factors in MERVL
silencing in mESCs. While MMERVK10C and IAP ERVs are bound by SETDB1 and KAP1 and
are induced following their deletion, MERVL ERVs show relatively low levels of
SETDB1 and KAP1 binding and are upregulated exclusively following KAP1 depletion,
indicating that KAP1 influences MERVL expression independent of SETDB1. In
contrast to class I and class II ERVs, MERVL and MERVL LTR-driven genic
transcripts are also upregulated following depletion of G9a or GLP, and G9a binds
directly to these ERVs. Consistent with a direct role for H3K9me2 in MERVL
repression, these elements are highly enriched for G9a-dependent H3K9me2, and
catalytically active G9a is required for silencing of MERVL LTR-driven
transcripts. MERVL is also derepressed in HP1a and HP1ß KO ESCs. However, like
KAP1, HP1a and HP1ß are only modestly enriched at MERVL relative to IAP LTRs.
Intriguingly, as recently shown for KAP1, RYBP, LSD1 and G9a-deficient mESCs,
many genes normally expressed in the 2C embryo are also induced in HP1 KO mESCs, 
revealing that aberrant expression of a subset of 2C-specific genes is a common
feature in each of these KO lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that G9a and GLP, which are not required for
silencing of class I and II ERVs, are recruited to MERVL elements and play a
direct role in silencing of these class III ERVs, dependent upon G9a catalytic
activity. In contrast, induction of MERVL expression in KAP1, HP1a and HP1ß KO
ESCs may occur predominantly as a consequence of indirect effects, in association
with activation of a subset of 2C-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC3682905
PMID: 23735015  [PubMed]


86. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Oct;70(20):3947-58. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1359-4. Epub 
2013 May 12.

Novel activity of KRAB domain that functions to reinforce nuclear localization of
KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins by interacting with KAP1.

Wang W(1), Cai J, Wu Y, Hu L, Chen Z, Hu J, Chen Z, Li W, Guo M, Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, 430072, Hubei, People's Republic of China.

Previously, we found that two isoforms of the ZNF268 gene (ZNF268a and ZNF268b2, 
with and without the KRAB domain, respectively) might play distinct roles in
normal epithelia and in cervical cancer. Here we further investigated that KRAB
domain defined the function disparity in part by reinforcing nuclear localization
of ZNF268a. We found that the A-box of KRAB alone retained major specific nuclear
localization activity. In contrast, the B-box alone did not have nuclear
localization activity but enhanced it significantly. Consistent with the critical
function of the A-box, each mutation of six conserved residues (V9, V11, F13,
E16, E17 and W18) in the A-box dramatically impaired nuclear localization
activity. Furthermore, the unique nuclear localization activity of KRAB was
verified in seven additional KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs),
suggesting that it is a universal feature of KRAB-ZFPs. Finally, KRAB exerted its
unique nuclear localization activity by interacting with the RBCC domain of its
corepressor KAP1. Our results have revealed a novel mechanism by which the KRAB
domain reinforces nuclear localization of KRAB-ZFPs by interacting with KAP1. Our
study also suggests that loss of the KRAB domain in KRAB-ZFPs due to aberrant
alternative splicing might contribute to carcinogenesis.

PMID: 23665872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17871-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.437756. Epub
2013 May 4.

Phosphorylation of KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) at Tyr-449, Tyr-458, and
Tyr-517 by nuclear tyrosine kinases inhibits the association of KAP1 and
heterochromatin protein 1a (HP1a) with heterochromatin.

Kubota S(1), Fukumoto Y, Aoyama K, Ishibashi K, Yuki R, Morinaga T, Honda T,
Yamaguchi N, Kuga T, Tomonaga T, Yamaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Inohana 1-8-1, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Protein tyrosine phosphorylation regulates a wide range of cellular processes at 
the plasma membrane. Recently, we showed that nuclear tyrosine phosphorylation by
Src family kinases (SFKs) induces chromatin structural changes. In this study, we
identify KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1/TIF1ß/TRIM28), a component of
heterochromatin, as a nuclear tyrosine-phosphorylated protein. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of KAP1 is induced by several tyrosine kinases, such as Src, Lyn,
Abl, and Brk. Among SFKs, Src strongly induces tyrosine phosphorylation of KAP1. 
Nucleus-targeted Lyn potentiates tyrosine phosphorylation of KAP1 compared with
intact Lyn, but neither intact Fyn nor nucleus-targeted Fyn phosphorylates KAP1. 
Substitution of the three tyrosine residues Tyr-449/Tyr-458/Tyr-517, located
close to the HP1 binding-motif, into phenylalanine ablates tyrosine
phosphorylation of KAP1. Immunostaining and chromatin fractionation show that Src
and Lyn decrease the association of KAP1 with heterochromatin in a kinase
activity-dependent manner. KAP1 knockdown impairs the association of HP1a with
heterochromatin, because HP1a associates with KAP1 in heterochromatin.
Intriguingly, tyrosine phosphorylation of KAP1 decreases the association of HP1a 
with heterochromatin, which is inhibited by replacement of endogenous KAP1 with
its phenylalanine mutant (KAP1-Y449F/Y458F/Y517F, KAP1-3YF). In DNA damage,
KAP1-3YF repressed transcription of p21. These results suggest that
nucleus-localized tyrosine kinases, including SFKs, phosphorylate KAP1 at
Tyr-449/Tyr-458/Tyr-517 and inhibit the association of KAP1 and HP1a with
heterochromatin.

PMCID: PMC3682585
PMID: 23645696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Endocr Pathol. 2013 Jun;24(2):77-82. doi: 10.1007/s12022-013-9245-z.

Clinical utility of KAP-1 expression in thyroid lesions.

Martins MB(1), Marcello MA, Morari EC, Cunha LL, Soares FA, Vassallo J, Ward LS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences (FCM),
University of Campinas (Unicamp), 126, Tessalia Vieira de Camargo St., Barão
Geraldo, Campinas, 13083-970, São Paulo, Brazil.

Although there are evidences of the involvement of KAP-1 in other tumors, data on
differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTC) are still lacking. We aimed to evaluate
KAP-1 clinical utility in the diagnosis and prognosis of DTC. We used both visual
immunohistochemistry and a semiquantitative analysis to evaluate KAP-1 expression
in 230 thyroid carcinomas and 131 noncancerous thyroid nodules. There were 43
follicular carcinomas (FC) and 187 papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC), including 
130 classic (CPTC), 4 tall cells (TCPTC), and 53 follicular variants (FVPTC).
Patients were followed up for 53.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>41 months. They were classified as
free-of-disease (142 cases) or poor outcome (25 cases--10 deaths), according to
their serum Tg levels and image evidences. KAP-1 was identified in 78 % PTC, 75 %
TCPTC, 74 % FC, 72 % FVPTC, 55 % FA, 44 % hyperplasia, and 11 % normal thyroid
tissues. A ROC analysis identified malignant nodules with 69 % sensitivity and 75
% specificity, using a cutoff of 73.19. In addition to distinguishing benign from
malignant thyroid tissues (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), KAP-1 expression differentiated CPTC from
nodular hyperplasia (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001), CPTC from FA (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0028), FVPTC from
hyperplasia (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0039), and FC from hyperplasia (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0025). Furthermore,
KAP-1 was more expressed in larger tumors (>4 cm; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0038) and in individuals 
who presented recurrences/metastases (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0130). We suggest that KAP-1 may help
diagnose thyroid nodules, characterize follicular-patterned thyroid lesions, and 
identify individuals with poor prognosis.

PMID: 23645532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Proteomics. 2013 Sep 2;90:38-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2013.03.015. Epub 2013
Apr 18.

iTRAQ proteome analysis reflects a progressed differentiation state of epiblast
derived versus inner cell mass derived murine embryonic stem cells.

Fröhlich T(1), Kösters M, Graf A, Wolf E, Kobolak J, Brochard V, Dinnyés A,
Jouneau A, Arnold GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA, Gene Center,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) and mouse epiblast stem cells (mEpiSC) share
similar pluripotency factors like NANOG or POU5F1, however, their state of
pluripotency differs significantly. mESC and mEpiSC can be derived from embryos
generated by fertilization (FT) or by somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT). In this
study we performed a 4-plex iTRAQ LC-MS/MS based approach, facilitating the
multiplexed comparison of the four indicated types of stem cells. From four
replicates of each cell type, 1650 proteins were quantified. 234 non redundant
proteins with significant abundance alterations between FT/NT-mESC and
FT/NT-mEpiSC, and 44 between FT and NT derived cells were detected. Bioinformatic
analysis revealed that several pluripotency associated proteins, among them
POU5F1, DNMT3L, TIF1B, and proteins involved in DNA repair like MSH2 and MSH6,
are more abundant in mESC compared to mEpiSC. The abundance level of these
proteins is not affected by the mode of embryo generation, whereas several
cytoskeleton proteins show a higher abundance in NT-mESC compared to FT-mESC. In 
addition, a number of cytoskeletal proteins are enriched in mEpiSC, e.g.,
myosins, filamins and intermediate filament proteins, reflecting the progressed
differentiation state of epiblast derived versus inner cell mass derived murine
pluripotent stem cells.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This study aims to get new
insights in the pluripotency state of stem cells and to deepen the knowledge of
early cell differentiation. In an iTRAQ MS approach, we quantitatively compared
proteomes of inner cell mass derived stem cells (mESC) with epiblast derived stem
cells (mEpiSC). These stem cell types are derived from embryos of different
developmental stages, and therefore vary considerably in their state of
pluripotency and reflect different stages of early differentiation. The proteins 
which show significant abundance differences between the two stem cell lines
represent (i) promising targets to further decipher molecular processes during
early embryo development and (ii) useful molecular markers to monitor early
differentiation events of stem cells by targeted approaches.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23603003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):6841-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1217692110. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Acetylated hsp70 and KAP1-mediated Vps34 SUMOylation is required for
autophagosome creation in autophagy.

Yang Y(1), Fiskus W, Yong B, Atadja P, Takahashi Y, Pandita TK, Wang HG, Bhalla
KN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China.

Autophagy is a stress-induced catabolic process in which cytoplasmic components, 
sequestered in double-membrane autophagic vesicles (AVs) or autophagosomes, are
delivered to lysosomes for degradation and recycling [Kroemer G, Mariño G, Levine
B (2010) Mol Cell 40(2):280-293]. Activity of the class III
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH-kinase (PI3K) vacuolar protein-sorting (Vps) 34, bound 
to coiled-coil moesin-like B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2)-interacting protein
Beclin-1, is required for phosphoinositide generation, essential for AV formation
in autophagy [Cuervo AM (2010) Nat Cell Biol 12(8):735-737]. However, how
autophagy-inducing stress regulates Vps34 activity has not been fully elucidated.
Our findings demonstrate that autophagy-inducing stress increases intracellular
levels of acetylated inducible heat shock protein (hsp) 70, which binds to the
Beclin-1-Vps34 complex. Acetylated hsp70 also recruits E3 ligase for SUMOylation,
KRAB-ZFP-associated protein 1 (KAP1), inducing Lys840 SUMOylation and increasing 
Vps34 activity bound to Beclin 1. Knockdown of hsp70 abolished the Beclin-1-Vps34
complex formation, as well as inhibited KAP1 binding to Vps34 and AV formation.
Notably, autophagy-inducing stress due to histone deacetylase inhibitor treatment
induced AV formation in the wild-type but not hsp70.1/3 knockout mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts MEFs. These findings highlight a regulatory mechanism of Vps34
activity, which involves acetylated hsp70 and KAP1-dependent SUMOylation of Vps34
bound to Beclin 1.

PMCID: PMC3637746
PMID: 23569248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Endocrinol Invest. 2013 Oct;36(9):699-706. doi: 10.3275/8927. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

The transcription intermediary factor 1ß coactivates the androgen receptor.

Van Tilborgh N(1), Spans L, Helsen C, Clinckemalie L, Dubois V, Lerut E, Boonen
S, Vanderschueren D, Claessens F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor. Its
transcription activation domain consists of the two transcription activation
units called Tau-1 and Tau- 5. Tau-5 interacts with p160 coactivators like the
transcription intermediary factor 2 (TIF2), which in their turn recruit histone
modifiers and chromatin-remodelling complexes. The mechanism of action of Tau-1, 
however, remains elusive. Here, we demonstrate that transcription intermediary
factor 1ß (TIF1ß) can induce the activity of the AR up to five fold when tested
in vitro. Although there is no evidence for direct interactions between TIF1ß and
AR, mutation studies show that the activity of TIF1ß depends on the integrity of 
Tau-1 in AR on the one hand, and the so-called tripartite motif domain in TIF1ß
on the other. Surprisingly, the coactivation by TIF1ß via Tau-1 seems additive
rather than cooperative with the AR coactivation by TIF2. Some mutations
naturally occurring in androgen-insensitivity syndrome patients that reside in
Tau-1 seem to impair the TIF1ß coactivation of the AR, indicating that TIF1ß
could also be relevant for the in vivo androgen response in humans. Moreover,
since TIF1ß is well expressed in prostate cancer cells, its functional
interaction with androgen signalling could in the long run be a therapeutic
target for this disease.

PMID: 23563173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. World J Surg Oncol. 2013 Apr 2;11:81. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-11-81.

Clinical utility of measuring expression levels of KAP1, TIMP1 and STC2 in
peripheral blood of patients with gastric cancer.

Wang YY(1), Li L, Zhao ZS, Wang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, 158 shangtang 
road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310014, PR China.

BACKGROUND: We examined preoperative kinesin II-associated protein (KAP1), TIMP
metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (TIMP1) and stanniocalcin 2 (STC2) expression levels
in patients with gastric cancers to assess their clinical application for
diagnosing and monitoring diseases.
METHODS: Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was used to
detect the expression levels of KAP1, TIMP1, STC2, talin 2 (TLN2),
sushi-repeat-containing protein, X-linked 2 (SRPX2) and secreted protein, acidic,
cysteine-rich (SPARC) in the patients' peripheral blood karyocytes. The data were
analyzed with receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves.
RESULTS: A total of 112 patients with gastric cancer, 42 patients with recurrence
and 107 healthy volunteers were recruited. There were significant correlations
between KAP1, TIMP1 and STC2 levels, and TNM tumor stages and distant metastases.
The area under the ROC curves (AUC) of KAP1 was 0.803 ± 0.040 (P = 0.0001), the
AUC of TIMP1 was 0.767 ± 0.043 (P = 0.0001) and the AUC of STC2 was 0.769 ± 0.045
(P = 0.0001), thus differentiating preoperative gastric cancer patients from
healthy volunteers by ROC curve analysis. The AUC of STC2 was 0.739 ± 0.070 (P = 
0.004) and the AUC of KAP1 was 0.418 ± 0.088 (P = 0.319), thus differentiating
recurrence of gastric cancer from healthy volunteers by ROC curve analysis. High 
TIMP1 and STC2 expression levels were suspected to be poor prognostic factors of 
disease recurrence in patients with gastric cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: KAP1, TIMP1 and STC2 expression levels may be potential biomarkers
for the screening, diagnosis, prognosis and surveillance of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3620905
PMID: 23548070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4470-3. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203561. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Cutting Edge: a novel, human-specific interacting protein couples FOXP3 to a
chromatin-remodeling complex that contains KAP1/TRIM28.

Huang C(1), Martin S, Pfleger C, Du J, Buckner JH, Bluestone JA, Riley JL,
Ziegler SF.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Program, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98101,
USA.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a pivotal role in the maintenance of
immunological self-tolerance. Deficiency or dysfunction of Tregs leads to severe 
autoimmune diseases. Although the forkhead/winged-helix family member FOXP3 is
critical for Treg differentiation and function, the molecular basis for FOXP3
function remains unclear. In this study, we identified and characterized a
human-specific FOXP3-interacting protein, referred to as FIK (FOXP3-interacting
KRAB domain-containing protein). FIK is highly expressed in Tregs and acts as a
bridging molecule to link FOXP3 with the chromatin-remodeling scaffold protein
KAP1 (TIF-1ß/TRIM28). Disruption of the FOXP3-FIK-KAP1 complex in Tregs restored 
expression of FOXP3-target genes and abrogated the suppressor activity of the
Tregs. These data demonstrate a critical role for FIK in regulating FOXP3
activity and Treg function.

PMCID: PMC4197931
PMID: 23543754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Science. 2013 Apr 19;340(6130):350-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1232398. Epub 2013 Mar
14.

A KRAB/KAP1-miRNA cascade regulates erythropoiesis through stage-specific control
of mitophagy.

Barde I(1), Rauwel B, Marin-Florez RM, Corsinotti A, Laurenti E, Verp S, Offner
S, Marquis J, Kapopoulou A, Vanicek J, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

During hematopoiesis, lineage- and stage-specific transcription factors work in
concert with chromatin modifiers to direct the differentiation of all blood
cells. We explored the role of KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs)
and their cofactor KAP1 in this process. In mice, hematopoietic-restricted
deletion of Kap1 resulted in severe hypoproliferative anemia. Kap1-deleted
erythroblasts failed to induce mitophagy-associated genes and retained
mitochondria. This was due to persistent expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
targeting mitophagy transcripts, itself secondary to a lack of repression by
stage-specific KRAB-ZFPs. The KRAB/KAP1-miRNA regulatory cascade is
evolutionarily conserved, as it also controls mitophagy during human
erythropoiesis. Thus, a multilayered transcription regulatory system is present, 
in which protein- and RNA-based repressors are superimposed in combinatorial
fashion to govern the timely triggering of an important differentiation event.

PMCID: PMC3678075
PMID: 23493425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58326. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058326. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Whole-genome thermodynamic analysis reduces siRNA off-target effects.

Chen X(1), Liu P, Chou HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State University,
Ames, Iowa, USA.

Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are important tools for knocking down targeted
genes, and have been widely applied to biological and biomedical research. To
design siRNAs, two important aspects must be considered: the potency in knocking 
down target genes and the off-target effect on any nontarget genes. Although many
studies have produced useful tools to design potent siRNAs, off-target prevention
has mostly been delegated to sequence-level alignment tools such as BLAST. We
hypothesize that whole-genome thermodynamic analysis can identify potential
off-targets with higher precision and help us avoid siRNAs that may have strong
off-target effects. To validate this hypothesis, two siRNA sets were designed to 
target three human genes IDH1, ITPR2 and TRIM28. They were selected from the
output of two popular siRNA design tools, siDirect and siDesign. Both siRNA
design tools have incorporated sequence-level screening to avoid off-targets,
thus their output is believed to be optimal. However, one of the sets we tested
has off-target genes predicted by Picky, a whole-genome thermodynamic analysis
tool. Picky can identify off-target genes that may hybridize to a siRNA within a 
user-specified melting temperature range. Our experiments validated that some
off-target genes predicted by Picky can indeed be inhibited by siRNAs. Similar
experiments were performed using commercially available siRNAs and a few
off-target genes were also found to be inhibited as predicted by Picky. In
summary, we demonstrate that whole-genome thermodynamic analysis can identify
off-target genes that are missed in sequence-level screening. Because Picky
prediction is deterministic according to thermodynamics, if a siRNA candidate has
no Picky predicted off-targets, it is unlikely to cause off-target effects.
Therefore, we recommend including Picky as an additional screening step in siRNA 
design.

PMCID: PMC3590146
PMID: 23484018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jun;28(6):967-74. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12157.

Relationship between epithelial and stromal TRIM28 expression predicts survival
in colorectal cancer patients.

Fitzgerald S(1), Sheehan KM, O'Grady A, Kenny D, O'Kennedy R, Kay EW, Kijanka GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Diagnostics Institute, Dublin City University, Ireland.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: TRIM28 is a multi-domain nuclear protein with pleotropic
effects in both normal and tumor cells. In this study, TRIM28 expression in
epithelial and stromal tumor microenvironment and its prognostic role in
colorectal cancer were investigated.
METHODS: Immunohistological staining of TRIM28 was evaluated in tissue
microarrays constructed from 137 colorectal cancer patients. The correlations of 
TRIM28 expression with clinicopathological features and p53 expression were
studied. Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazard modeling were used to 
assess overall survival (OS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS).
RESULTS: Strong epithelial TRIM28 expression was found in 42% of colorectal
cancer tissues. TRIM28 expression correlated significantly with p53 expression in
matched cases (P=0.0168, Spearman rank test). A high epithelial to stromal TRIM28
expression ratio was associated with shorter OS (P=0.033; log-rank test) and RFS 
(P=0.043; log-rank test). Multivariate analysis showed that the epithelial to
stromal TRIM28 expression ratio was an independent predictor of OS (hazard
ratio=2.136; 95% confidence interval 1.015-4.498, P=0.046) and RFS (hazard
ratio=2.100; confidence interval 1.052-4.191, P=0.035).
CONCLUSION: A high TRIM28 expression ratio between stromal and epithelial
compartments in colorectal cancer tissue is an independent predictor of poor
prognosis. The pathophysiological role of TRIM28 in carcinogenesis may be
dependent on expression levels and cell type within the tumor microenvironment.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23425061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jan 31;4:e478. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.211.

Resistance to DNA-damaging treatment in non-small cell lung cancer
tumor-initiating cells involves reduced DNA-PK/ATM activation and diminished cell
cycle arrest.

Lundholm L(1), Hååg P, Zong D, Juntti T, Mörk B, Lewensohn R, Viktorsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Biomics Center, Karolinska
Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Increasing evidence suggests that tumor-initiating cells (TICs), also called
cancer stem cells, are partly responsible for resistance to DNA-damaging
treatment. Here we addressed if such a phenotype may contribute to radio- and
cisplatin resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We showed that four
out of eight NSCLC cell lines (H125, A549, H1299 and H23) possess sphere-forming 
capacity when cultured in stem cell media and three of these display elevated
levels of CD133. Indeed, sphere-forming NSCLC cells, hereafter called TICs,
showed a reduced apoptotic response and increased survival after irradiation
(IR), as compared with the corresponding bulk cell population. Decreased
cytotoxicity and apoptotic signaling manifested by diminished poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) cleavage and caspase 3 activity was also evident in TICs after 
cisplatin treatment. Neither radiation nor cisplatin resistance was due to
quiescence as H125 TICs proliferated at a rate comparable to bulk cells. However,
TICs displayed less pronounced G2 cell cycle arrest and S/G2-phase block after IR
and cisplatin, respectively. Additionally, we confirmed a cisplatin-refractory
phenotype of H125 TICs in vivo in a mouse xenograft model. We further examined
TICs for altered expression or activation of DNA damage repair proteins as a way 
to explain their increased radio- and/or chemotherapy resistance. Indeed, we
found that TICs exhibited increased basal <U+03B3>H2AX (H2A histone family, member X)
expression and diminished DNA damage-induced phosphorylation of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK), ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM), Krüppel-associated 
protein 1 (KAP1) and monoubiquitination of Fanconi anemia, complementation group 
D2 (FANCD2). As a proof of principle, ATM inhibition in bulk cells increased
their cisplatin resistance, as demonstrated by reduced PARP cleavage. In
conclusion, we show that reduced apoptotic response, altered DNA repair signaling
and cell cycle perturbations in NSCLC TICs are possible factors contributing to
their therapy resistance, which may be exploited for DNA damage-sensitizing
purposes.

PMCID: PMC3563998
PMID: 23370278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2013 Feb 1;140(3):519-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.087585.

De novo DNA methylation of endogenous retroviruses is shaped by KRAB-ZFPs/KAP1
and ESET.

Rowe HM(1), Friedli M, Offner S, Verp S, Mesnard D, Marquis J, Aktas T, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) undergo de novo DNA methylation during the first
few days of mammalian embryogenesis, although the factors that control the
targeting of this process are largely unknown. We asked whether KAP1
(KRAB-associated protein 1) is involved in this mechanism because of its
previously defined role in maintaining the silencing of ERVs through the histone 
methyltransferase ESET and histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation. Here, we
demonstrate that introduced ERV sequences are sufficient to direct rapid de novo 
methylation of a flanked promoter in embryonic stem (ES) cells. This mechanism
requires the presence of an ERV sequence-recognizing KRAB zinc-finger protein
(ZFP) and both KAP1 and ESET. Furthermore, this process can also take place on a 
strong cellular promoter and leads to methylation signatures that are
subsequently maintained in vivo throughout embryogenesis. Finally, we show that
methylation of ERVs residing in the genome is affected by knockout of KAP1 in
early embryos. KRAB-ZFPs, KAP1 and ESET are thus likely to be responsible for the
early embryonic instatement of stable epigenetic marks at ERV-containing loci.

PMID: 23293284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Proteomics. 2013 Mar 27;80:132-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.12.014. Epub 2013 
Jan 2.

Identification of KAP-1-associated complexes negatively regulating the Ey and
ß-major globin genes in the ß-globin locus.

Yang D(1), Ma Z(2), Lin W(1), Yang J(1), Tian C(1), Wei H(1), Jiang Y(3), He
F(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, PR China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of 
Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, PR China; College of Life Science and
Bio-engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100022, PR China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, PR China. Electronic address:
jiangying304@hotmail.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome
Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, PR
China; Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Chemistry, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, PR China. Electronic address: hefc@nic.bmi.ac.cn.

Deregulations of erythroid differentiation may lead to erythroleukemia and other 
hemoglobinopathies, yet the molecular mechanisms underlying these events are not 
fully understood. Here, we found that KAP-1-associated complexes contribute to
the regulation of the ß-globin locus, the key events of erythroid
differentiation. We show that RNAi-mediated knockdown of KAP-1 in mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells increases expression of the Ey and ß-major globin
genes during hexamethylenebisacetamide (HMBA) induced differentiation process.
This indicates that at least part of KAP-1-associated complexes negatively
regulates ß-globin gene expression during definitive erythroid differentiation.
ChIP-PCR analysis revealed that one or more KAP-1-associated complexes are
targeted to the promoter region of the Ey and beta-major globin genes. Since
KAP-1 is only a scaffold molecule, there must be some transcriptional regulators 
allowing its targeted recruitment to the ß-globin locus. To further discover
these novel regulators, proteins interacting with KAP-1 were isolated by
endogenous immunoprecipitation and identified by LC-ESI-MS/MS. Among the proteins
identified, MafK and Zfp445 were studied further. We found that KAP-1 may
contribute to the repression of Ey and ß-major globin gene transcription through 
recruitment to the promoters of these two genes, mediated by the interaction of
KAP-1 with either Zfp445 or MafK, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23291531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genome Res. 2013 Mar;23(3):452-61. doi: 10.1101/gr.147678.112. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

TRIM28 repression of retrotransposon-based enhancers is necessary to preserve
transcriptional dynamics in embryonic stem cells.

Rowe HM(1), Kapopoulou A, Corsinotti A, Fasching L, Macfarlan TS, Tarabay Y,
Viville S, Jakobsson J, Pfaff SL, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

TRIM28 is critical for the silencing of endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here, we reveal that an essential impact of this
process is the protection of cellular gene expression in early embryos from
perturbation by cis-acting activators contained within these retroelements. In
TRIM28-depleted ES cells, repressive chromatin marks at ERVs are replaced by
histone modifications typical of active enhancers, stimulating transcription of
nearby cellular genes, notably those harboring bivalent promoters.
Correspondingly, ERV-derived sequences can repress or enhance expression from an 
adjacent promoter in transgenic embryos depending on their TRIM28 sensitivity in 
ES cells. TRIM28-mediated control of ERVs is therefore crucial not just to
prevent retrotransposition, but more broadly to safeguard the transcriptional
dynamics of early embryos.

PMCID: PMC3589534
PMID: 23233547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Aging Cell. 2013 Apr;12(2):316-8. doi: 10.1111/acel.12035. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Defective ATM-Kap-1-mediated chromatin remodeling impairs DNA repair and
accelerates senescence in progeria mouse model.

Liu B(1), Wang Z, Ghosh S, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Hong Kong.

ATM-mediated phosphorylation of KAP-1 triggers chromatin remodeling and
facilitates the loading and retention of repair proteins at DNA lesions. Mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Zmpste24(-/-) mice undergo early
senescence, attributable to delayed recruitment of DNA repair proteins. Here, we 
show that ATM-Kap-1 signaling is compromised in Zmpste24(-/-) MEFs, leading to
defective DNA damage-induced chromatin remodeling. Knocking down Kap-1 rescues
impaired chromatin remodeling, defective DNA repair and early senescence in
Zmpste24(-/-) MEFs. Thus, ATM-Kap-1-mediated chromatin remodeling plays a
critical role in premature aging, carrying significant implications for progeria 
therapy.

© 2012 The Authors Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 23173799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 4;109(49):20083-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1214704109. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

TRIM28 mediates chromatin modifications at the TCRa enhancer and regulates the
development of T and natural killer T cells.

Zhou XF(1), Yu J, Chang M, Zhang M, Zhou D, Cammas F, Sun SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

T-cell receptor-a (TCRa) rearrangement in CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive immature
thymocytes is a prerequisite for production of aß T cells and invariant natural
killer T cells. This developmental event is regulated by the TCRa enhancer (Ea), 
which induces chromatin modification and recruitment of the
recombination-activating proteins Rag1 and Rag2. However, the molecular mechanism
underlying the activation and long-range action of Ea remains incompletely
understood. We show here that the chromatin-modifying factor TRIM28 is highly
expressed in double-positive thymocytes and persistently phosphorylated at serine
473. TRIM28 binds to Ea and induces histone 3 lysine 4 trimethylation in the Ea
and distant regions of the TCRa locus, coupled with recruitment of Rag proteins. 
T-cell-conditional ablation of TRIM28 impaired TCRa gene rearrangement and
compromised the development of aß T cells and invariant natural killer T cells.
These findings establish TRIM28 as a unique regulator of thymocyte development
and highlight an epigenetic mechanism involving TRIM28-mediated active chromatin 
modification in the TCRa locus.

PMCID: PMC3523851
PMID: 23169648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Mar;133(3):759-67. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.355. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

MAGE-C2 promotes growth and tumorigenicity of melanoma cells, phosphorylation of 
KAP1, and DNA damage repair.

Bhatia N(1), Xiao TZ, Rosenthal KA, Siddiqui IA, Thiyagarajan S, Smart B, Meng Q,
Zuleger CL, Mukhtar H, Kenney SC, Albertini MR, Jack Longley B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Carbone Cancer Center,
Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA. bneehar@medicine.wisc.edu

Melanoma-associated antigen-encoding (MAGE) genes are expressed in melanoma and
other cancers but not in normal somatic cells. MAGE expression is associated with
aggressive tumor growth, poor clinical outcome, and resistance to chemotherapy,
but the mechanisms have not been completely elucidated. In this study, we show
that downregulation of MAGE-C2 in A375 melanoma cells and low-passage cultures
from human metastatic melanomas (MRA cells) results in increased apoptosis and
decreased growth of tumor xenografts in athymic nude mice. Previously, we showed 
that MAGE-C2 binds KAP1, a scaffolding protein that regulates DNA repair.
Phosphorylation of KAP1-Serine 824 (Ser824) by ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated
(ATM) kinase is necessary for repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs); now we
show that MAGE-C2 knockdown reduces, whereas MAGE-C2 overexpression increases,
ATM kinase-dependent phosphorylation of KAP1-Ser824. We demonstrate that MAGE-C2 
increases co-precipitation of KAP1 with ATM and that binding of MAGE-C2 to KAP1
is necessary for increased KAP1-Ser824 phosphorylation. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of MAGE-C2 enhances repair of I-SceI endonuclease-induced DSBs in
U-2OS cells. As phosphorylation of KAP1-Ser824 facilitates relaxation of
heterochromatin, which is necessary for DNA repair and cellular proliferation,
our results suggest that MAGE-C2 can promote tumor growth by phosphorylation of
KAP1-Ser824 and by enhancement of DNA damage repair.

PMCID: PMC3570725
PMID: 23096706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Front Genet. 2012 Oct 15;3:214. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00214. eCollection 2012.

More than insulator: multiple roles of CTCF at the H19-Igf2 imprinted domain.

Singh P(1), Lee DH, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute
Duarte, CA, USA.

CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor)-mediated insulation at the H19-Insulin-like growth
factor 2 (Igf2) imprinted domain is a classic example for imprinted gene
regulation. DNA methylation difference in the imprinting control region (ICR) is 
inherited from the gametes and subsequently determines parental allele-specific
enhancer blocking and imprinted expression in the soma. Recent genetic studies
showed that proper monoallelic enhancer blocking at the H19-Igf2 ICR is critical 
for development. Strict biallelic insulation at this locus causes perinatal
lethality, whereas leaky biallelic insulation results in smaller size but no
lethality. Apart from enhancer blocking, CTCF is also the master organizer of
chromatin composition in the maternal allele along this imprinted domain,
affecting not only histone tail covalent modifications but also those in the
histone core. Additionally, CTCF binding in the soma protects the maternal allele
from de novo DNA methylation. CTCF binding is not involved in the establishment
of the gametic marks at the ICR, but it slightly delays de novo methylation in
the maternally inherited ICR allele in prospermatogonia. This review focuses on
the developmental and epigenetic consequences of CTCF binding at the H19-Igf2
ICR.

PMCID: PMC3471092
PMID: 23087708  [PubMed]


105. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40106-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.380865. Epub
2012 Oct 11.

Tripartite motif containing 28 (Trim28) can regulate cell proliferation by
bridging HDAC1/E2F interactions.

Chen L(1), Chen DT, Kurtyka C, Rawal B, Fulp WJ, Haura EB, Cress WD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Trim28 appears up-regulated in many cancers.
RESULTS: In early stage lung tumors high Trim28 correlates with increased overall
survival and Trim28 reduces cell proliferation in model lung cancer cell lines
through E2F interactions.
CONCLUSION: Trim28 may have a tumor suppressing role in the early stages of lung 
cancer.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest a complex role for Trim28 in lung cancer.
Trim28 is a poorly understood transcriptional co-factor with pleiotropic
biological activities. Although Trim28 mRNA is found in many studies to be
up-regulated in both lung and breast cancer tissues relative to normal adjacent
tissue, we found that within a panel of early-stage lung adenocarcinomas high
levels of Trim28 protein correlate with better overall survival. This surprising 
observation suggests that Trim 28 may have anti-proliferative activity within
tumors. To test this hypothesis, we used shRNAi to generate Trim28-knockdown
breast and lung cancer cell lines and found that Trim28 depletion led to
increased cell proliferation. Likewise, overexpression of Trim28 led to decreased
cell proliferation. Confocal microscopy indicated co-localization of E2F3 and
E2F4 with Trim28 within the cell nucleus, and co-immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that Trim28 can bind both E2F3 and E2F4. Trim28 overexpression
inhibited the transcriptional activity of E2F3 and E2F4, whereas Trim28
deficiency enhanced their activity. Co-immunoprecipitations further indicated
that Trim28 bridges an interaction between E2Fs 3 and 4 and HDAC1.
Promoter-reporter assays demonstrated that the ability of HDAC1 to repress E2F3
and E2F4-driven transcription is dependent on Trim28. Trim28 depletion increased 
E2F3 and E2F4 DNA binding activity, as measured by chromatin-immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) assays while simultaneously reducing HDAC1 binding. Finally, ChIP-ReChIP
experiments demonstrated that Trim/E2F complexes exist on several E2F-regulated
promoters. Taken together, these results suggest that Trim28 has
anti-proliferative activity in lung cancers via repression of members of the E2F 
family that are critical for cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3504725
PMID: 23060449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Rep. 2012 Oct 25;2(4):766-73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.043. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

The KRAB-ZFP/KAP1 system contributes to the early embryonic establishment of
site-specific DNA methylation patterns maintained during development.

Quenneville S(1), Turelli P, Bojkowska K, Raclot C, Offner S, Kapopoulou A, Trono
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

De novo DNA methylation is an essential aspect of the epigenetic reprogramming
that takes place during early development, yet factors responsible for its
instatement at particular genomic loci are poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate
that the KRAB-ZFP-mediated recruitment of KAP1 to DNA in embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) induces cytosine methylation. This process is preceded by H3K9
trimethylation, and genome-wide analyses reveal that it spreads over short
distances from KAP1-binding sites so as to involve nearby CpG islands. In sharp
contrast, in differentiated cells, KRAB/KAP1-induced heterochromatin formation
does not lead to DNA methylation. Correspondingly, the methylation status of CpG 
islands in the adult mouse liver correlates with their proximity to KAP1-binding 
sites in ESCs, not in hepatocytes. Therefore, KRAB-ZFPs and their cofactor KAP1
are in part responsible for the establishment during early embryogenesis of
site-specific DNA methylation patterns that are maintained through development.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3677399
PMID: 23041315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Dec;40(22):11363-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks868. Epub 2012
Oct 2.

SPOC1 modulates DNA repair by regulating key determinants of chromatin compaction
and DNA damage response.

Mund A(1), Schubert T, Staege H, Kinkley S, Reumann K, Kriegs M, Fritsch L,
Battisti V, Ait-Si-Ali S, Hoffbeck AS, Soutoglou E, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Virology,
Department of General Virology, Martinistrasse 52, 20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Survival time-associated plant homeodomain (PHD) finger protein in Ovarian Cancer
1 (SPOC1, also known as PHF13) is known to modulate chromatin structure and is
essential for testicular stem-cell differentiation. Here we show that SPOC1 is
recruited to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) in an ATM-dependent manner.
Moreover, SPOC1 localizes at endogenous repair foci, including OPT domains and
accumulates at large DSB repair foci characteristic for delayed repair at
heterochromatic sites. SPOC1 depletion enhances the kinetics of ionizing
radiation-induced foci (IRIF) formation after <U+03B3>-irradiation (<U+03B3>-IR),
non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair activity, and cellular radioresistance, 
but impairs homologous recombination (HR) repair. Conversely, SPOC1
overexpression delays IRIF formation and <U+03B3>H2AX expansion, reduces NHEJ repair
activity and enhances cellular radiosensitivity. SPOC1 mediates dose-dependent
changes in chromatin association of DNA compaction factors KAP-1, HP1-a and H3K9 
methyltransferases (KMT) GLP, G9A and SETDB1. In addition, SPOC1 interacts with
KAP-1 and H3K9 KMTs, inhibits KAP-1 phosphorylation and enhances H3K9
trimethylation. These findings provide the first evidence for a function of SPOC1
in DNA damage response (DDR) and repair. SPOC1 acts as a modulator of repair
kinetics and choice of pathways. This involves its dose-dependent effects on DNA 
damage sensors, repair mediators and key regulators of chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC3526275
PMID: 23034801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Immunobiology. 2012 Dec;217(12):1315-24. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.07.026. Epub
2012 Aug 11.

KAP1/TRIM28: an inhibitor of IRF5 function in inflammatory macrophages.

Eames HL(1), Saliba DG, Krausgruber T, Lanfrancotti A, Ryzhakov G, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Imperial College, 65 Aspenlea Road, London 
W6 8LH, United Kingdom. h.eames09@imperial.ac.uk

IRF5 plays a key role in the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
contributing to the plasticity and polarisation of macrophages to an M1 phenotype
and initiation of a potent T(H)1-T(H)17 response. To better understand the means 
of IRF5 transcriptional action, we conducted a screen for IRF5-interacting
partners by affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry and identified
KAP1/TRIM28 as a novel protein-protein interaction partner of IRF5. KAP1 acts as 
a transcriptional co-repressor, chiefly via recruitment of complexes involved in 
chromatin silencing, such as histone deacetylases and methyltransferases. We
mapped the N-terminus of IRF5, encompassing its DNA-binding domain together with 
a highly intrinsically disordered region, as crucial for the IRF5-KAP1
interaction interface, and demonstrated that IRF5 can also form complexes with
the methyltransferase SETDB1. Knockdown of KAP1 (TRIM28) gene expression in human
M1 macrophages potentiated IRF5-mediated expression of TNF and other M1
macrophage markers. This effect may be linked to methyltransferase activity of
SETDB1, such as trimethylation of lysine 9 of histone 3 (H3K9me3), deposition of 
which was decreased at the human TNF locus upon KAP1 knockdown. Our study
furthers an understanding of the complex molecular interactions between the TRIM 
and IRF protein families, and highlights a role of the inhibitory properties of
KAP1 in association with IRF5-mediated gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22995936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. FEBS Lett. 2012 Oct 19;586(20):3562-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.08.010. Epub
2012 Aug 17.

ZBRK1 represses HIV-1 LTR-mediated transcription.

Nishitsuji H(1), Abe M, Sawada R, Takaku H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Chiba Institute of Technology, 
2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan.
hironori.nishitsuji@it-chiba.ac.jp

The identification of cellular proteins that interact with the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat (LTR) provides a basic
understanding of HIV-1 gene expression, which is the major determinant regulating
virus replication. We show that ZBRK1 negatively regulates the HIV-1 LTR. Ectopic
expression of ZBRK1 represses transcriptional activity of the HIV-1 LTR, whereas 
the depletion of endogenous ZBRK1 leads to activation of the HIV-1 LTR. The
repressor activity of ZBRK1 is required for TRIM28 binding. Furthermore, ZBRK1 is
bound to the HIV-1 LTR in vivo. These results indicate that ZBRK1 could be
involved in a potent intrinsic antiretroviral defense.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22975076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Feb;37(1):71-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2012.08.005. Epub
2012 Sep 7.

TRIM28, a new molecular marker predicting metastasis and survival in early-stage 
non-small cell lung cancer.

Liu L(1), Zhao E, Li C, Huang L, Xiao L, Cheng L, Huang X, Song Y, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical Institute, Chengde Medical College,
Chengde, Hebei Province, 067000, China. homingreceptor@hotmail.com

TRIM28 is a universal corepressor for Kruppel-associated box zinc finger
proteins. In this study, we demonstrated the expression of TRIM28 gene was
significantly higher in cancerous tissues than in noncancerous tissues (P <
0.001). TRIM28 knockdown resulted in a decrease in cell proliferation in liquid
media as well as in soft agar. The proliferation rate was impaired and the cell
cycle progression was inhibited after knockdown of TRIM28 in non-small cell lung 
cancer cell lines PAa and SK-MES-1. We used real-time polymerase chain reaction
to detect circulating cancer cells in 138 non-small cell lung cancer patients.
The overall positive detection rate was 30.4% (42 of 138) in peripheral blood of 
NSCLC patients and was 29.9% (29 of 97) in early-stage patients. In a 70-month
follow-up study, 20 of 29 patients (69.0%) in TRIM28 positive group had
recurrence and/or metastasis, significantly higher (P = 0.004) than in the TRIM28
negative group (25 of 68, 36.8%). In addition, non-small cell lung cancer
patients whose circulating cancer cells expressed TRIM28 suffered shorter
tumor-specific survival compared with those with absent TRIM28 expression (P <
0.001). Results of our study showed that TRIM28 provides a survival advantage to 
lung cancer cells and may be a new marker to predict metastasis and prognosis in 
early-stage non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22959342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FASEB J. 2012 Nov;26(11):4561-75. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-206177. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

KAP1 regulates gene networks controlling T-cell development and responsiveness.

Santoni de Sio FR(1), Barde I, Offner S, Kapopoulou A, Corsinotti A, Bojkowska K,
Genolet R, Thomas JH, Luescher IF, Pinschewer D, Harris N, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Chromatin remodeling at specific genomic loci controls lymphoid differentiation. 
Here, we investigated the role played in this process by Kruppel-associated box
(KRAB)-associated protein 1 (KAP1), the universal cofactor of KRAB-zinc finger
proteins (ZFPs), a tetrapod-restricted family of transcriptional repressors.
T-cell-specific Kap1-deleted mice displayed a significant expansion of immature
thymocytes, imbalances in CD4(+)/CD8(+) cell ratios, and altered responses to TCR
and TGFß stimulation when compared to littermate KAP1 control mice. Transcriptome
and chromatin studies revealed that KAP1 binds T-cell-specific cis-acting
regulatory elements marked by the H3K9me3 repressive mark and enriched in
Ikaros/NuRD complexes. Also, KAP1 directly controls the expression of several
genes involved in TCR and cytokine signaling. Among these, regulation of FoxO1
seems to play a major role in this system. Likely responsible for tethering KAP1 
to at least part of its genomic targets, a small number of KRAB-ZFPs are
selectively expressed in T-lymphoid cells. These results reveal the so far
unsuspected yet important role of KAP1-mediated epigenetic regulation in
T-lymphocyte differentiation and activation.

PMID: 22872677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Epigenetics. 2012 Sep;7(9):969-75. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Should I stay or should I go: protection and maintenance of DNA methylation at
imprinted genes.

Messerschmidt DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Group, Institute of Medical Biology, Singapore.
daniel.m@imb.a-star.edu.sg

Recent findings shed light on the coordination of two fundamental, yet
mechanistically opposing, processes in the early mammalian embryo. During the
oocyte-to-embryo transition and early preimplantation development nuclear
reprogramming occurs. This resetting of the epigenome in maternal and paternal
pronuclei to a ground state is the essential step ensuring totipotency in the
zygote, the first embryonic stage. Radical, global DNA demethylation, which
occurs actively in the paternal and passively in the maternal genome, is a
prominent feature of nuclear reprogramming; yet, this process poses a danger to a
subset of methylated sequences that must be preserved for their germline to soma 
inheritance. Genomic imprinting and its importance were demonstrated three
decades ago by a series of experiments generating non-viable mammalian
uniparental embryos. Indeed, imprinted loci, gene clusters with parent-of-origin 
specific gene expression patterns, must retain their differential methylation
status acquired during gametogenesis throughout embryogenesis and in adult
tissues. It is just recently that the molecular players that protect/maintain
imprinting marks during reprogramming in preimplantation embryos have been
identified, in particular, an epigenetic modifier complex formed by ZFP57 and
TRIM28/KAP1. The interaction of these and other molecules with the newly formed
embryonic chromatin and imprinted genes is discussed and highlighted herein.

PMCID: PMC3515016
PMID: 22869105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3732-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00615-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
16.

The KRAB zinc finger protein RSL1 regulates sex- and tissue-specific promoter
methylation and dynamic hormone-responsive chromatin configuration.

Krebs CJ(1), Schultz DC, Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Over 400 Krüppel-associated box zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) are encoded in
mammalian genomes. While KRAB-ZFPs strongly repress transcription in vitro,
little is known about their biological function or gene targets in vivo.
Regulator of sex limitation 1 (Rsl1), one of the first KRAB-Zfp genes assigned a 
physiological role, accentuates sex-biased liver gene expression, most
dramatically for mouse sex-limited protein (Slp), which provides an in vivo
reporter of KRAB-ZFP function. Slp is induced in males in the liver and kidney by
growth hormone (GH) and androgen, respectively. In the liver but not kidney, the 
Rsl1 genotype correlates with methylation of a CpG dinucleotide in the Slp
promoter that is demethylated at puberty. RSL1 binds 2 kb upstream of the Slp
promoter, both in vitro and in vivo, within an enhancer containing response
elements for STAT5b. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that
RSL1 recruits KAP1/TRIM28, the corepressor for KRAB action in vitro, to this
enhancer. Slp induction requires rapid cycling of STAT5b in chromatin.
Remarkably, RSL1 simultaneously binds adjacent to STAT5b with a reciprocal
binding pattern that limits hormonal response. These experiments demonstrate a
surprisingly dynamic interplay between a hormonal activator, STAT5b, and a
KRAB-ZFP repressor and provide unique insights into KRAB-ZFP epigenetic
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3430191
PMID: 22801370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Brief Funct Genomics. 2012 May;11(3):227-39. doi: 10.1093/bfgp/els018.

Proteins involved in establishment and maintenance of imprinted methylation
marks.

Strogantsev R(1), Ferguson-Smith AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge, CB2 3EG, UK.

Epigenetic phenomena are being increasingly recognized to play key roles in
normal mammalian development and disease. This is exemplified by the process of
genomic imprinting whereby despite identical DNA sequence, the two parental
chromosomes are not equivalent and show either maternal- or paternal-specific
expression at a subset of genes in the genome. These patterns are set up by
differential DNA methylation marking at the imprinting control regions in male
and female germ line. In this review, we discuss the specific mechanisms by which
these methyl marks are established and then selectively maintained throughout
pre-implantation development. Specifically, we discuss the recent findings of a
critical role played by a KRAB zinc-finger protein ZFP57 and its co-factor
KAP1/TRIM28 in mediating both processes.

PMID: 22760206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 15;11(14):2643-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.20957. Epub 2012 Jul 15.

Protein phosphatase PP4 is involved in NHEJ-mediated repair of DNA double-strand 
breaks.

Liu J(1), Xu L, Zhong J, Liao J, Li J, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of DNA Damage Response and College of Life Science,
Capital Normal University, Beijing, China.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Oct 1;11(19):3534-5.
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 15;11(14):2590-1.

Reversible phosphorylation is an essential posttranslational modification to turn
on/off a protein function and to regulate many cellular activities, including DNA
repair. A DNA double-strand break (DSB) is the most lethal form of DNA damage and
is mainly fixed by the error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ)-mediated
repair and by the high-fidelity homology recombination (HR)-mediated repair. We
found previously that protein phosphatase PP4 is required for HR-mediated DSB
repair. In this report, we showed that depletion of PP4C by siRNA compromised
NHEJ-mediated repair of DSBs induced by the nuclease I-SceI. Both PP4C and its
regulatory subunit PP4R2 physically interacted with the chromatin condensation
factor KAP1 (KRAB-associated protein 1). Depletion of PP4C led to sustained
phosphorylation of KAP1 at Ser824. Conversely, overexpression of PP4C resulted in
a decrease of KAP1 phosphorylation. PP4 dephosphorylated pKAP1 in vitro.
Inhibition of KAP1 expression resulted in a defect on NHEJ-mediated DSB repair,
and co-depletion of PP4c and KAP1 did not have significant synergistic effect on 
NHEJ-mediated DSB repair. Taken together, our results suggest that PP4C and KAP1 
are in the same epistasis group, and PP4 is involved in NHEJ-mediated DSB repair,
possibly through regulating the phosphorylation status of KAP1.

PMID: 22732494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 10;287(33):28122-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.368381. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Kruppel-associated Box (KRAB)-associated co-repressor (KAP-1) Ser-473
phosphorylation regulates heterochromatin protein 1ß (HP1-ß) mobilization and DNA
repair in heterochromatin.

Bolderson E(1), Savage KI, Mahen R, Pisupati V, Graham ME, Richard DJ, Robinson
PJ, Venkitaraman AR, Khanna KK.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Queensland 4029, Australia.

The DNA damage response encompasses a complex series of signaling pathways that
function to regulate and facilitate the repair of damaged DNA. Recent studies
have shown that the repair of transcriptionally inactive chromatin, named
heterochromatin, is dependent upon the phosphorylation of the co-repressor,
Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-associated protein (KAP-1), by the ataxia
telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) kinase. Co-repressors, such as KAP-1, function to
regulate the rigid structure of heterochromatin by recruiting histone-modifying
enzymes, such HDAC1/2, SETDB1, and nucleosome-remodeling complexes such as CHD3. 
Here, we have characterized a phosphorylation site in the HP1-binding domain of
KAP-1, Ser-473, which is phosphorylated by the cell cycle checkpoint kinase Chk2.
Expression of a nonphosphorylatable S473A mutant conferred cellular sensitivity
to DNA-damaging agents and led to defective repair of DNA double-strand breaks in
heterochromatin. In addition, cells expressing S473A also displayed defective
mobilization of the HP1-ß chromodomain protein. The DNA repair defect observed in
cells expressing S473A was alleviated by depletion of HP1-ß, suggesting that
phosphorylation of KAP-1 on Ser-473 promotes the mobilization of HP1-ß from
heterochromatin and subsequent DNA repair. These results suggest a novel
mechanism of KAP-1-mediated chromatin restructuring via Chk2-regulated HP1-ß
exchange from heterochromatin, promoting DNA repair.

PMCID: PMC3431694
PMID: 22715096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jul 10;107(2):291-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.265. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

Targeting radiation-resistant hypoxic tumour cells through ATR inhibition.

Pires IM(1), Olcina MM, Anbalagan S, Pollard JR, Reaper PM, Charlton PA, McKenna 
WG, Hammond EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Gray Institute for Radiation Oncology & Biology,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Most solid tumours contain regions of sub-optimal oxygen
concentration (hypoxia). Hypoxic cancer cells are more resistant to radiotherapy 
and represent the most aggressive fraction of a tumour. It is therefore essential
that strategies continue to be developed to target hypoxic cancer cells.
Inhibition of the DNA damage response (DDR) might be an effective way of
sensitising hypoxic tumour cells to radiotherapy.
METHODS: Here, we describe the cellular effects of pharmacological inhibition of 
the apical DDR kinase ATR (Ataxia Telangiectasia and Rad 3 related) with a highly
selective inhibitor, VE-821, in hypoxic conditions and its potential as a
radiosensitiser.
RESULTS: VE-821 was shown to inhibit ATR-mediated signalling in response to
replication arrest induced by severe hypoxia. In these same conditions, VE-821
induced DNA damage and consequently increased Ataxia Telangiectasia
Mutated-mediated phosphorylation of H2AX and KAP1. Consistently, ATR inhibition
sensitised tumour cell lines to a range of oxygen tensions. Most importantly,
VE-821 increased radiation-induced loss of viability in hypoxic conditions. Using
this inhibitor we have also demonstrated for the first time a link between ATR
and the key regulator of the hypoxic response, HIF-1. HIF-1 stabilisation and
transcriptional activity were both decreased in response to ATR inhibition.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that ATR inhibition represents a novel
strategy to target tumour cells in conditions relevant to pathophysiology and
enhance the efficacy of radiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3394988
PMID: 22713662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hepatology. 2012 Oct;56(4):1279-90. doi: 10.1002/hep.25767. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Liver-specific ablation of Krüppel-associated box-associated protein 1 in mice
leads to male-predominant hepatosteatosis and development of liver adenoma.

Bojkowska K(1), Aloisio F, Cassano M, Kapopoulou A, Santoni de Sio F, Zangger N, 
Offner S, Cartoni C, Thomas C, Quenneville S, Johnsson K, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

The liver is characterized by sexually dimorphic gene expression translating into
sex-specific differences in lipid, drug, steroid hormone, and xenobiotic
metabolism, with distinct responses of males and females to environmental
challenges. Here, we investigated the role of the Krüppel-associated box
(KRAB)-associated protein 1 (KAP1) epigenetic regulator in this process.
Liver-specific KAP1 knockout (KO) led to strikingly sexually dimorphic phenotypic
disturbances, including male-predominant steatosis and hepatic tumors with
up-regulation of protein kinase B and extracellular signal-related kinases 1/2
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. This correlated with the sex-specific
transcriptional dysregulation of a wide range of metabolic genes, notably those
involved in retinol and sex hormone processing as well as in detoxification.
Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing indicated 
that a number of dysregulated genes are direct targets of the KRAB/KAP1
repression system. Those genes include sexually dimorphic cytochrome P 450
Cyp2d9, glutathione S-transferase p, Cyp2a, Cyp2b, and Cyp3a gene clusters.
Additionally, we identified a male-restricted KAP1-binding site in the
fat-specific protein 27 gene, correlating with its male-predominant up-regulation
upon Kap1 deletion, suggesting that the latter might be an important trigger in
the development of male-specific hepatosteatosis and secondary
tumorigenesis.CONCLUSION: This work reveals KRAB/KAP1-mediated transcriptional
regulation as a central event in metabolic control hormones, drugs, and
xenobiotics in the liver and further links disturbances in these processes with
hepatic carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22684873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nat Immunol. 2012 Apr 29;13(6):596-603. doi: 10.1038/ni.2293.

TRIM28 prevents autoinflammatory T cell development in vivo.

Chikuma S(1), Suita N, Okazaki IM, Shibayama S, Honjo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

TRIM28 is a component of heterochromatin complexes whose function in the immune
system is unknown. By studying mice with conditional T cell-specific deletion of 
TRIM28 (CKO mice), we found that TRIM28 was phosphorylated after stimulation via 
the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) and was involved in the global regulation of
CD4(+) T cells. The CKO mice had a spontaneous autoimmune phenotype that was due 
in part to early lymphopenia associated with a defect in the production of
interleukin 2 (IL-2) as well as incomplete cell-cycle progression of their T
cells. In addition, CKO T cells showed derepression of the cytokine TGF-ß3, which
resulted in an altered cytokine balance; this caused the accumulation of
autoreactive cells of the T(H)17 subset of helper T cells and of Foxp3(+) T
cells. Notably, CKO Foxp3(+) T cells were unable to prevent the autoimmune
phenotype in vivo. Our results show critical roles for TRIM28 in both T cell
activation and T cell tolerance.

PMID: 22544392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Jul;70(1):207-12. doi:
10.1007/s00280-012-1868-0. Epub 2012 Apr 21.

The "survivin suppressants" NSC 80467 and YM155 induce a DNA damage response.

Glaros TG(1), Stockwin LH, Mullendore ME, Smith B, Morrison BL, Newton DL.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Testing Branch, Developmental Therapeutics Program, Building 320,
Room 9, SAIC-Frederick Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2012 Nov;70(5):763-4.

PURPOSE: To establish whether NSC80467, a novel fused naphthquinone imidazolium, 
has a similar spectrum of activity to the well-characterized "survivin
suppressant" YM155 and to extend mechanistic studies for this structural class of
agent.
METHODS: NSC80467 and YM155 were analyzed in parallel using assays measuring
viability, survivin suppression, inhibition of DNA/RNA/protein synthesis and the 
cellular response to DNA damage.
RESULTS: GI(50) values generated for both compounds in the NCI-60 screen yielded 
a correlation coefficient of 0.748, suggesting significant concordance. Both
agents were also shown to inhibit protein expression of survivin [BIRC5]. COMPARE
analysis identified DNA damaging agents chromomycin A3 and bisantrene HCl and one
DNA-directed inhibitor of transcription, actinomycin D, as correlating with the
activity of NSC80467 and YM155. Furthermore, both agents were shown to
preferentially inhibit DNA, over RNA and protein synthesis. Thus, the ability of 
NSC80467 and YM155 to induce a DNA damage response was examined further.
Treatment of PC3 cells with either agent resulted in dose-dependent induction of 
<U+03B3>H2AX and pKAP1, two markers of DNA damage. The concentrations of agent required 
to stimulate <U+03B3>H2AX were considerably lower than those required to inhibit
survivin, implicating DNA damage as an initiating event. The DNA damage response 
was then confirmed in a panel of cell lines treated with NSC80467 or YM155,
suggesting that <U+03B3>H2AX and pKAP1 have potential as response biomarkers.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide the first evidence that NSC80467 and YM155 are
DNA damaging agents where suppression of survivin is a secondary event, likely a 
consequence of transcriptional repression.

PMID: 22526412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Arthritis Res Ther. 2012 Apr 17;14(2):R79. doi: 10.1186/ar3802.

Autoantibodies to transcription intermediary factor TIF1ß associated with
dermatomyositis.

Satoh M(1), Chan JY, Ross SJ, Li Y, Yamasaki Y, Yamada H, Vazquez-del Mercado M, 
Petri MH, Jara LJ, Saavedra MA, Cruz-Reyes C, Sobel ES, Reeves WH, Ceribelli A,
Chan EK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Florida, P,O,Box 100221, 1600 SW Archer Rd, Gainesville, FL
32610-0221, USA. minoru.satoh@medicine.ufl.edu

INTRODUCTION: Myositis specific autoantibodies are associated with unique
clinical subsets and are useful biomarkers in polymyositis/dermatomyositis
(PM/DM). A 120 kD protein recognized by certain patients with DM was identified
and clinical features of patients with this specificity were characterized.
METHODS: The 120 kD protein recognized by a prototype serum was purified and
identified by mass spectrometry and immunological methods. Autoantibody to this
120 kD protein was screened in sera from 2,356 patients with various diagnoses
from four countries, including 254 PM/DM, by immunoprecipitation of
35S-methionine labeled K562 cell extracts. Clinical information of patients with 
this specificity was collected.
RESULTS: The 120 kD protein, which exactly comigrated with PL-12, was identified 
as transcription intermediary factor TIF1ß (TRIM28) by mass spectrometry and
validated by immunoassays. By immunofluorescence, anti-TIF1ß positivity showed a 
fine-speckled nuclear staining pattern. Four cases of anti-TIF1ß were identified;
all are women, one each in a Japanese, African American, Caucasian, and Mexican
individual. Three had a diagnosis of DM and one case was classified as having an 
undifferentiated connective tissue disease with an elevated CPK but without
significant muscle symptoms. This individual also had a history of colon cancer, 
cervical squamous metaplasia and fibroid tumors of the uterus. Myopathy was mild 
in all cases and resolved without treatment in one case. The anti-TIF1ß
specificity was not found in other conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-TIF1ß is a new DM autoantibody associated with a mild form of
myopathy. Whether it has an association with malignancy, as in the case of
anti-TIF1<U+03B3>, or other unique features will need to be evaluated in future studies.

PMCID: PMC3446453
PMID: 22513056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):18937-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313262. Epub 2012
Apr 11.

Roles of Kruppel-associated Box (KRAB)-associated Co-repressor KAP1 Ser-473
Phosphorylation in DNA Damage Response.

Hu C(1), Zhang S, Gao X, Gao X, Xu X, Lv Y, Zhang Y, Zhu Z, Zhang C, Li Q, Wong
J, Cui Y, Zhang W, Ma L, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences and College of Life Science and.

The Kruppel-associated box (KRAB)-associated co-repressor KAP1 is an essential
nuclear co-repressor for the KRAB zinc finger protein superfamily of
transcriptional factors. Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-Chk2 and ATM- and
Rad3-related (ATR)-Chk1 are two primary kinase signaling cascades activated in
response to DNA damage. A growing body of evidence suggests that ATM and ATR
phosphorylate KAP1 at Ser-824 in response to DNA damage and regulate
KAP1-dependent chromatin condensation, DNA repair, and gene expression. Here, we 
show that, depending on the type of DNA damage that occurs, KAP1 Ser-473 can be
phosphorylated by ATM-Chk2 or ATR-Chk1 kinases. Phosphorylation of KAP1 at
Ser-473 attenuated its binding to the heterochromatin protein 1 family proteins
and inhibited its transcriptional repression of KRAB-zinc finger protein
(KRAB-ZFP) target genes. Moreover, KAP1 Ser-473 phosphorylation induced by DNA
damage stimulated KAP1-E2F1 binding. Overexpression of heterochromatin protein 1 
significantly inhibited E2F1-KAP1 binding. Elimination of KAP1 Ser-473
phosphorylation increased E2F1-targeted proapoptotic gene expression and
E2F1-induced apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Furthermore, loss of
phosphorylation of KAP1 Ser-473 led to less BRCA1 focus formation and slower
kinetics of loss of <U+03B3>H2AX foci after DNA damage. KAP1 Ser-473 phosphorylation was
required for efficient DNA repair and cell survival in response to DNA damage.
Our studies reveal novel functions of KAP1 Ser-473 phosphorylation under stress.

PMCID: PMC3365928
PMID: 22496453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. EMBO J. 2012 May 16;31(10):2403-15. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.86. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

Phosphoproteomic analysis reveals that PP4 dephosphorylates KAP-1 impacting the
DNA damage response.

Lee DH(1), Goodarzi AA, Adelmant GO, Pan Y, Jeggo PA, Marto JA, Chowdhury D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2014 May 8;54(3):332-3.

Protein phosphatase PP4C has been implicated in the DNA damage response (DDR),
but its substrates in DDR remain largely unknown. We devised a novel proteomic
strategy for systematic identification of proteins dephosphorylated by PP4C and
identified KRAB-domain-associated protein 1 (KAP-1) as a substrate. Ionizing
radiation leads to phosphorylation of KAP-1 at S824 (via ATM) and at S473 (via
CHK2). A PP4C/R3ß complex interacts with KAP-1 and silencing this complex leads
to persistence of phospho-S824 and phospho-S473. We identify a new role for KAP-1
in DDR by showing that phosphorylation of S473 impacts the G2/M checkpoint.
Depletion of PP4R3ß or expression of the phosphomimetic KAP-1 S473 mutant (S473D)
leads to a prolonged G2/M checkpoint. Phosphorylation of S824 is necessary for
repair of heterochromatic DNA lesions and similar to cells expressing
phosphomimetic KAP-1 S824 mutant (S824D), or PP4R3ß-silenced cells, display
prolonged relaxation of chromatin with release of chromatin remodelling protein
CHD3. Our results define a new role for PP4-mediated dephosphorylation in the
DDR, including the regulation of a previously undescribed function of KAP-1 in
checkpoint response.

PMCID: PMC3364739
PMID: 22491012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Blood. 2012 May 17;119(20):4675-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-401117. Epub 2012 
Mar 27.

KAP1 regulates gene networks controlling mouse B-lymphoid cell differentiation
and function.

Santoni de Sio FR(1), Massacand J, Barde I, Offner S, Corsinotti A, Kapopoulou A,
Bojkowska K, Dagklis A, Fernandez M, Ghia P, Thomas JH, Pinschewer D, Harris N,
Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Chromatin remodeling is fundamental for B-cell differentiation. In the present
study, we explored the role of KAP1, the cofactor of KRAB-ZFP transcriptional
repressors, in this process. B-lymphoid-specific Kap1-KO mice displayed reduced
numbers of mature B cells, lower steady-state levels of Abs, and accelerated
rates of decay of neutralizing Abs after viral immunization. Transcriptome
analyses of Kap1-deleted B splenocytes revealed an up-regulation of PTEN, the
enzymatic counteractor of PIK3 signaling, and of genes encoding DNA-damage
response factors, cell-cycle regulators, and chemokine receptors. ChIP/seq
studies established that KAP1 bound at or close to several of these genes and
controlled chromatin status at their promoters. Genome wide, KAP1 binding sites
lacked active B cell-specific enhancers and were enriched in repressive histone
marks, further supporting a role for this molecule in gene silencing in vivo.
Likely responsible for tethering KAP1 to at least some of these targets, a
discrete subset of KRAB-ZFPs is enriched in B lymphocytes. Our results therefore 
reveal the role of KRAB/KAP1-mediated epigenetic regulation in B-cell development
and homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3683646
PMID: 22452978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Science. 2012 Mar 23;335(6075):1499-502. doi: 10.1126/science.1216154.

Trim28 is required for epigenetic stability during mouse oocyte to embryo
transition.

Messerschmidt DM(1), de Vries W, Ito M, Solter D, Ferguson-Smith A, Knowles BB.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Group, Institute of Medical Biology, Singapore.

Phenotypic variability in genetic disease is usually attributed to genetic
background variation or environmental influence. Here, we show that deletion of a
single gene, Trim28 (Kap1 or Tif1ß), from the maternal germ line alone, on an
otherwise identical genetic background, results in severe phenotypic and
epigenetic variability that leads to embryonic lethality. We identify early and
minute epigenetic variations in blastomeres of the preimplantation embryo of
these animals, suggesting that the embryonic lethality may result from the
misregulation of genomic imprinting in mice lacking maternal Trim28. Our results 
reveal the long-range effects of a maternal gene deletion on epigenetic memory
and illustrate the delicate equilibrium of maternal and zygotic factors during
nuclear reprogramming.

PMID: 22442485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cell Cycle. 2012 Mar 15;11(6):1167-73. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.6.19576. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

Dynamic inhibition of ATM kinase provides a strategy for glioblastoma multiforme 
radiosensitization and growth control.

Golding SE(1), Rosenberg E, Adams BR, Wignarajah S, Beckta JM, O'Connor MJ,
Valerie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is notoriously resistant to treatment. Therefore,
new treatment strategies are urgently needed. ATM elicits the DNA damage response
(DDR), which confers cellular radioresistance; thus, targeting the DDR with an
ATM inhibitior (ATMi) is very attractive. Herein, we show that dynamic ATM kinase
inhibition in the nanomolar range results in potent radiosensitization of human
glioma cells, inhibits growth and does not conflict with temozolomide (TMZ)
treatment. The second generation ATMi analog KU-60019 provided quick, reversible 
and complete inhibition of the DDR at sub-micromolar concentrations in human
glioblastoma cells. KU-60019 inhibited the phosphorylation of the major DNA
damage effectors p53, H2AX and KAP1 as well as AKT. Colony-forming radiosurvival 
showed that continuous exposure to nanomolar concentrations of KU-60019
effectively radiosensitized glioblastoma cell lines. When cells were co-treated
with KU-60019 and TMZ, a slight increase in radiation-induced cell killing was
noted, although TMZ alone was unable to radiosensitize these cells. In addition, 
without radiation, KU-60019 with or without TMZ reduced glioma cell growth but
had no significant effect on the survival of human embryonic stem cell
(hESC)-derived astrocytes. Altogether, transient inhibition of the ATM kinase
provides a promising strategy for radiosensitizing GBM in combination with
standard treatment. In addition, without radiation, KU-60019 limits growth of
glioma cells in co-culture with human astrocytes that seem unaffected by the same
treatment. Thus, inter-fraction growth inhibition could perhaps be achieved in
vivo with minor adverse effects to the brain.

PMCID: PMC3335919
PMID: 22370485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Acta Oncol. 2012 Mar;51(3):394-6. doi: 10.3109/0284186X.2011.652742. Epub 2012
Jan 24.

A reverse-ELISA for the detection of TRIM28/KAP1 serum autoantibodies in
colorectal cancer patients.

Hector S, Chen H, Kijanka G, Murray F, Prehn JH.

PMID: 22268577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012 Feb;40(1):173-8. doi: 10.1042/BST20110631.

DNA double-strand break repair within heterochromatic regions.

Murray JM(1), Stiff T, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RQ,
UK. j.m.murray@sussex.ac.uk

DNA DSBs (double-strand breaks) represent a critical lesion for a cell, with
misrepair being potentially as harmful as lack of repair. In mammalian cells,
DSBs are predominantly repaired by non-homologous end-joining or homologous
recombination. The kinetics of repair of DSBs can differ widely, and recent
studies have shown that the higher-order chromatin structure can dramatically
affect the pathway utilized, the rate of repair and the genetic factors required 
for repair. Studies of the repair of DSBs arising within heterochromatic DNA
regions have provided insight into the constraints that higher-order chromatin
structure poses on repair and the processing that is uniquely required for the
repair of such DSBs. In the present paper, we provide an overview of our current 
understanding of the process of heterochromatic DSB repair in mammalian cells and
consider the evolutionary conservation of the processes.

PMID: 22260685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Transcription. 2011 Sep-Oct;2(5):231-6. doi: 10.4161/trns.2.5.17725.

The TIF1a-related TRIM cofactors couple chromatin modifications to
transcriptional regulation, signaling and tumor suppression.

Herquel B(1), Ouararhni K, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch
Cédex, France.

TRIM24 (TIF1a), TRIM28 (TIF1ß) and TRIM33 (TIF1<U+03B3>) are related cofactors defining 
a subgroup of the tripartite motif (TRIM) superfamily comprising an N-terminal
RING finger E3 ligase and a C-terminal PHD-Bromodomain chromatin interacting
module. Increasing evidence highlights the important roles of these proteins as
modulators of multiple signaling pathways during normal development and as tumor 
suppressors. The finding that they interact to form a multiprotein complex
suggests new mechanisms to integrate multiple signaling pathways for tumor
suppression.

PMCID: PMC3265781
PMID: 22231120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Mar;10(3):401-14. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0134. Epub
2011 Dec 28.

The ATM substrate KAP1 controls DNA repair in heterochromatin: regulation by HP1 
proteins and serine 473/824 phosphorylation.

White D(1), Rafalska-Metcalf IU, Ivanov AV, Corsinotti A, Peng H, Lee SC, Trono
D, Janicki SM, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The repair of DNA damage in highly compact, transcriptionally silent
heterochromatin requires that repair and chromatin packaging machineries be
tightly coupled and regulated. KAP1 is a heterochromatin protein and co-repressor
that binds to HP1 during gene silencing but is also robustly phosphorylated by
Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) at serine 824 in response to DNA damage. The 
interplay between HP1-KAP1 binding/ATM phosphorylation during DNA repair is not
known. We show that HP1a and unmodified KAP1 are enriched in endogenous
heterochromatic loci and at a silent transgene prior to damage. Following damage,
<U+03B3>H2AX and pKAP1-s824 rapidly increase and persist at these loci. Cells that lack 
HP1 fail to form discreet pKAP1-s824 foci after damage but levels are higher and 
more persistent. KAP1 is phosphorylated at serine 473 in response to DNA damage
and its levels are also modulated by HP1. Unlike pKAP1-s824, pKAP1-s473 does not 
accumulate at damage foci but is diffusely localized in the nucleus. While HP1
association tempers KAP1 phosphorylation, this interaction also slows the
resolution of <U+03B3>H2AX foci. Thus, HP1-dependent regulation of KAP1 influences DNA
repair in heterochromatin.

PMID: 22205726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Eur J Mass Spectrom (Chichester, Eng). 2011;17(5):507-23. doi: 10.1255/ejms.1134.

EJMS protocol: systematic studies on TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment
procedures upon in-solution and in-gel digestions of proteins. Are there readily 
applicable protocols suitable for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
mass spectrometry-based phosphopeptide stability estimations?

Eickner T(1), Mikkat S, Lorenz P, Sklorz M, Zimmermann R, Thiesen HJ, Glocker MO.

Author information: 
(1)Proteome Center Rostock, Medical Faculty, University of Rostock, Rostock,
Germany.

There have been many successful efforts to enrich phosphopeptides in complex
protein mixtures by the use of immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC)
and/or metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC) with which mass spectrometric
analysis of phosphopeptides has become state of the art in specialized
laboratories, mostly applying nanoLC electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry-based investigations. However, widespread use of these powerful
techniques is still not achieved. In this study, we present a ready-to-use
phosphopeptide enrichment procedure using commercially available TiO(2)-loaded
pipette tips in combination with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass
spectrometry (MALDI-MS) analyses. Using a-casein as a model protein and citric
acid as additive during sample loading, a similar enrichment success can be
achieved as compared to applying 2,5- dihydroxy benzoic acid (DHB) for this task.
But the DHB-inherited drawbacks are eliminated. In addition, we show that
combining DHB and 2,4,6-trihydroxy acetophenone (THAP) as matrix for MALDI-MS
measurements retains the sensitivity of DHB for phosphopeptide analysis but adds 
the homogenous crystallization properties of THAP, enabling preparation of evenly
distributed matrix surfaces on MALDI-MS anchor targets, a prerequisite for
automated MALDI- MS analyses. Tripartite motif-containing protein 28 and stathmin
are two examples for which successful phosphopeptide enrichment of either sodium 
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis or two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis-separated proteins is shown. Finally, high resolution MALDI
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry after phosphopeptide 
enrichment suggests that chemical dephosphorylation may occur as a side reaction 
during basic elution of phosphopeptides bound to MOAC surfaces, suggesting that
proteome-wide phosphopeptide analyses ought to be interpreted with caution. In
contrast, in-depth analysis of phosphopeptide/non-phosphorylated peptide siblings
may be used to estimate stability differences of phosphorylation sites in
individual proteins, possibly adding valuable information on biological
regulation processes.

PMID: 22173543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 13;287(3):2107-18. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.322644. Epub 2011 
Dec 5.

Zinc finger protein ZFP57 requires its co-factor to recruit DNA
methyltransferases and maintains DNA methylation imprint in embryonic stem cells 
via its transcriptional repression domain.

Zuo X(1), Sheng J, Lau HT, McDonald CM, Andrade M, Cullen DE, Bell FT, Iacovino
M, Kyba M, Xu G, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Department of Developmental and Regenerative
Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Previously, we discovered that ZFP57 is a maternal-zygotic effect gene, and it
maintains DNA methylation genomic imprint at multiple imprinted regions in mouse 
embryos. Despite these findings, it remains elusive how DNA methyltransferases
are targeted to the imprinting control regions to initiate and maintain DNA
methylation imprint. To gain insights into these essential processes in genomic
imprinting, we examined how ZFP57 maintains genomic DNA methylation imprint in
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Here we demonstrate that the loss of ZFP57 in
mouse ES cells led to a complete loss of genomic DNA methylation imprint at
multiple imprinted regions, similar to its role in mouse embryos. However,
reintroduction of ZFP57 into Zfp57-null ES cells did not result in reacquisition 
of DNA methylation imprint, suggesting that the memory for genomic imprinting had
been lost or altered in Zfp57-null ES cells in culture. Interestingly, ZFP57 and 
DNA methyltransferases could form complexes in the presence of KAP1/TRIM28/TIF1ß 
when co-expressed in COS cells. We also found that the wild-type exogenous ZFP57 
but not the mutant ZFP57 lacking the KRAB box that interacts with its co-factor
KAP1/TRIM28/TIF1ß could substitute for the endogenous ZFP57 in maintaining the
DNA methylation imprint in ES cells. These results suggest that ZFP57 may recruit
DNA methyltransferases to its target regions to maintain DNA methylation imprint,
and this interaction is likely facilitated by KAP1/TRIM28/TIF1ß.

PMCID: PMC3265890
PMID: 22144682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2011 Dec;138(24):5333-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.072546.

TRIM28 is required by the mouse KRAB domain protein ZFP568 to control convergent 
extension and morphogenesis of extra-embryonic tissues.

Shibata M(1), Blauvelt KE, Liem KF Jr, García-García MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, 526 Campus
Road, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

TRIM28 is a transcriptional regulator that is essential for embryonic development
and is implicated in a variety of human diseases. The roles of TRIM28 in distinct
biological processes are thought to depend on its interaction with factors that
determine its DNA target specificity. However, functional evidence linking TRIM28
to specific co-factors is scarce. chatwo, a hypomorphic allele of Trim28, causes 
embryonic lethality and defects in convergent extension and morphogenesis of
extra-embryonic tissues. These phenotypes are remarkably similar to those of
mutants in the Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) zinc finger protein ZFP568,
providing strong genetic evidence that ZFP568 and TRIM28 control morphogenesis
through a common molecular mechanism. We determined that chatwo mutations
decrease TRIM28 protein stability and repressive activity, disrupting both
ZFP568-dependent and ZFP568-independent roles of TRIM28. These results, together 
with the analysis of embryos bearing a conditional inactivation of Trim28 in
embryonic-derived tissues, revealed that TRIM28 is differentially required by
ZFP568 and other factors during the early stages of mouse embryogenesis. In
addition to uncovering novel roles of TRIM28 in convergent extension and
morphogenesis of extra-embryonic tissues, our characterization of chatwo mutants 
demonstrates that KRAB domain proteins are essential to determine some of the
biological functions of TRIM28.

PMCID: PMC3222210
PMID: 22110054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell. 2011 Nov 4;44(3):361-72. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.032.

In embryonic stem cells, ZFP57/KAP1 recognize a methylated hexanucleotide to
affect chromatin and DNA methylation of imprinting control regions.

Quenneville S(1), Verde G, Corsinotti A, Kapopoulou A, Jakobsson J, Offner S,
Baglivo I, Pedone PV, Grimaldi G, Riccio A, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Frontiers in Genetics Program, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2011 Nov 4;44(3):341-2.

The maintenance of H3K9 and DNA methylation at imprinting control regions (ICRs) 
during early embryogenesis is key to the regulation of imprinted genes. Here, we 
reveal that ZFP57, its cofactor KAP1, and associated effectors bind selectively
to the H3K9me3-bearing, DNA-methylated allele of ICRs in ES cells. KAP1 deletion 
induces a loss of heterochromatin marks at ICRs, whereas deleting ZFP57 or DNMTs 
leads to ICR DNA demethylation. Accordingly, we find that ZFP57 and KAP1
associated with DNMTs and hemimethylated DNA-binding NP95. Finally, we identify
the methylated TGCCGC hexanucleotide as the motif that is recognized by ZFP57 in 
all ICRs and in several tens of additional loci, several of which are at least
ZFP57-dependently methylated in ES cells. These results significantly advance our
understanding of imprinting and suggest a general mechanism for the protection of
specific loci against the wave of DNA demethylation that affects the mammalian
genome during early embryogenesis.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3210328
PMID: 22055183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 15;10(20):3545-53. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.20.17841. Epub 2011
Oct 15.

Differential epithelium DNA damage response to ATM and DNA-PK pathway inhibition 
in human prostate tissue culture.

Zhang Z(1), Yang Z, Jäämaa S, Liu H, Pellakuru LG, Iwata T, af Hällström TM, De
Marzo AM, Laiho M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Molecular Radiation Sciences, Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):3995.

The ability of cells to respond and repair DNA damage is fundamental for the
maintenance of genomic integrity. Ex vivo culturing of surgery-derived human
tissues has provided a significant advancement to assess DNA damage response
(DDR) in the context of normal cytoarchitecture in a non-proliferating tissue.
Here, we assess the dependency of prostate epithelium DDR on ATM and DNA-PKcs,
the major kinases responsible for damage detection and repair by nonhomologous
end-joining (NHEJ), respectively. DNA damage was caused by ionizing radiation
(IR) and cytotoxic drugs, cultured tissues were treated with ATM and DNA-PK
inhibitors, and DDR was assessed by phosphorylation of ATM and its targets H2AX
and KAP1, a heterochromatin binding protein. Phosphorylation of H2AX and KAP1 was
fast, transient and fully dependent on ATM, but these responses were moderate in 
luminal cells. In contrast, DNA-PKcs was phosphorylated in both luminal and basal
cells, suggesting that DNA-PK-dependent repair was also activated in the luminal 
cells despite the diminished H2AX and KAP1 responses. These results indicate that
prostate epithelial cell types have constitutively dissimilar responses to DNA
damage. We correlate the altered damage response to the differential chromatin
state of the cells. These findings are relevant in understanding how the
epithelium senses and responds to DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3356835
PMID: 22030624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 4;414(4):820-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.021. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Global chromatin fibre compaction in response to DNA damage.

Hamilton C(1), Hayward RL, Gilbert N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK.

DNA is protected by packaging it into higher order chromatin fibres, but this can
impede nuclear processes like DNA repair. Despite considerable research into the 
factors required for signalling and repairing DNA damage, it is unclear if there 
are concomitant changes in global chromatin fibre structure. In human cells DNA
double strand break (DSB) formation triggers a signalling cascade resulting in
H2AX phosphorylation (<U+03B3>H2AX), the rapid recruitment of chromatin associated
proteins and the subsequent repair of damaged sites. KAP1 is a transcriptional
corepressor and in HCT116 cells we found that after DSB formation by chemicals or
ionising radiation there was a wave of, predominantly ATM dependent, KAP1
phosphorylation. Both KAP1 and phosphorylated KAP1 were readily extracted from
cells indicating they do not have a structural role and <U+03B3>H2AX was extracted in
soluble chromatin indicating that sites of damage are not attached to an
underlying structural matrix. After DSB formation we did not find a concomitant
change in the sensitivity of chromatin fibres to micrococcal nuclease digestion. 
Therefore to directly investigate higher order chromatin fibre structures we used
a biophysical sedimentation technique based on sucrose gradient centrifugation to
compare the conformation of chromatin fibres isolated from cells before and after
DNA DSB formation. After damage we found global chromatin fibre compaction,
accompanied by rapid linker histone dephosphorylation, consistent with fibres
being more regularly folded or fibre deformation being stabilized by linker
histones. We suggest that following DSB formation, although there is localised
chromatin unfolding to facilitate repair, the bulk genome becomes rapidly
compacted protecting cells from further damage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3459090
PMID: 22020103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Oct 7;11(11):792-804. doi: 10.1038/nrc3139.

TRIM proteins and cancer.

Hatakeyama S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Animal Experimentation, and Central 
Institute of Isotope Science, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.
hatas@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Emerging clinical evidence shows that the deregulation of ubiquitin-mediated
degradation of oncogene products or tumour suppressors is likely to be involved
in the aetiology of carcinomas and leukaemias. Recent studies have indicated that
some members of the tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins (one of the subfamilies of
the RING type E3 ubiquitin ligases) function as important regulators for
carcinogenesis. This Review focuses on TRIM proteins that are involved in tumour 
development and progression.

PMID: 21979307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4754-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101704. Epub 2011
Sep 21.

Tripartite motif-containing protein 28 is a small ubiquitin-related modifier E3
ligase and negative regulator of IFN regulatory factor 7.

Liang Q(1), Deng H, Li X, Wu X, Tang Q, Chang TH, Peng H, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Ozato 
K, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a potent transcription factor of type I IFNs
and IFN-stimulated genes and is known as the master regulator of type I
IFN-dependent immune responses. Because excessive responses could harm the host, 
IRF7 itself is delicately regulated at the transcriptional, translational, and
posttranslational levels. Modification of IRF7 by small ubiquitin-related
modifiers (SUMOs) has been shown to regulate IFN expression and antiviral
responses negatively, but the specific E3 ligase needed for IRF7 SUMOylation has 
remained unknown. As reported in this article, we have identified the tripartite 
motif-containing protein 28 (TRIM28) as a binding partner of IRF7. We have
demonstrated that TRIM28 also interacts with the SUMO E2 enzyme and increases
SUMOylation of IRF7 both in vivo and in vitro, suggesting it acts as a SUMO E3
ligase of IRF7. Unlike the common SUMO E3 ligase, protein inhibitor of activated 
STAT1, the E3 activity of TRIM28 is specific to IRF7, because it has little
effect on IRF7's close relative IRF3. TRIM28 is therefore, so far as we know, the
first IRF7-specific SUMO E3 reported. TRIM28-mediated SUMOylation of IRF7 is
increased during viral infection, and SUMOylation of transcription factors
usually results in transcriptional repression. Overexpression of TRIM28 therefore
inhibits IRF7 transactivation activity, whereas knockdown of TRIM28 has the
opposite effect and potentiates IFN production and antiviral responses.
Collectively, our results suggest that TRIM28 is a specific SUMO E3 ligase and
negative regulator of IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3197880
PMID: 21940674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023747. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

MAGE I transcription factors regulate KAP1 and KRAB domain zinc finger
transcription factor mediated gene repression.

Xiao TZ(1), Bhatia N, Urrutia R, Lomberk GA, Simpson A, Longley BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
Txiao@dermatology.wisc.edu

Class I MAGE proteins (MAGE I) are normally expressed only in developing germ
cells but are aberrantly expressed in many cancers. They have been shown to
promote tumor survival, aggressive growth, and chemoresistance but the underlying
mechanisms and MAGE I functions have not been fully elucidated. KRAB domain zinc 
finger transcription factors (KZNFs) are the largest group of vertebrate
transcription factors and regulate neoplastic transformation, tumor suppression, 
cellular proliferation, and apoptosis. KZNFs bind the KAP1 protein and direct
KAP1 to specific DNA sequences where it suppresses gene expression by inducing
localized heterochromatin characterized by histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3me3K9). Discovery that MAGE I proteins also bind to KAP1 prompted us to
investigate whether MAGE I can affect KZNF and KAP1 mediated gene regulation. We 
found that expression of MAGE I proteins, MAGE-A3 or MAGE-C2, relieved repression
of a reporter gene by ZNF382, a KZNF with tumor suppressor activity. ChIP of MAGE
I (-) HEK293T cells showed KAP1 and H3me3K9 are normally bound to the ID1 gene, a
target of ZNF382, but that binding is greatly reduced in the presence of MAGE I
proteins. MAGE I expression relieved KAP1 mediated ID1 repression, causing
increased expression of ID1 mRNA and ID1 chromatin relaxation characterized by
loss of H3me3K9. MAGE I binding to KAP1 also induced ZNF382 poly-ubiquitination
and degradation, consistent with loss of ZNF382 leading to decreased KAP1 binding
to ID1. In contrast, MAGE I expression caused increased KAP1 binding to Ki67,
another KAP1 target gene, with increased H3me3K9 and decreased Ki67 mRNA
expression. Since KZNFs are required to direct KAP1 to specific genes, these
results show that MAGE I proteins can differentially regulate members of the KZNF
family and KAP1 mediated gene repression.

PMCID: PMC3158099
PMID: 21876767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Aug 25;11(9):617-25. doi: 10.1038/nri3043.

Antiviral TRIMs: friend or foe in autoimmune and autoinflammatory disease?

Jefferies C(1), Wynne C, Higgs R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123
St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. cjefferies@rcsi.ie

The concept that viral sensing systems, via their ability to drive
pro-inflammatory cytokine and interferon production, contribute to the
development of autoimmune and autoinflammatory disease is supported by a wide
range of clinical and experimental observations. Recently, the tripartite
motif-containing proteins (TRIMs) have emerged as having key roles in antiviral
immunity - either as viral restriction factors or as regulators of pathways
downstream of viral RNA and DNA sensors, and the inflammasome. Given their
involvement in these pathways, we propose that TRIM proteins contribute to the
development and pathology of autoimmune and autoinflammatory conditions, thus
making them potential novel targets for therapeutic manipulation.

PMID: 21866173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Genome Biol. 2011 Aug 18;12(8):R78. doi: 10.1186/gb-2011-12-8-r78.

A phospho-proteomic screen identifies substrates of the checkpoint kinase Chk1.

Blasius M(1), Forment JV, Thakkar N, Wagner SA, Choudhary C, Jackson SP.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

BACKGROUND: The cell-cycle checkpoint kinase Chk1 is essential in mammalian cells
due to its roles in controlling processes such as DNA replication, mitosis and
DNA-damage responses. Despite its paramount importance, how Chk1 controls these
functions remains unclear, mainly because very few Chk1 substrates have hitherto 
been identified.
RESULTS: Here, we combine a chemical genetics approach with high-resolution mass 
spectrometry to identify novel Chk1 substrates and their phosphorylation sites.
The list of targets produced reveals the potential impact of Chk1 function not
only on processes where Chk1 was already known to be involved, but also on other 
key cellular events such as transcription, RNA splicing and cell fate
determination. In addition, we validate and explore the phosphorylation of
transcriptional co-repressor KAP1 Ser473 as a novel DNA-damage-induced Chk1 site.
CONCLUSIONS: By providing a substantial set of potential Chk1 substrates, we
present opportunities for studying unanticipated functions for Chk1 in
controlling a wide range of cellular processes. We also refine the Chk1 consensus
sequence, facilitating the future prediction of Chk1 target sites. In addition,
our identification of KAP1 Ser473 phosphorylation as a robust readout for Chk1
activity could be used to explore the in vivo effects of Chk1 inhibitors that are
being developed for clinical evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3245618
PMID: 21851590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2476-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003243. Epub 2011
Aug 1.

Krüppel-associated box-associated protein 1 negatively regulates TNF-a-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity by influencing the interactions among STAT3, p300,
and NF-<U+03BA>B/p65.

Kamitani S(1), Togi S, Ikeda O, Nakasuji M, Sakauchi A, Sekine Y, Muromoto R,
Oritani K, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Krüppel-associated box-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is thought to act mainly as a 
scaffold for protein complexes, which together silence transcription by
triggering the formation of heterochromatin. Using small interfering RNA-mediated
KAP1 knockdown, we found that endogenous KAP1 negatively regulated TNF-a-induced 
IL-6 production in HeLa cells. KAP1 is likely to modulate the binding of NF-<U+03BA>B to
the IL-6 promoter because KAP1 knockdown enhanced TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B-luciferase 
activity, but not I<U+03BA>Ba degradation. Of importance, we found negative regulatory
effects of KAP1 on the serine phosphorylation of STAT3, the acetylation of
NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 by p300, and the nuclear localization of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65. In addition, KAP1
associated with NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 and inhibited the binding between NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 and p300.
Thus, KAP1 is likely to negatively control the acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65, which is
critical for its nuclear retention. Taken together, KAP1 modulated the
acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 by interfering with the interactions among STAT3, p300, 
and NF-<U+03BA>B/p65, resulting in reduced IL-6 production after TNF-a stimulation. Our 
findings that KAP1 directly interacts with transcriptional factors are new, and
will inform further research to elucidate KAP1 function.

PMID: 21810609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;31(19):4022-35. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05289-11. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

Analysis of human syndromes with disordered chromatin reveals the impact of
heterochromatin on the efficacy of ATM-dependent G2/M checkpoint arrest.

Brunton H(1), Goodarzi AA, Noon AT, Shrikhande A, Hansen RS, Jeggo PA, Shibata A.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex BN1 9RQ,
United Kingdom.

Heterochromatin (HC) poses a barrier to <U+03B3>H2AX focus expansion and DNA
double-strand break (DSB) repair, the latter being relieved by ATM-dependent
KAP-1 phosphorylation. Using high-resolution imaging, we show here that the HC
superstructure markedly restricts ATM signaling to cell cycle checkpoint
proteins. The impact of HC is greater than anticipated from the percentage of
HC-DNA and, in distinction to DSB repair, ATM only partly overcomes the
constraints posed by HC. Importantly, we examine ATM signaling in human syndromes
with disordered HC. After depletion of MeCP2 and DNMT3B, proteins defective in
the Rett and immunodeficiency with centromere instability and facial anomalies
(ICF) syndromes, respectively, we demonstrate enhanced <U+03B3>H2AX signal expansion at 
HC-chromocenters in mouse NIH 3T3 cells, which have visible HC-chromocenters.
Previous studies have shown that the G(2)/M checkpoint is inefficient requiring
multiple DSBs to initiate arrest. MeCP2 and DNMT3B depletion leads to
hypersensitive radiation-induced G(2)/M checkpoint arrest despite normal DSB
repair. Cell lines from Rett, ICF, and Hutchinson-Guildford progeria syndrome
patients similarly showed hyperactivated ATM signaling and hypersensitive and
prolonged G(2)/M checkpoint arrest. Collectively, these findings reveal that
heterochromatin contributes to the previously described inefficient G(2)/M
checkpoint arrest and demonstrate how the signaling response can be uncoupled
from DSB repair.

PMCID: PMC3187363
PMID: 21791604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jul 26;12:378. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-378.

A gene-rich, transcriptionally active environment and the pre-deposition of
repressive marks are predictive of susceptibility to KRAB/KAP1-mediated
silencing.

Meylan S(1), Groner AC, Ambrosini G, Malani N, Quenneville S, Zangger N,
Kapopoulou A, Kauzlaric A, Rougemont J, Ciuffi A, Bushman FD, Bucher P, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: KRAB-ZFPs (Krüppel-associated box domain-zinc finger proteins) are
vertebrate-restricted transcriptional repressors encoded in the hundreds by the
mouse and human genomes. They act via an essential cofactor, KAP1, which recruits
effectors responsible for the formation of facultative heterochromatin. We have
recently shown that KRAB/KAP1 can mediate long-range transcriptional repression
through heterochromatin spreading, but also demonstrated that this process is at 
times countered by endogenous influences.
METHOD: To investigate this issue further we used an ectopic KRAB-based
repressor. This system allowed us to tether KRAB/KAP1 to hundreds of euchromatic 
sites within genes, and to record its impact on gene expression. We then
correlated this KRAB/KAP1-mediated transcriptional effect to pre-existing genomic
and chromatin structures to identify specific characteristics making a gene
susceptible to repression.
RESULTS: We found that genes that were susceptible to KRAB/KAP1-mediated
silencing carried higher levels of repressive histone marks both at the promoter 
and over the transcribed region than genes that were insensitive. In parallel, we
found a high enrichment in euchromatic marks within both the close and more
distant environment of these genes.
CONCLUSION: Together, these data indicate that high levels of gene activity in
the genomic environment and the pre-deposition of repressive histone marks within
a gene increase its susceptibility to KRAB/KAP1-mediated repression.

PMCID: PMC3199781
PMID: 21791101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Exp Med. 2011 Aug 1;208(8):1649-60. doi: 10.1084/jem.20110118. Epub 2011 Jul
11.

Epigenetic tethering of AID to the donor switch region during immunoglobulin
class switch recombination.

Jeevan-Raj BP(1), Robert I, Heyer V, Page A, Wang JH, Cammas F, Alt FW, Losson R,
Reina-San-Martin B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut
National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale Unité 964/Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104, Université de Strasbourg, 67404
Illkirch, France.

Immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR) is initiated by double-stranded
DNA breaks (DSBs) in switch regions triggered by activation-induced cytidine
deaminase (AID). Although CSR correlates with epigenetic modifications at the IgH
locus, the relationship between these modifications and AID remains unknown. In
this study, we show that during CSR, AID forms a complex with KAP1 (KRAB
domain-associated protein 1) and HP1 (heterochromatin protein 1) that is tethered
to the donor switch region (Sµ) bearing H3K9me3 (trimethylated histone H3 at
lysine 9) in vivo. Furthermore, in vivo disruption of this complex results in
impaired AID recruitment to Sµ, inefficient DSB formation, and a concomitant
defect in CSR but not in somatic hypermutation. We propose that KAP1 and HP1
tether AID to H3K9me3 residues at the donor switch region, thus providing a
mechanism linking AID to epigenetic modifications during CSR.

PMCID: PMC3149220
PMID: 21746811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):484-95. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.05.004.

The TRIM family protein KAP1 inhibits HIV-1 integration.

Allouch A(1), Di Primio C, Alpi E, Lusic M, Arosio D, Giacca M, Cereseto A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri
7, Pisa 56126, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):447-8.

The integration of viral cDNA into the host genome is a critical step in the life
cycle of HIV-1. This step is catalyzed by integrase (IN), a viral enzyme that is 
positively regulated by acetylation via the cellular histone acetyl transferase
(HAT) p300. To investigate the relevance of IN acetylation, we searched for
cellular proteins that selectively bind acetylated IN and identified KAP1, a
protein belonging to the TRIM family of antiviral proteins. KAP1 binds acetylated
IN and induces its deacetylation through the formation of a protein complex which
includes the deacetylase HDAC1. Modulation of intracellular KAP1 levels in
different cell types including T cells, the primary HIV-1 target, revealed that
KAP1 curtails viral infectivity by selectively affecting HIV-1 integration. This 
study identifies KAP1 as a cellular factor restricting HIV-1 infection and
underscores the relevance of IN acetylation as a crucial step in the viral
infectious cycle.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21669397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):447-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.05.009.

KAPs off for HIV-1 integration.

Figueiredo A(1), Hope TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Host Microbe. 2011 Jun 16;9(6):484-95.

Integration of reverse transcribed HIV-1 DNA into the host genome, catalyzed by
HIV-1 integrase, represents an obligate step in establishing productive viral
infection. Allouch et al. (2011) identify KAP1 (TRIM28) as an interaction partner
of acetylated integrase. KAP1, in complex with HDAC1, represses HIV-1 integration
through specific deacetylation of HIV-1 integrase.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21669392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26267-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R111.252569. Epub
2011 Jun 7.

KAP1 protein: an enigmatic master regulator of the genome.

Iyengar S(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Genetics Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, California 
95616, USA.

In mammalian cells, multiple cellular processes, including gene silencing, cell
growth and differentiation, pluripotency, neoplastic transformation, apoptosis,
DNA repair, and maintenance of genomic integrity, converge on the evolutionarily 
conserved protein KAP1, which is thought to regulate the dynamic organization of 
chromatin structure via its ability to influence epigenetic patterns and
chromatin compaction. In this minireview, we discuss how KAP1 might execute such 
pleiotropic effects, focusing on genomic targeting mechanisms, protein-protein
interactions, specific post-translational modifications of both KAP1 and
associated histones, and transcriptome analyses of cells deficient in KAP1.

PMCID: PMC3143589
PMID: 21652716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun 5;18(7):831-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2077.

KAP-1 phosphorylation regulates CHD3 nucleosome remodeling during the DNA
double-strand break response.

Goodarzi AA(1), Kurka T, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex, UK.
a.goodarzi@ucalgary.ca

KAP-1 poses a substantial barrier to DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair within 
heterochromatin that is alleviated by ATM-dependent KAP-1 phosphorylation
(pKAP-1). Here we address the mechanistic consequences of pKAP-1 that promote
heterochromatic DSB repair and chromatin relaxation. KAP-1 function involves
autoSUMOylation and recruitment of nucleosome deacetylation, methylation and
remodeling activities. Although heterochromatin acetylation or methylation
changes were not detected, radiation-induced pKAP-1 dispersed the nucleosome
remodeler CHD3 from DSBs and triggered concomitant chromatin relaxation; pKAP-1
loss reversed these effects. Depletion or inactivation of CHD3, or ablation of
its interaction with KAP-1(SUMO1), bypassed pKAP-1's role in repair. Though KAP-1
SUMOylation was unaffected after irradiation, CHD3 dissociated from KAP-1(SUMO1) 
in a pKAP-1-dependent manner. We demonstrate that KAP-1(Ser824) phosphorylation
generates a motif that directly perturbs interactions between CHD3's
SUMO-interacting motif and SUMO1, dispersing CHD3 from heterochromatin DSBs and
enabling repair.

PMID: 21642969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):6986-97. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr331. Epub 2011 
May 19.

Endogenously induced DNA double strand breaks arise in heterochromatic DNA
regions and require ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Artemis for their repair.

Woodbine L(1), Brunton H, Goodarzi AA, Shibata A, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9RQ,
UK.

Ataxia telangiectasia (ATM) mutated and Artemis, the proteins defective in ataxia
telangiectasia and a class of Radiosensitive-Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
(RS-SCID), respectively, function in the repair of DNA double strand breaks
(DSBs), which arise in heterochromatic DNA (HC-DSBs) following exposure to
ionizing radiation (IR). Here, we examine whether they have protective roles
against oxidative damage induced and/or endogenously induced DSBs. We show that
DSBs generated following acute exposure of G0/G1 cells to the oxidative damaging 
agent, tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBH), are repaired with fast and slow components
of similar magnitude to IR-induced DSBs and have a similar requirement for ATM
and Artemis. Strikingly, DSBs accumulate in ATM(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts
(MEFs) and in ATM or Artemis-defective human primary fibroblasts maintained for
prolonged periods under confluence arrest. The accumulated DSBs localize to
HC-DNA regions. Collectively, the results provide strong evidence that
oxidatively induced DSBs arise in HC as well as euchromatic DNA and that Artemis 
and ATM function in their repair. Additionally, we show that Artemis functions
downstream of ATM and is dispensable for HC-relaxation and for pKAP-1 foci
formation. These findings are important for evaluating the impact of endogenously
arising DNA DSBs in ATM and Artemis-deficient patients.

PMCID: PMC3167608
PMID: 21596788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 17;108(20):8212-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1101544108. Epub 2011 Apr 29.

Transcription cofactors TRIM24, TRIM28, and TRIM33 associate to form regulatory
complexes that suppress murine hepatocellular carcinoma.

Herquel B(1), Ouararhni K, Khetchoumian K, Ignat M, Teletin M, Mark M, Béchade G,
Van Dorsselaer A, Sanglier-Cianférani S, Hamiche A, Cammas F, Davidson I, Losson 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cédex,
France.

TRIM24 (TIF1a), TRIM28 (TIF1ß), and TRIM33 (TIF1<U+03B3>) are three related cofactors
belonging to the tripartite motif superfamily that interact with distinct
transcription factors. TRIM24 interacts with the liganded retinoic acid (RA)
receptor to repress its transcriptional activity. Germ line inactivation of
TRIM24 in mice deregulates RA-signaling in hepatocytes leading to the development
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here we show that TRIM24 can be purified as at
least two macromolecular complexes comprising either TRIM33 or TRIM33 and TRIM28.
Somatic hepatocyte-specific inactivation of TRIM24, TRIM28, or TRIM33 all promote
HCC in a cell-autonomous manner in mice. Moreover, HCC formation upon TRIM24
inactivation is strongly potentiated by further loss of TRIM33. These results
demonstrate that the TIF1-related subfamily of TRIM proteins interact both
physically and functionally to modulate HCC formation in mice.

PMCID: PMC3100982
PMID: 21531907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biochem J. 2011 Jun 1;436(2):387-97. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101748.

The novel Nrf2-interacting factor KAP1 regulates susceptibility to oxidative
stress by promoting the Nrf2-mediated cytoprotective response.

Maruyama A(1), Nishikawa K, Kawatani Y, Mimura J, Hosoya T, Harada N, Yamamato M,
Itoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Response Science, Center for Advanced Medical Science,
Hirosaki University Graduate School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori
036-8562, Japan.

The transcription factor Nrf2 (nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2)
co-ordinately regulates ARE (antioxidant-response element)-mediated induction of 
cytoprotective genes in response to electrophiles and oxidative stress; however, 
the molecular mechanism controlling Nrf2-dependent gene expression is not fully
understood. To identify factors that regulate Nrf2-dependent transcription, we
searched for proteins that interact with the Nrf2-NT (N-terminal Nrf2
transactivation domain) by affinity purification from HeLa nuclear extracts. In
the present study, we identified KAP1 [KRAB (Krüppel-associated box)-associated
protein 1] as a novel Nrf2-NT-interacting protein. Pull-down analysis confirmed
the interaction between KAP1 and Nrf2 in cultured cells and demonstrated that the
N-terminal region of KAP1 binds to Nrf2-NT in vitro. Reporter assays showed that 
KAP1 facilitates Nrf2 transactivation activity in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, the induction of the Nrf2-dependent expression of HO-1 (haem
oxygenase-1) and NQO1 [NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1] by DEM (diethyl maleate)
was attenuated by KAP1 knockdown in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. This finding established
that KAP1 acts as a positive regulator of Nrf2. Although Nrf2 nuclear
accumulation was unaffected by KAP1 knockdown, the ability of Nrf2 to bind to the
regulatory region of HO-1 and NQO1 was reduced. Moreover, KAP1 knockdown enhanced
the sensitivity of NIH 3T3 cells to tert-butylhydroquinone, H2O2 and diamide.
These results support our contention that KAP1 participates in the oxidative
stress response by maximizing Nrf2-dependent transcription.

PMID: 21382013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genes Dev. 2011 Mar 15;25(6):594-607. doi: 10.1101/gad.2008511. Epub 2011 Feb 28.

Endogenous retroviruses and neighboring genes are coordinately repressed by
LSD1/KDM1A.

Macfarlan TS(1), Gifford WD, Agarwal S, Driscoll S, Lettieri K, Wang J, Andrews
SE, Franco L, Rosenfeld MG, Ren B, Pfaff SL.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California, 92037, USA.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) constitute a substantial portion of mammalian
genomes, and their retrotransposition activity helped to drive genetic variation,
yet their expression is tightly regulated to prevent unchecked amplification. We 
generated a series of mouse mutants and embryonic stem (ES) cell lines carrying
"deletable" and "rescuable" alleles of the lysine-specific demethylase
LSD1/KDM1A. In the absence of KDM1A, the murine endogenous retrovirus
MuERV-L/MERVL becomes overexpressed and embryonic development arrests at
gastrulation. A number of cellular genes normally restricted to the zygotic
genome activation (ZGA) period also become up-regulated in Kdm1a mutants.
Strikingly, many of these cellular genes are flanked by MERVL sequences or have
cryptic LTRs as promoters that are targets of KDM1A repression. Using genome-wide
epigenetic profiling of Kdm1a mutant ES cells, we demonstrate that this subset of
ZGA genes and MERVL elements displays increased methylation of histone H3K4,
increased acetylation of H3K27, and decreased methylation of H3K9. As a
consequence, Kdm1a mutant ES cells exhibit an unusual propensity to generate
extraembryonic tissues. Our findings suggest that ancient retroviral insertions
were used to co-opt regulatory sequences targeted by KDM1A for epigenetic
silencing of cell fate genes during early mammalian embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC3059833
PMID: 21357675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 May;31(9):1833-47. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01331-10. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

Functional analysis of KAP1 genomic recruitment.

Iyengar S(1), Ivanov AV, Jin VX, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Mail Code 9601, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

TRIM28 (KAP1) is upregulated in many cancers and has been implicated in both
transcriptional activation and repression. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
and sequencing, we show that KAP1 binding sites fall into several categories,
specifically, the 3' coding exons of zinc finger (ZNF) genes and promoter regions
of ZNFs and other genes. The currently accepted model is that KAP1 is recruited
to the genome via interaction of its N-terminal RBCC domain with KRAB ZNFs (KRAB 
domain containing ZNFs). To determine whether the interaction of KAP1 with KRAB
ZNFs is the mechanism by which KAP1 is recruited to genomic binding sites, we
analyzed stable cell lines that express tagged wild-type and mutant KAP1.
Surprisingly, deletion of the RBCC domain abolished KAP1 binding to the 3' exons 
of ZNF genes but KAP1 binding to promoter regions was unaffected. Using KAP1
knockdown cells, we showed that the genes most responsive to KAP1 were not ZNF
genes but instead were either indirect targets or had KAP1 bound 10 to 100 kb
from the transcription start site. Therefore, our studies suggest that KAP1 plays
a role distinct from transcriptional regulation at the majority of its strongest 
binding sites.

PMCID: PMC3133220
PMID: 21343339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 1;10(5):735-6. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

KAPping PML nuclear body number.

Salomoni P.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 15;10(2):308-22.

PMID: 21325882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 15;10(4):576-7. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

KAP1: a new link between the DNA damage response and PML nuclear bodies.

Hemmerich P.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 15;10(2):308-22.

PMID: 21311239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011 Apr 15;508(2):217-21. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.01.007. 
Epub 2011 Jan 28.

Identification of novel small molecules that inhibit protein-protein interactions
between MAGE and KAP-1.

Bhatia N(1), Yang B, Xiao TZ, Peters N, Hoffmann MF, Longley BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA. nbhatia@dermatology.wisc.edu

The Class I MAGE proteins are normally expressed only in developing germ cells
but are often aberrantly expressed in malignancies, particularly melanoma, making
them good therapeutic targets. MAGE proteins promote tumor survival by binding to
the RBCC region of KAP-1 and suppressing p53. Although, suppression of MAGE
expression, by RNA interference, relieves p53 suppression and inhibits tumor
growth, its therapeutic uses are limited by lack of methods for systemic delivery
of small interfering RNA. To overcome this barrier, we sought to discover
chemical compounds that inhibit binding between MAGE and KAP-1 proteins. Based on
previously published effects of MAGE suppression, we developed a strategy for
screening a small molecule library based on selective death of MAGE positive
cells, activation of p53 and lack of caspase activity. We screened the Maybridge 
HitFinder library of compounds and eight compounds fulfilled these criteria.
Seven of these compounds interfered with co-precipitation of MAGE and KAP-1, and 
three interfered with binding of MAGE and KAP-1 in a mammalian two hybrid assay. 
We now report identification of three potential compounds that interfere with
MAGE/KAP-1 binding and can be developed as novel chemo-therapeutic agents for
treatment of advanced melanoma and other cancers.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3149886
PMID: 21277283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 22;286(16):14291-303. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.204602. Epub
2011 Jan 18.

A multiprotein binding interface in an intrinsically disordered region of the
tumor suppressor protein interferon regulatory factor-1.

Narayan V(1), Halada P, Hernychová L, Chong YP, áková J, Hupp TR, Vojtesek B,
Ball KL.

Author information: 
(1)CRUK Interferon and Cell Signalling Group, Cell Signalling Unit, Edinburgh
Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, United
Kingdom.

The interferon-regulated transcription factor and tumor suppressor protein IRF-1 
is predicted to be largely disordered outside of the DNA-binding domain. One of
the advantages of intrinsically disordered protein domains is thought to be their
ability to take part in multiple, specific but low affinity protein interactions;
however, relatively few IRF-1-interacting proteins have been described. The
recent identification of a functional binding interface for the E3-ubiquitin
ligase CHIP within the major disordered domain of IRF-1 led us to ask whether
this region might be employed more widely by regulators of IRF-1 function. Here
we describe the use of peptide aptamer-based affinity chromatography coupled with
mass spectrometry to define a multiprotein binding interface on IRF-1 (Mf2
domain; amino acids 106-140) and to identify Mf2-binding proteins from A375
cells. Based on their function as known transcriptional regulators, a selection
of the Mf2 domain-binding proteins (NPM1, TRIM28, and YB-1) have been validated
using in vitro and cell-based assays. Interestingly, although NPM1, TRIM28, and
YB-1 all bind to the Mf2 domain, they have differing amino acid specificities,
demonstrating the degree of combinatorial diversity and specificity available
through linear interaction motifs.

PMCID: PMC3077630
PMID: 21245151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 15;10(2):308-22. Epub 2011 Jan 15.

KAP1 depletion increases PML nuclear body number in concert with ultrastructural 
changes in chromatin.

Kepkay R(1), Attwood KM, Ziv Y, Shiloh Y, Dellaire G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 15;10(4):576-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 1;10(5):735-6.

The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein is the main structural component of
subnuclear domains termed PML nuclear bodies (PML NBs), which are implicated in
tumor suppression by regulating apoptosis, cell senescence, and DNA repair.
Previously, we demonstrated that ATM kinase can regulate changes in PML NB number
in response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). PML NBs make extensive contacts
with chromatin and ATM mediates DNA damage-dependent changes in chromatin
structure in part by the phosphorylation of the KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) 
at S824. We now demonstrate that in the absence of DNA damage, reduced KAP1
expression results in a constitutive increase in PML NB number in both human
U2-OS cells and normal human diploid fibroblasts. This increase in PML NB number 
correlated with decreased nuclear lamina-associated heterochromatin and a 30%
reduction in chromatin density as observed by electron microscopy, which is
reminiscent of DNA damaged chromatin. These changes in chromatin ultrastructure
also correlated with increased histone H4 acetylation, and treatment with the
HDAC inhibitor TSA failed to further increase PML NB number. Although PML NB
number could be restored by complementation with wild-type KAP1, both the loss of
KAP1 or complementation with phospho-mutants of KAP1 inhibited the early increase
in PML NB number and reduced the fold induction of PML NBs by 25-30% in response 
to etoposide-induced DNA DSBs. Together these data implicate KAP1-dependent
changes in chromatin structure as one possible mechanism by which ATM may
regulate PML NB number in response to DNA damage.

PMID: 21228624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 8;5(12):e15082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015082.

ZNF274 recruits the histone methyltransferase SETDB1 to the 3' ends of ZNF genes.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Blahnik KR, Jin VX, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of California
Davis, Davis, California, United States of America.

Only a small percentage of human transcription factors (e.g. those associated
with a specific differentiation program) are expressed in a given cell type.
Thus, cell fate is mainly determined by cell type-specific silencing of
transcription factors that drive different cellular lineages. Several histone
modifications have been associated with gene silencing, including H3K27me3 and
H3K9me3. We have previously shown that genes for the two largest classes of
mammalian transcription factors are marked by distinct histone modifications;
homeobox genes are marked by H3K27me3 and zinc finger genes are marked by
H3K9me3. Several histone methyltransferases (e.g. G9a and SETDB1) may be involved
in mediating the H3K9me3 silencing mark. We have used ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq to
demonstrate that SETDB1, but not G9a, is associated with regions of the genome
enriched for H3K9me3. One current model is that SETDB1 is recruited to specific
genomic locations via interaction with the corepressor TRIM28 (KAP1), which is in
turn recruited to the genome via interaction with zinc finger transcription
factors that contain a Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain. However, specific
KRAB-ZNFs that recruit TRIM28 (KAP1) and SETDB1 to the genome have not been
identified. We now show that ZNF274 (a KRAB-ZNF that contains 5 C2H2 zinc finger 
domains), can interact with KAP1 both in vivo and in vitro and, using ChIP-seq,
we show that ZNF274 binding sites co-localize with SETDB1, KAP1, and H3K9me3 at
the 3' ends of zinc finger genes. Knockdown of ZNF274 with siRNAs reduced the
levels of KAP1 and SETDB1 recruitment to the binding sites. These studies provide
the first identification of a KRAB domain-containing ZNF that is involved in
recruitment of the KAP1 and SETDB1 to specific regions of the human genome.

PMCID: PMC2999557
PMID: 21170338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):548-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.014. Epub 2010 
Dec 14.

TIF1ß association with HP1 is essential for post-gastrulation development, but
not for Sertoli cell functions during spermatogenesis.

Herzog M(1), Wendling O, Guillou F, Chambon P, Mark M, Losson R, Cammas F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
Illkirch-Cedex, France.

TIF1ß is an essential mammalian transcriptional corepressor. It interacts with
the heterochromatin proteins HP1 through a highly conserved motif, the HP1box,
and we have previously shown that this interaction is essential for the
differentiation of F9 cells to occur. Here we address the in vivo functions of
the TIF1ß-HP1 interaction, by generating mice in which the TIF1ß HP1box is
mutated, leading to the loss of TIF1ß interaction with HP1. The effects of the
mutation were monitored in two instances, where TIF1ß is known to play key roles:
early embryonic development and spermatogenesis. We find that mutating the HP1box
of TIF1ß disrupts embryonic development soon after gastrulation. This effect is
likely caused by the misexpression of TIF1ß targets that regulate mitotic
progression and pluripotency. In contrast, in Sertoli cells, we found that the
absence of TIF1ß but not its mutation in the HP1box leads to a clear defect of
spermatogenesis characterized by a failure of spermatid release and a testicular 
degeneration. These data show that the interaction between TIF1ß and HP1 is
essential for some but not all TIF1ß functions in vivo. Furthermore, we observed 
that TIF1ß is dispersed through the nucleoplasm of E7.0 embryos, whereas it is
mainly associated with pericentromeric heterochromatin of E8.5 embryos and of
Sertoli cells, an association that is lost upon TIF1ß HP1box mutation.
Altogether, these data provide strong evidence that nuclear organization plays
key roles during early embryonic development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21163256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genome Biol. 2010;11(11):R111. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-11-r111. Epub 2010 Nov 19.

Reduced levels of two modifiers of epigenetic gene silencing, Dnmt3a and Trim28, 
cause increased phenotypic noise.

Whitelaw NC(1), Chong S, Morgan DK, Nestor C, Bruxner TJ, Ashe A, Lambley E,
Meehan R, Whitelaw E.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Population Health, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 300 
Herston Road, Brisbane, Queensland 4006, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Inbred individuals reared in controlled environments display
considerable variance in many complex traits but the underlying cause of this
intangible variation has been an enigma. Here we show that two modifiers of
epigenetic gene silencing play a critical role in the process.
RESULTS: Inbred mice heterozygous for a null mutation in DNA methyltransferase 3a
(Dnmt3a) or tripartite motif protein 28 (Trim28) show greater coefficients of
variance in body weight than their wild-type littermates. Trim28 mutants
additionally develop metabolic syndrome and abnormal behavior with incomplete
penetrance. Genome-wide gene expression analyses identified 284 significantly
dysregulated genes in Trim28 heterozygote mutants compared to wild-type mice,
with Mas1, which encodes a G-protein coupled receptor implicated in lipid
metabolism, showing the greatest average change in expression (7.8-fold higher in
mutants). This gene also showed highly variable expression between mutant
individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide a molecular explanation of developmental noise
in whole organisms and suggest that faithful epigenetic control of transcription 
is central to suppressing deleterious levels of phenotypic variation. These
findings have broad implications for understanding the mechanisms underlying
sporadic and complex disease in humans.

© 2010 Whitelaw et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3156950
PMID: 21092094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. DNA Repair (Amst). 2010 Dec 10;9(12):1273-82. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2010.09.013. 
Epub 2010 Oct 30.

The influence of heterochromatin on DNA double strand break repair: Getting the
strong, silent type to relax.

Goodarzi AA(1), Jeggo P, Lobrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex BN1 9RQ,
United Kingdom.

DNA non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) represent
the major DNA double strand break (DSB) pathways in mammalian cells, whilst
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) lies at the core of the DSB signalling
response. ATM signalling plays a major role in modifying chromatin structure in
the vicinity of the DSB and increasing evidence suggests that this function
influences the DSB rejoining process. DSBs have long been known to be repaired
with two (or more) component kinetics. The majority (~85%) of DSBs are repaired
with fast kinetics in a predominantly ATM-independent manner. In contrast, ~15%
of radiation-induced DSBs are repaired with markedly slower kinetics via a
process that requires ATM and those mediator proteins, such as MDC1 or 53BP1,
that accumulate at ionising radiation induced foci (IRIF). DSBs repaired with
slow kinetics predominantly localise to the periphery of genomic heterochromatin 
(HC). Indeed, there is mounting evidence that chromatin complexity and not damage
complexity confers slow DSB repair kinetics. ATM's role in HC-DSB repair involves
the direct phosphorylation of KAP-1, a key HC formation factor. KAP-1
phosphorylation (pKAP-1) arises in both a pan-nuclear and a focal manner after
radiation and ATM-dependent pKAP-1 is essential for DSB repair within HC regions.
Mediator proteins such as 53BP1, which are also essential for HC-DSB repair, are 
expendable for pan-nuclear pKAP-1 whilst being essential for pKAP-1 formation at 
IRIF. Data suggests that the essential function of the mediator proteins is to
promote the retention of activated ATM at DSBs, concentrating the phosphorylation
of KAP-1 at HC DSBs. DSBs arising in G2 phase are also repaired with fast and
slow kinetics but, in contrast to G0/G1 where they all DSBs are repaired by NHEJ,
the slow component of DSB repair in G2 phase represents an HR process involving
the Artemis endonuclease. Results suggest that whilst NHEJ repairs the majority
of DSBs in G2 phase, Artemis-dependent HR uniquely repairs HC DSBs. Collectively,
these recent studies highlight not only how chromatin complexity influences the
factors required for DSB repair but also the pathway choice.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell. 2010 Sep 24;39(6):963-74. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.08.029.

MAGE-RING protein complexes comprise a family of E3 ubiquitin ligases.

Doyle JM(1), Gao J, Wang J, Yang M, Potts PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9038, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Sep 24;39(6):835-7.

The melanoma antigen (MAGE) family consists of more than 60 genes, many of which 
are cancer-testis antigens that are highly expressed in cancer and play a
critical role in tumorigenesis. However, the biochemical and cellular functions
of this enigmatic family of proteins have remained elusive. Here, we identify
really interesting new gene (RING) domain proteins as binding partners for MAGE
family proteins. Multiple MAGE family proteins bind E3 RING ubiquitin ligases
with specificity. The crystal structure of one of these MAGE-RING complexes,
MAGE-G1-NSE1, reveals structural insights into MAGE family proteins and their
interaction with E3 RING ubiquitin ligases. Biochemical and cellular assays
demonstrate that MAGE proteins enhance the ubiquitin ligase activity of RING
domain proteins. For example, MAGE-C2-TRIM28 is shown to target p53 for
degradation in a proteasome-dependent manner, consistent with its tumorigenic
functions. These findings define a biochemical and cellular function for the MAGE
protein family.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4509788
PMID: 20864041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Oct;8(10):1388-98. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0042. Epub 
2010 Sep 21.

Interactions of ErbB4 and Kap1 connect the growth factor and DNA damage response 
pathways.

Gilmore-Hebert M(1), Ramabhadran R, Stern DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

ErbB4 is unusual among receptor tyrosine kinases because some isoforms can be
efficiently cleaved at the plasma membrane to release a soluble intracellular
domain. The cleavage product has high kinase activity and homes to the nucleus. A
screen for proteins that associate with the ErbB4 intracellular domain identified
candidate interactors including ITCH, WWP2, Nucleolin, and Krab-associated
protein 1 (Kap1). Kap1 binds to multiple isoforms of ErbB4 but does not require
ErbB4 kinase activity for binding, nor is it an ErbB4 substrate. Kap1 reduces
ERBB4 transcription and either directly or indirectly modulates the expression of
genes that are themselves regulated by ErbB4. Upregulation of ErbB4 and
suppression of MDM2 jointly enhance and accelerate the accumulation of p21(CIP1) 
in response to DNA damage. Overall, these findings further substantiate the role 
of ErbB4 in conjoint regulation of growth factor signaling and DNA damage
responses.

PMCID: PMC3901583
PMID: 20858735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31337-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.155788. Epub 2010
Aug 1.

Isoform-specific intermolecular disulfide bond formation of heterochromatin
protein 1 (HP1).

Higo S(1), Asano Y, Kato H, Yamazaki S, Nakano A, Tsukamoto O, Seguchi O, Asai M,
Asakura M, Asanuma H, Sanada S, Minamino T, Komuro I, Kitakaze M, Takashima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Three mammalian isoforms of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), a, ß, and <U+03B3>, play
diverse roles in gene regulation. Despite their structural similarity, the
diverse functions of these isoforms imply that they are additionally regulated by
post-translational modifications. Here, we have identified intermolecular
disulfide bond formation of HP1 cysteines in an isoform-specific manner. Cysteine
133 in HP1a and cysteine 177 in HP1<U+03B3> were involved in intermolecular
homodimerization. Although both HP1a and HP1<U+03B3> contain reactive cysteine residues,
only HP1<U+03B3> readily and reversibly formed disulfide homodimers under oxidative
conditions. Oxidatively dimerized HP1<U+03B3> strongly and transiently interacted with
TIF1ß, a universal transcriptional co-repressor. Under oxidative conditions, HP1<U+03B3>
dimerized and held TIF1ß in a chromatin component and inhibited its repression
ability. Our results highlight a novel, isoform-specific role for HP1 as a sensor
of the cellular redox state.

PMCID: PMC2951208
PMID: 20675861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Proteome Res. 2010 Aug 6;9(8):4016-27. doi: 10.1021/pr100194d.

Proteomic analysis of nuclei isolated from cancer cell lines treated with
indenoisoquinoline NSC 724998, a novel topoisomerase I inhibitor.

Han B(1), Stockwin LH, Hancock C, Yu SX, Hollingshead MG, Newton DL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, SAIC-Frederick Inc., NCI-Frederick,
Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Erratum in
    J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):2128.

The indenoisoquinoline NSC724998 is a novel topoisomerase I (Top1) inhibitor
entering Phase I clinical trials at the National Cancer Institute, USA. In this
study, 2-D PAGE analysis was performed on nuclear lysates prepared from HCT-116
and A375 cells treated with 1 microM NSC724998 for 24 h and the differentially
regulated spots identified by LC-MS/MS. One-hundred fourteen protein spot
differentials were identified, 66 from A375 cells and 48 from HCT-116 cells.
Proteins related to apoptosis changed specifically in A375 cells, whereas
proteins involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome system were highly enriched in
treated HCT-116 cells. Importantly, 12 differentially expressed proteins (ETFA,
HCC1, HNRCL, KAP1, NPM, NUCL, PRDX1, PRP19, PSB6, RAE1L, RU2A, and SFRS9) were
common to both cell lines. Western blotting and immunocytochemistry confirmed
significant nuclear upregulation of both the proteasome subunit PSB6 and the
transcriptional repressor KAP1. Interestingly, increased KAP1 polypeptide was
accompanied by enhanced phosphorylation at Ser824. Similar to gammaH2AX, KAP1
phosphorylation was consistently enhanced in a panel of 12 cell lines and in A375
xenografts following NSC 724998 treatment. In summary, these data enhance our
understanding of protein dynamics in the nucleus following DNA damage and provide
an alternate marker (pKAP1) with potential for monitoring clinical responses to
Top1 poisons.

PMCID: PMC2917484
PMID: 20515076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 15;107(24):10926-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0907601107. Epub 2010 May 27.

TIF1beta regulates the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner.

Seki Y(1), Kurisaki A, Watanabe-Susaki K, Nakajima Y, Nakanishi M, Arai Y, Shiota
K, Sugino H, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Organ Development Research Laboratory, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba 305-8562, Japan.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 27;107(30):13556.

Transcription networks composed of various transcriptional factors specifically
expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells have been implicated in
the regulation of pluripotency in ES cells. However, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for self-renewal, maintenance of pluripotency, and lineage
specification during differentiation of ES cells are still unclear. The results
of this study demonstrate that a phosphorylation-dependent chromatin relaxation
factor, transcriptional intermediary factor-1beta (TIF1beta), is a unique
regulator of the pluripotency of ES cells and regulates Oct3/4-dependent
transcription in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. TIF1beta is specifically
phosphorylated in pluripotent mouse ES cells at the C-terminal serine 824, which 
has been previously shown to induce chromatin relaxation. Phosphorylated TIF1beta
is partially colocalized at the activated chromatin markers, and forms a complex 
with the pluripotency-specific transcription factor Oct3/4 and subunits of the
switching defective/sucrose nonfermenting, ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complex, Smarcd1 [corrected], Brg-1, and BAF155, all of which are components of
an ES-specific chromatin remodeling complex, esBAF. Phosphorylated TIF1beta
specifically induces ES cell-specific genes and enables prolonged maintenance of 
an undifferentiated state in mouse ES cells. Moreover, TIF1beta regulates the
reprogramming process of somatic cells in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Our
results suggest that TIF1beta provides a phosphorylation-dependent, bidirectional
platform for specific transcriptional factors and chromatin remodeling enzymes
that regulate the cell differentiation process and the pluripotency of stem
cells.

PMCID: PMC2890767
PMID: 20508149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Sci Signal. 2010 Apr 27;3(119):ra32. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2000781.

SUMOylation of the transcriptional co-repressor KAP1 is regulated by the serine
and threonine phosphatase PP1.

Li X(1), Lin HH, Chen H, Xu X, Shih HM, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, City of Hope Beckman Research Institute,
Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain-associated protein 1 [KAP1, also known as
transcription intermediary factor-1beta (TIF1beta)] is a ubiquitous
transcriptional co-repressor that is susceptible to phosphorylation at Ser(824)
by ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and to modification by small
ubiquitin-like modifying (SUMO) proteins. Here, we found that, whereas the
protein phosphatase 1alpha isoform (PP1alpha) directly interacted with KAP1 under
basal conditions, PP1beta interacted with KAP1 only in response to genotoxic
stress. Changes in the abundance of PP1alpha or PP1beta had differential effects 
on the phosphorylation and SUMOylation states of KAP1 under basal conditions and 
in response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
re-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that PP1alpha and PP1beta were
recruited to KAP1 with different kinetics before and after the induction of DNA
DSBs, which provided a mechanistic basis for the switch in the phosphorylation
and SUMOylation states of KAP1. PP1beta-dependent SUMOylation of KAP1 occurred by
mechanisms that were dependent and independent of the phosphorylation status of
Ser(824). We posit a mechanism whereby the combined actions of PP1alpha and
PP1beta cause dephosphorylation of KAP1 at Ser(824) and assure its SUMOylation to
counter the effect of ATM, thereby regulating the transcription of KAP1 target
genes in unstressed and stressed cells.

PMCID: PMC3302164
PMID: 20424263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS Genet. 2010 Mar 5;6(3):e1000869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000869.

KRAB-zinc finger proteins and KAP1 can mediate long-range transcriptional
repression through heterochromatin spreading.

Groner AC(1), Meylan S, Ciuffi A, Zangger N, Ambrosini G, Dénervaud N, Bucher P, 
Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Krüppel-associated box domain-zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) are
tetrapod-specific transcriptional repressors encoded in the hundreds by the human
genome. In order to explore their as yet ill-defined impact on gene expression,
we developed an ectopic repressor assay, allowing the study of KRAB-mediated
transcriptional regulation at hundreds of different transcriptional units. By
targeting a drug-controllable KRAB-containing repressor to gene-trapping
lentiviral vectors, we demonstrate that KRAB and its corepressor KAP1 can silence
promoters located several tens of kilobases (kb) away from their DNA binding
sites, with an efficiency which is generally higher for promoters located within 
15 kb or less. Silenced promoters exhibit a loss of histone H3-acetylation, an
increase in H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3), and a drop in RNA Pol II
recruitment, consistent with a block of transcriptional initiation following the 
establishment of silencing marks. Furthermore, we reveal that KRAB-mediated
repression is established by the long-range spreading of H3K9me3 and
heterochromatin protein 1 beta (HP1beta) between the repressor binding site and
the promoter. We confirm the biological relevance of this phenomenon by
documenting KAP1-dependent transcriptional repression at an endogenous KRAB-ZFP
gene cluster, where KAP1 binds to the 3' end of genes and mediates propagation of
H3K9me3 and HP1beta towards their 5' end. Together, our data support a model in
which KRAB/KAP1 recruitment induces long-range repression through the spread of
heterochromatin. This finding not only suggests auto-regulatory mechanisms in the
control of KRAB-ZFP gene clusters, but also provides important cues for
interpreting future genome-wide DNA binding data of KRAB-ZFPs and KAP1.

PMCID: PMC2832679
PMID: 20221260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nature. 2010 Apr 8;464(7290):927-31. doi: 10.1038/nature08858. Epub 2010 Feb 17.

Proviral silencing in embryonic stem cells requires the histone methyltransferase
ESET.

Matsui T(1), Leung D, Miyashita H, Maksakova IA, Miyachi H, Kimura H, Tachibana
M, Lorincz MC, Shinkai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute for Virus
Research, Kyoto University, 53 Shogoin, Kawara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2014 Sep 4;513(7516):128.

Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), retrovirus-like elements with long terminal
repeats, are widely dispersed in the euchromatic compartment in mammalian cells, 
comprising approximately 10% of the mouse genome. These parasitic elements are
responsible for >10% of spontaneous mutations. Whereas DNA methylation has an
important role in proviral silencing in somatic and germ-lineage cells, an
additional DNA-methylation-independent pathway also functions in embryonal
carcinoma and embryonic stem (ES) cells to inhibit transcription of the exogenous
gammaretrovirus murine leukaemia virus (MLV). Notably, a recent genome-wide study
revealed that ERVs are also marked by histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) and H4K20me3 in ES cells but not in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.
However, the role that these marks have in proviral silencing remains unexplored.
Here we show that the H3K9 methyltransferase ESET (also called SETDB1 or KMT1E)
and the Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-associated protein 1 (KAP1, also called
TRIM28) are required for H3K9me3 and silencing of endogenous and introduced
retroviruses specifically in mouse ES cells. Furthermore, whereas ESET enzymatic 
activity is crucial for HP1 binding and efficient proviral silencing, the H4K20
methyltransferases Suv420h1 and Suv420h2 are dispensable for silencing. Notably, 
in DNA methyltransferase triple knockout (Dnmt1(-/-)Dnmt3a(-/-)Dnmt3b(-/-)) mouse
ES cells, ESET and KAP1 binding and ESET-mediated H3K9me3 are maintained and ERVs
are minimally derepressed. We propose that a DNA-methylation-independent pathway 
involving KAP1 and ESET/ESET-mediated H3K9me3 is required for proviral silencing 
during the period early in embryogenesis when DNA methylation is dynamically
reprogrammed.

PMID: 20164836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Feb;12(2):177-84. doi: 10.1038/ncb2017. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

53BP1-dependent robust localized KAP-1 phosphorylation is essential for
heterochromatic DNA double-strand break repair.

Noon AT(1), Shibata A, Rief N, Löbrich M, Stewart GS, Jeggo PA, Goodarzi AA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex, BN1
9RQ, UK.

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) trigger ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated)
signalling and elicit genomic rearrangements and chromosomal fragmentation if
misrepaired or unrepaired. Although most DSB repair is ATM-independent,
approximately 15% of ionizing radiation (IR)-induced breaks persist in the
absence of ATM-signalling. 53BP1 (p53-binding protein 1) facilitates
ATM-dependent DSB repair but is largely dispensable for ATM activation or
checkpoint arrest. ATM promotes DSB repair within heterochromatin by
phosphorylating KAP-1 (KRAB-associated protein 1, also known as TIF1beta, TRIM28 
or KRIP-1; ref. 2). Here, we show that the ATM signalling mediator proteins MDC1,
RNF8, RNF168 and 53BP1 are also required for heterochromatic DSB repair. Although
KAP-1 phosphorylation is critical for 53BP1-mediated repair, overall
phosphorylated KAP-1 (pKAP-1) levels are only modestly affected by 53BP1 loss.
pKAP-1 is transiently pan-nuclear but also forms foci overlapping with gammaH2AX 
in heterochromatin. Cells that do not form 53BP1 foci, including human RIDDLE
(radiosensitivity, immunodeficiency, dysmorphic features and learning
difficulties) syndrome cells, fail to form pKAP-1 foci. 53BP1 amplifies
Mre11-NBS1 accumulation at late-repairing DSBs, concentrating active ATM and
leading to robust, localized pKAP-1. We propose that ionizing-radiation induced
foci (IRIF) spatially concentrate ATM activity to promote localized alterations
in regions of chromatin otherwise inhibitory to repair.

PMID: 20081839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nature. 2010 Jan 14;463(7278):237-40. doi: 10.1038/nature08674.

KAP1 controls endogenous retroviruses in embryonic stem cells.

Rowe HM(1), Jakobsson J, Mesnard D, Rougemont J, Reynard S, Aktas T, Maillard PV,
Layard-Liesching H, Verp S, Marquis J, Spitz F, Constam DB, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015
Lausanne, Switzerland.

More than forty per cent of the mammalian genome is derived from retroelements,
of which about one-quarter are endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Some are still
active, notably in mice the highly polymorphic early transposon (ETn)/MusD and
intracisternal A-type particles (IAP). ERVs are transcriptionally silenced during
early embryogenesis by histone and DNA methylation (and reviewed in ref. 7),
although the initiators of this process, which is essential to protect genome
integrity, remain largely unknown. KAP1 (KRAB-associated protein 1, also known as
tripartite motif-containing protein 28, TRIM28) represses genes by recruiting the
histone methyltransferase SETDB1, heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) and the NuRD
histone deacetylase complex, but few of its physiological targets are known. Two 
lines of evidence suggest that KAP1-mediated repression could contribute to the
control of ERVs: first, KAP1 can trigger permanent gene silencing during early
embryogenesis, and second, a KAP1 complex silences the retrovirus murine
leukaemia virus in embryonic cells. Consistent with this hypothesis, here we show
that KAP1 deletion leads to a marked upregulation of a range of ERVs, in
particular IAP elements, in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and in early embryos.
We further demonstrate that KAP1 acts synergistically with DNA methylation to
silence IAP elements, and that it is enriched at the 5' untranslated region
(5'UTR) of IAP genomes, where KAP1 deletion leads to the loss of histone 3 lysine
9 trimethylation (H3K9me3), a hallmark of KAP1-mediated repression.
Correspondingly, IAP 5'UTR sequences can impose in cis KAP1-dependent repression 
on a heterologous promoter in ES cells. Our results establish that KAP1 controls 
endogenous retroelements during early embryonic development.

PMID: 20075919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7187-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.061861. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Histone deacetylase 10 relieves repression on the melanogenic program by
maintaining the deacetylation status of repressors.

Lai IL(1), Lin TP, Yao YL, Lin CY, Hsieh MJ, Yang WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan.

HDAC10 belongs to the class II histone deacetylase family; however, its functions
remain enigmatic. We report here that the HDAC10 protein complex contained
deacetylated chaperone protein hsc70, and HDAC10 relieved repression of
melanogenesis by decreasing the repressional activity of two transcriptional
regulators, paired box protein 3 (Pax3) and KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1).
HDAC10 physically interacted with Pax3 and KAP1 in a ternary complex and
maintained Pax3 and KAP1 in a deacetylated state. Deacetylated Pax3 and KAP1
derepressed promoters of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF)
and melanocyte-specific tyrosinase-related protein 1 and 2 (TRP-1 and TRP-2),
three genes of the melanogenesis cascade, in a trichostatin A-sensitive manner.
Co-occupancy of melanogenic promoters by HDAC10, Pax3, and KAP1 only happened in 
cells of the melanocyte lineage, and KAP1 facilitated nuclear enrichment of
HDAC10. Finally, cellular melanin content correlated directly with the expression
level and activity of HDAC10. Our results not only show that HDAC10 regulates
melanogenesis but also demonstrate that the transcriptional activities of Pax3
and KAP1 are intimately linked to their acetylation status.

PMCID: PMC2844168
PMID: 20032463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Ann Surg Oncol. 2010 Mar;17(3):821-8. doi: 10.1245/s10434-009-0795-8. Epub 2009
Nov 7.

KAP1 is associated with peritoneal carcinomatosis in gastric cancer.

Yokoe T(1), Toiyama Y, Okugawa Y, Tanaka K, Ohi M, Inoue Y, Mohri Y, Miki C,
Kusunoki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal and Pediatric Surgery, Mie University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan. takesche@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is a universal corepressor for
Kruppel-associated box zinc finger proteins. Here we demonstrate the biological
function and clinical significance of KAP1 expression in gastric cancer.
METHODS: Knockdown of the KAP1 gene by siRNA transfection was performed to
evaluate KAP1 function in gastric cancer cells. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction was performed in 91 samples obtained from gastric cancer patients.
RESULTS: The proliferation rate was impaired and resistance to anoikis was
decreased after knockdown of KAP1 in the gastric cancer cell lines AZ521 and KATO
III. Expression of the KAP1 gene was significantly higher in cancerous tissues
than in noncancerous tissues (P < .05). Patients with high KAP1 expression showed
a higher incidence of peritoneal carcinomatosis (P < .05) and significantly
poorer overall survival compared to patients with low KAP1 expression (5-year
overall survival rates, 35.4% and 50.5%, respectively; P < .05). Multivariate
analysis revealed that high KAP1 expression was an independent prognostic factor 
(risk ratio, 1.44; 95% confidence interval, 1.03-1.99; P < .05). Intriguingly,
high KAP1 expression was also an independent factor for peritoneal carcinomatosis
(odds ratio, 4.53; 95% confidence interval, 1.27-18.5; P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: KAP1 provides a survival advantage to gastric cancer cells and is an
independent factor for peritoneal dissemination in patients with gastric cancer. 
These results suggest that KAP1 plays an important role in progression to
peritoneal carcinomatosis in gastric cancer patients.

PMID: 19898899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 18;284(51):35670-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.032086.

Epigenetic gene silencing by the SRY protein is mediated by a KRAB-O protein that
recruits the KAP1 co-repressor machinery.

Peng H(1), Ivanov AV, Oh HJ, Lau YF, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The sex determination transcription factor SRY is a cell fate-determining
transcription factor that mediates testis differentiation during embryogenesis.
It may function by repressing the ovarian determinant gene, RSPO1, action in the 
ovarian developmental pathway and activates genes, such as SOX9, important for
testis differentiation at the onset of gonadogenesis. Further, altered expression
of SRY and related SOX genes contribute to oncogenesis in many human cancers.
Little is known of the mechanisms by which SRY regulates its target genes.
Recently a KRAB domain protein (KRAB-O) that lacks a zinc finger motif has been
demonstrated to interact with SRY and hypothesized to function as an adaptor
molecule for SRY by tethering the KAP1-NuRD-SETDB1-HP1 silencing machinery to
repress SRY targets. We have critically examined this hypothesis by
reconstituting and characterizing SRY-KRAB-O-KAP1 interactions. These recombinant
molecules can form a ternary complex by direct and high affinity interactions.
The KRAB-O protein can simultaneously bind KAP1 and SRY in a noncompetitive but
also noncooperative manner. An extensive mutagenesis analysis suggests that
different surfaces on KRAB-O are utilized for these independent interactions.
Transcriptional repression by SRY requires binding to KRAB-O, thus bridging to
the KAP1 repression machinery. This repression machinery is recruited to SRY
target promoters in chromatin templates via SRY. These results suggest that SRY
has co-opted the KRAB-O protein to recruit the KAP1 repression machinery to sex
determination target genes. Other KRAB domain proteins, which lack a zinc finger 
DNA-binding motif, may function in similar roles as adaptor proteins for
epigenetic gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC2790998
PMID: 19850934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Gut. 2010 Jan;59(1):69-78. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.178574.

Human IgG antibody profiles differentiate between symptomatic patients with and
without colorectal cancer.

Kijanka G(1), Hector S, Kay EW, Murray F, Cummins R, Murphy D, MacCraith BD,
Prehn JH, Kenny D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Proteomics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin,
Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with cancer have antibodies against tumour antigens.
Characterising the antibody repertoire may provide insights into aberrant
cellular mechanisms in cancer development, ultimately leading to novel diagnostic
or therapeutic targets. The aim of this study was to characterise the antibody
profiles in patients whose symptoms warranted colonoscopy, to see if there was a 
difference in patients with and without colorectal cancer.
METHODS: Patients were recruited from a colonoscopy clinic. Individual serum
samples from 43 patients with colorectal cancer and 40 patients with no cancer on
colonoscopy were profiled on a 37 830 clone recombinant human protein array.
Antigen expression was evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR and by
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays.
RESULTS: Using a sex- and age-matched training set, 18 antigens associated with
cancer and 4 associated with the absence of cancer (p<0.05) were identified and
confirmed. To investigate the mechanisms triggering antibody responses to these
antigens, antigen expression was examined in normal colorectal mucosa and
colorectal carcinoma of the same patients. The identified antigens showed
cellular accumulation (p53), aberrant cellular expression (high mobility group B1
(HMGB1)) and overexpression (tripartite motif-containing 28 (TRIM28), p53, HMGB1,
transcription factor 3 (TCF3), longevity assurance gene homologue 5 (LASS5) and
zinc finger protein 346 (ZNF346)) in colorectal cancer tissue compared with
normal colorectal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: It is demonstrated for the first time that screening high-density
protein arrays identifies unique antibody profiles that discriminate between
symptomatic patients with and without colorectal cancer. The differential
expression of identified antigens suggests their involvement in aberrant cellular
mechanisms in cancer.

PMID: 19828471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Feb;17(2):346-59. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.145. Epub 2009
Oct 9.

Regulation of stress-induced nuclear protein redistribution: a new function of
Bax and Bak uncoupled from Bcl-x(L).

Lindenboim L(1), Blacher E, Borner C, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel.

Apoptosis is regulated by changes in the subcellular distribution of pro- and
anti-apoptotic proteins, among which are nuclear proteins such as histone H1 (H1)
and nucleophosmin (NPM). These proteins were reported to translocate to the
cytosol and mitochondria, and to facilitate apoptosis in response to apoptotic
stressors. The significance of this stress-induced, nuclear protein
redistribution and its exact molecular mechanism are poorly understood. We show
here that in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), different apoptotic stimuli
induce H1, NPM and nucleolin, but not KAP-1 nuclear/cytoplasmic redistribution,
which precedes the appearance of apoptotic features. Using MEFs deficient in
Bax/Bak, Apaf-1 or caspase-9, as well as caspase inhibitors, we show that this
redistribution requires Bax and Bak, but neither the apoptosome nor caspases.
Furthermore, the BH3 mimetic ABT-737, which acts through Bax/Bak, also stimulates
nuclear protein redistribution in a Bax/Bak-dependent manner. Re-expression of
Bax or Bak in Bax/Bak-deficient MEFs restores nuclear redistribution during
apoptosis. This is not accompanied by Bax or Bak N-terminus exposure and is not
inhibited by Bcl-x(L) overexpression. These results identify, for the first time,
a function of Bax/Bak that is insensitive to inhibition by Bcl-x(L) and most
likely unrelated to their canonical, pore-forming activity on mitochondria.

PMID: 19816507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):28660-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.023457. Epub
2009 Aug 26.

The metastasis efficiency modifier ribosomal RNA processing 1 homolog B (RRP1B)
is a chromatin-associated factor.

Crawford NP(1), Yang H, Mattaini KR, Hunter KW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

There is accumulating evidence for a role of germ line variation in breast cancer
metastasis. We have recently identified a novel metastasis susceptibility gene,
Rrp1b (ribosomal RNA processing 1 homolog B). Overexpression of Rrp1b in a mouse 
mammary tumor cell line induces a gene expression signature that predicts
survival in breast cancer. Here we extend the analysis of RRP1B function by
demonstrating that the Rrp1b activation gene expression signature accurately
predicted the outcome in three of four publicly available breast carcinoma gene
expression data sets. In addition, we provide insights into the mechanism of
RRP1B. Tandem affinity purification demonstrated that RRP1B physically interacts 
with many nucleosome binding factors, including histone H1X, poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1, TRIM28 (tripartite motif-containing 28), and CSDA (cold shock
domain protein A). Co-immunofluorescence and co-immunoprecipitation confirmed
these interactions and also interactions with heterochromatin protein-1alpha and 
acetyl-histone H4 lysine 5. Finally, we investigated the effects of ectopic
expression of an RRP1B allelic variant previously associated with improved
survival in breast cancer. Gene expression analyses demonstrate that, compared
with ectopic expression of wild type RRP1B in HeLa cells, the variant RRP1B
differentially modulates various transcription factors controlled by TRIM28 and
CSDA. These data suggest that RRP1B, a tumor progression and metastasis
susceptibility candidate gene, is potentially a dynamic modulator of
transcription and chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC2781410
PMID: 19710015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Oct 30;388(4):689-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.08.065. Epub 2009 Aug 18.

KAP1-independent transcriptional repression of SCAN-KRAB-containing zinc finger
proteins.

Itokawa Y(1), Yanagawa T, Yamakawa H, Watanabe N, Koga H, Nagase T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genome Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, 2-6-7
Kazusa-Kamatari, Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818, Japan.

The Krüppel-associated box-containing zinc finger gene family (KRAB-ZNF) is one
of the largest gene families of transcriptional factors in the human genome.
Although the functions of most of these genes remain to be determined, it is
known that KRAB-mediated transcriptional repression requires a direct interaction
with the KAP1 co-repressor. By mammalian one- or two-hybrid experiments in HEK293
cells, we compared transcriptional repression activities of 61 human KRAB-ZNFs.
The results showed that six SCAN-KRAB-containing ZNFs are KAP1-independent
transcriptional repressors whose SCAN-KRAB domain is unable to associate with
KAP1 despite retaining transcriptional repression activity. Transcriptional
repression activities of the SCAN-KRAB domain of KAP1-independent KRAB-ZNFs are
not influenced by depletion of endogenous KAP1 levels by small interfering RNA.
Although the mechanism by which KAP1-independent KRAB-ZNFs repress
transcriptional activity remains to be elucidated, it appears that there may be a
pathway for transcriptional repression that does not involve KAP1. These results 
provide new insight into the functions of the members of the KRAB-ZNF family.

PMID: 19695231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Oct;20(19):4194-204. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-06-0489. Epub 2009 
Aug 5.

Hierarchical inactivation of a synthetic human kinetochore by a chromatin
modifier.

Cardinale S(1), Bergmann JH, Kelly D, Nakano M, Valdivia MM, Kimura H, Masumoto
H, Larionov V, Earnshaw WC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9
3JR, United Kingdom.

We previously used a human artificial chromosome (HAC) with a synthetic
kinetochore that could be targeted with chromatin modifiers fused to tetracycline
repressor to show that targeting of the transcriptional repressor tTS within
kinetochore chromatin disrupts kinetochore structure and function. Here we show
that the transcriptional corepressor KAP1, a downstream effector of the tTS, can 
also inactivate the kinetochore. The disruption of kinetochore structure by KAP1 
subdomains does not simply result from loss of centromeric CENP-A nucleosomes.
Instead it reflects a hierarchical disruption of the outer kinetochore, with
CENP-C levels falling before CENP-A levels and, in certain instances, CENP-H
being lost more readily than CENP-C. These results suggest that this novel
approach to kinetochore dissection may reveal new patterns of protein
interactions within the kinetochore.

PMCID: PMC2754933
PMID: 19656847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Oncol. 2009 Dec;3(5-6):439-50. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2009.07.001. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Identification of c-Src tyrosine kinase substrates in platelet-derived growth
factor receptor signaling.

Amanchy R(1), Zhong J, Hong R, Kim JH, Gucek M, Cole RN, Molina H, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Departments of Biological
Chemistry, Oncology and Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205,
USA.

c-Src non-receptor tyrosine kinase is an important component of the
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor signaling pathway. c-Src has been 
shown to mediate the mitogenic response to PDGF in fibroblasts. However, the
exact components of PDGF receptor signaling pathway mediated by c-Src remain
unclear. Here, we used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC) coupled with mass spectrometry to identify Src-family kinase substrates
involved in PDGF signaling. Using SILAC, we were able to detect changes in
tyrosine phosphorylation patterns of 43 potential c-Src kinase substrates in PDGF
receptor signaling. This included 23 known c-Src kinase substrates, of which 16
proteins have known roles in PDGF signaling while the remaining 7 proteins have
not previously been implicated in PDGF receptor signaling. Importantly, our
analysis also led to identification of 20 novel Src-family kinase substrates, of 
which 5 proteins were previously reported as PDGF receptor signaling pathway
intermediates while the remaining 15 proteins represent novel signaling
intermediates in PDGF receptor signaling. In validation experiments, we
demonstrated that PDGF indeed induced the phosphorylation of a subset of
candidate Src-family kinase substrates - Calpain 2, Eps15 and Trim28 - in a
c-Src-dependent fashion.

PMCID: PMC2783305
PMID: 19632164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5681-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4570. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

Kruppel-associated box domain-associated protein-1 as a latency regulator for
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and its modulation by the viral protein
kinase.

Chang PC(1), Fitzgerald LD, Van Geelen A, Izumiya Y, Ellison TJ, Wang DH, Ann DK,
Luciw PA, Kung HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Medicine and University of
California-Davis Cancer Center, California 95817, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) has been linked to the development
of Kaposi's sarcoma, a major AIDS-associated malignancy, and to hematologic
malignancies, including primary effusion lymphoma and multicentric Castleman's
disease. Like other herpesviruses, KSHV is capable of both latent and lytic
replication. Understanding the molecular details associated with this transition 
from latency to lytic replication is key to controlling virus spread and can
affect the development of intervention strategies. Here, we report that
Kruppel-associated box domain-associated protein-1 (KAP-1)/transcriptional
intermediary factor 1beta, a cellular transcriptional repressor that controls
chromosomal remodeling, participates in the process of switching viral latency to
lytic replication. Knockdown of KAP-1 by small interfering RNA leads to KSHV
reactivation mediated by K-Rta, a key transcriptional regulator. In cells
harboring latent KSHV, KAP-1 was associated with the majority of viral lytic-gene
promoters. K-Rta overexpression induced the viral lytic cycle with concomitant
reduction of KAP-1 binding to viral promoters. Association of KAP-1 with
heterochromatin was modulated by both sumoylation and phosphorylation. During
lytic replication of KSHV, KAP-1 was phosphorylated at Ser(824). Several lines of
evidence directly linked the viral protein kinase to this post-translational
modification. Additional studies showed that this phosphorylation of KAP-1
produced a decrease in its sumoylation, consequently decreasing the ability of
KAP-1 to condense chromatin on viral promoters. In summary, the cellular
transcriptional repressor KAP-1 plays a role in regulating KSHV latency, and
viral protein kinase modulates the chromatin remodeling function of this
repressor.

PMCID: PMC2731626
PMID: 19584288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell. 2009 May 15;34(3):285-97. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.04.025.

Essential role for DNA-PKcs in DNA double-strand break repair and apoptosis in
ATM-deficient lymphocytes.

Callén E(1), Jankovic M, Wong N, Zha S, Chen HT, Difilippantonio S, Di Virgilio
M, Heidkamp G, Alt FW, Nussenzweig A, Nussenzweig M.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair protein DNA-PKcs and the signal
transducer ATM are both activated by DNA breaks and phosphorylate similar
substrates in vitro, yet appear to have distinct functions in vivo. Here, we show
that ATM and DNA-PKcs have overlapping functions in lymphocytes. Ablation of both
kinase activities in cells undergoing immunoglobulin class switch recombination
leads to a compound defect in switching and a synergistic increase in chromosomal
fragmentation, DNA insertions, and translocations due to aberrant processing of
DSBs. These abnormalities are attributed to a compound deficiency in
phosphorylation of key proteins required for DNA repair, class switching, and
cell death. Notably, both kinases are required for normal levels of p53
phosphorylation in B and T cells and p53-dependent apoptosis. Our experiments
reveal a DNA-PKcs-dependent pathway that regulates DNA repair and activation of
p53 in the absence of ATM.

PMCID: PMC2709792
PMID: 19450527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. EMBO Rep. 2009 Jun;10(6):629-35. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.60. Epub 2009 May 15.

Distinct roles of ATR and DNA-PKcs in triggering DNA damage responses in
ATM-deficient cells.

Tomimatsu N(1), Mukherjee B, Burma S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Division of Molecular Radiation Biology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 2201 Inwood Road, NC7.214E,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

The cellular response to DNA double-strand breaks involves direct activation of
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and indirect activation of ataxia
telangiectasia and Rad3 related (ATR) in an ATM/Mre11/cell-cycle-dependent
manner. Here, we report that the crucial checkpoint signalling proteins-p53,
structural maintainance of chromosomes 1 (SMC1), p53 binding protein 1 (53BP1),
checkpoint kinase (Chk)1 and Chk2-are phosphorylated rapidly by ATR in an
ATM/Mre11/cell-cycle-independent manner, albeit at low levels. We observed the
sequential recruitment of replication protein A (RPA) and ATR to the sites of DNA
damage in ATM-deficient cells, which provides a mechanistic basis for the
observed phosphorylations. The recruitment of ATR and consequent phosphorylations
do not require Mre11 but are dependent on Exo1. We show that these low levels of 
phosphorylation are biologically important, as ATM-deficient cells enforce an
early G2/M checkpoint that is ATR-dependent. ATR is also essential for the late
G2 accumulation that is peculiar to irradiated ATM-deficient cells.
Interestingly, phosphorylation of KRAB associated protein 1 (KAP-1), a protein
involved in chromatin remodelling, is mediated by DNA-dependent protein kinase
catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) in a spatio-temporal manner in addition to ATM. We
posit that ATM substrates involved in cell-cycle checkpoint signalling can be
minimally phosphorylated independently by ATR, while a small subset of proteins
involved in chromatin remodelling are phosphorylated by DNA-PKcs in addition to
ATM.

PMCID: PMC2711839
PMID: 19444312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009 Jun;37(Pt 3):569-76. doi: 10.1042/BST0370569.

The impact of heterochromatin on DSB repair.

Goodarzi AA(1), Noon AT, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.

DNA NHEJ (non-homologous end-joining) is the major DNA DSB (double-strand break) 
repair pathway in mammalian cells. Although NHEJ-defective cell lines show marked
DSB-repair defects, cells defective in ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) repair
most DSBs normally. Thus NHEJ functions independently of ATM signalling. However,
approximately 15% of radiation-induced DSBs are repaired with slow kinetics and
require ATM and the nuclease Artemis. DSBs persisting in the presence of an ATM
inhibitor, ATMi, localize to heterochromatin, suggesting that ATM is required for
repairing DSBs arising within or close to heterochromatin. Consistent with this, 
we show that siRNA (small interfering RNA) of key heterochromatic proteins,
including KAP-1 [KRAB (Krüppel-associated box) domain-associated protein 1], HP1 
(heterochromatin protein 1) and HDAC (histone deacetylase) 1/2, relieves the
requirement for ATM for DSB repair. Furthermore, ATMi addition to cell lines with
genetic alterations that have an impact on heterochromatin, including Suv39H1/2
(suppressor of variegation 3-9 homologue 1/2)-knockout, ICFa (immunodeficiency,
centromeric region instability, facial anomalies syndrome type a) and
Hutchinson-Guilford progeria cell lines, fails to have an impact on DSB repair.
KAP-1 is a highly dose-dependent, transient and ATM-specific substrate, and
mutation of the ATM phosphorylation site on KAP-1 influences DSB repair.
Collectively, the findings show that ATM functions to overcome the barrier to DSB
repair posed by heterochromatin. However, even in the presence of ATM, gamma-H2AX
(phosphorylated histone H2AX) foci form on the periphery rather than within
heterochromatic centres. Finally, we show that KAP-1's association with
heterochromatin is diminished as cells progress through mitosis. We propose that 
KAP-1 is a critical heterochromatic factor that undergoes specific modifications 
to promote DSB repair and mitotic progression in a manner that allows localized
and transient chromatin relaxation, but precludes significant dismantling of the 
heterochromatic superstructure.

PMID: 19442252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 May;11(5):580-91. doi: 10.1038/ncb1864. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

KRAB-type zinc-finger protein Apak specifically regulates p53-dependent
apoptosis.

Tian C(1), Xing G, Xie P, Lu K, Nie J, Wang J, Li L, Gao M, Zhang L, He F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteomics Research Center,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 27 Taiping Road, Beijing 100850, China.

Only a few p53 regulators have been shown to participate in the selective control
of p53-mediated cell cycle arrest or apoptosis. How p53-mediated apoptosis is
negatively regulated remains largely unclear. Here we report that Apak (ATM and
p53-associated KZNF protein), a Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-type zinc-finger
protein, binds directly to p53 in unstressed cells, specifically downregulates
pro-apoptotic genes, and suppresses p53-mediated apoptosis by recruiting
KRAB-box-associated protein (KAP)-1 and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to
attenuate the acetylation of p53. Apak inhibits p53 activity by interacting with 
ATM, a previously identified p53 activator. In response to stress, Apak is
phosphorylated by ATM and dissociates from p53, resulting in activation of p53
and induction of apoptosis. These findings revealed Apak to be a negative
regulator of p53-mediated apoptosis and showed the dual role of ATM in p53
regulation.

PMID: 19377469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Genes Dev. 2009 Apr 1;23(7):837-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.1769609.

A genome-wide RNAi screen identifies a new transcriptional module required for
self-renewal.

Hu G(1), Kim J, Xu Q, Leng Y, Orkin SH, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Division of Genetics,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

We performed a genome-wide siRNA screen in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to
identify genes essential for self-renewal, and found 148 genes whose
down-regulation caused differentiation. Many of the identified genes function in 
gene regulation and/or development, and are highly expressed in ES cells and
embryonic tissues. We further identified target genes of two transcription
regulators Cnot3 and Trim28. We discovered that Cnot3 and Trim28 co-occupy many
putative gene promoters with c-Myc and Zfx, but not other pluripotency-associated
transcription factors. They form a unique module in the self-renewal
transcription network, separate from the core module formed by Nanog, Oct4, and
Sox2. The transcriptional targets of this module are enriched for genes involved 
in cell cycle, cell death, and cancer. This supports the idea that regulatory
networks controlling self-renewal in stem cells may also be active in certain
cancers and may represent novel anti-cancer targets. Our screen has implicated
over 100 new genes in ES cell self-renewal, and illustrates the power of RNAi and
forward genetics for the systematic study of self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2666338
PMID: 19339689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 22;284(21):14147-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809023200. Epub 2009
Mar 25.

TIF1beta/KAP-1 is a coactivator of the orphan nuclear receptor NGFI-B/Nur77.

Rambaud J(1), Desroches J, Balsalobre A, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada.

In efforts to define mechanisms of transcriptional activation by the orphan
nuclear receptor NGFI-B (Nur77), we identified TIF1beta by mass spectrometry
within a nuclear protein complex containing NGFI-B. TIF1beta, also known as KAP-1
(KRAB domain-associated protein) or KRIP-1, acts as a transcriptional corepressor
for many transcription factors, in particular for the Krüppel-associated box
domain-containing zinc finger transcription factors. TIF1beta is also an
intrinsic component of two chromatin remodeling and histone deacetylase
complexes, the N-CoR1 and nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation complexes. In
contrast to these activities, we report that TIF1beta is a coactivator of NGFI-B 
and that it is as potent as the SRC coactivators in this context. Using pull-down
assays and immunoprecipitation, we showed that TIF1beta interacts directly with
NGFI-B and with other Nur family members. NGFI-B is an important mediator of
hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) activation of
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) transcription, and TIF1beta enhances transcription
mediated through the NGFI-B target, the Nur response element (NurRE). The NurRE
binds Nur factor dimers and is responsive to signaling pathways. In keeping with 
the role of NGFI-B as mediator of CRH signaling, we found that TIF1beta is
recruited to the POMC promoter following CRH stimulation and that TIF1beta
potentiates CRH and protein kinase A signaling through the NurRE; it acts
synergistically with the SRC2 coactivator. However, the actions of TIF1beta and
SRC2 were mapped to different NGFI-B AF-1 subdomains. Taken together, these
results indicate that TIF1beta is an important coactivator of NGFI-B-dependent
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2682863
PMID: 19321449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Virol. 2009 Jun;83(11):5574-80. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00001-09. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

Regulation of episomal gene expression by KRAB/KAP1-mediated histone
modifications.

Barde I(1), Laurenti E, Verp S, Groner AC, Towne C, Padrun V, Aebischer P, Trumpp
A, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Frontiers in Genetics National Center for Competence 
in Research, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

KAP1 is an essential cofactor of KRAB zinc finger proteins, a family of
vertebrate-specific epigenetic repressors of largely unknown functions encoded in
the hundreds by the mouse and human genomes. So far, KRAB/KAP1-mediated gene
regulation has been studied within the environment of chromosomal DNA. Here we
demonstrate that KRAB/KAP1 regulation is fully functional within the context of
episomal DNA, such as adeno-associated viral and nonintegrated lentiviral
vectors, and is correlated with histone modifications typically associated with
this epigenetic regulator.

PMCID: PMC2681943
PMID: 19279087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Nature. 2009 Apr 30;458(7242):1201-4. doi: 10.1038/nature07844. Epub 2009 Mar 8.

Embryonic stem cells use ZFP809 to silence retroviral DNAs.

Wolf D(1), Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, HHSC 1310,
701 West 168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and other primitive stem cells of mice have been
known for more than 30 years to potently block retrovirus replication. Infection 
of ESCs by the murine leukaemia viruses (MLVs) results in the normal
establishment of integrated proviral DNA, but this DNA is then transcriptionally 
silenced, preventing further viral spread. The repression is largely mediated by 
trans-acting factors that recognize a conserved sequence element termed the
primer binding site, an 18-base pair sequence complementary to the 3' end of a
cellular transfer RNA. A specific tRNA is annealed to the primer binding site
sequence of the viral genomic RNA, and is used to prime DNA synthesis. This same 
sequence in the context of the integrated proviral DNA is targeted for silencing 
in ESCs. We have recently shown that a large protein complex binding to the
primer binding site in ESCs contains TRIM28 (refs 8, 9), a well-characterized
transcriptional co-repressor. An important question remains as to the identity of
the factor that directly recognizes integrated retroviral DNAs and recruits
TRIM28 to mediate their specific silencing. Here we identify the zinc finger
protein ZFP809 as the recognition molecule that bridges the integrated proviral
DNA and TRIM28. We show that expression of ZFP809 is sufficient to render even
differentiated cells highly resistant to MLV infection. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that ZFP809 is able to potently block transcription from DNA
constructs of human T-cell lymphotropic virus-1 (HTLV-1), which use the same
primer tRNA. These results identify ZFP809 as a DNA-binding factor that
specifically recognizes a large subset of mammalian retroviruses and
retroelements, targeting them for transcriptional silencing. We propose that
ZFP809 evolved as a stem-cell-specific retroviral restriction factor, and
therefore constitutes a new component of the intrinsic immune system of stem
cells.

PMCID: PMC2676211
PMID: 19270682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Cell Sci. 2009 Apr 1;122(Pt 7):937-46. doi: 10.1242/jcs.034793. Epub 2009 Mar
3.

KRAB zinc-finger proteins localise to novel KAP1-containing foci that are
adjacent to PML nuclear bodies.

Briers S(1), Crawford C, Bickmore WA, Sutherland HG.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

The KRAB-zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) represent a very large, but poorly
understood, family of transcriptional regulators in mammals. They are thought to 
repress transcription via their interaction with KRAB-associated protein 1
(KAP1), which then assembles a complex of chromatin modifiers to lay down histone
marks that are associated with inactive chromatin. Studies of
KRAB-ZFP/KAP1-mediated gene silencing, using reporter constructs and ectopically 
expressed proteins, have shown colocalisation of both KAP1 and repressed reporter
target genes to domains of constitutive heterochromatin in the nucleus. However, 
we show here that although KAP1 does indeed become recruited to pericentric
heterochromatin during differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells,
endogenous KRAB-ZFPs do not. Rather, KRAB-ZFPs and KAP1 relocalise to novel
nucleoplasmic foci that we have termed KRAB- and KAP1-associated (KAKA) foci.
HP1s can also concentrate in these foci and there is a close spatial relationship
between KAKA nuclear foci and PML nuclear bodies. Finally, we reveal differential
requirements for the recruitment of KAP1 to pericentric heterochromatin and KAKA 
foci, and suggest that KAKA foci may contain sumoylated KAP1 - the form of the
protein that is active in transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2720929
PMID: 19258395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Proteome Res. 2009 Feb;8(2):583-94. doi: 10.1021/pr8007368.

Novel breast cancer metastasis-associated proteins.

Ho J(1), Kong JW, Choong LY, Loh MC, Toy W, Chong PK, Wong CH, Wong CY, Shah N,
Lim YP.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Institute, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Singapore.

With the use of the breast cancer metastatic model, which comprises four isogenic
cell lines, iTRAQ-based ESI-LC/MS/MS proteomics was employed to catalog protein
expression changes as cancer cells acquire increasing metastatic potential. From 
more than 1000 proteins detected, 197 proteins, including drug-targetable
kinases, phosphatases, proteases and transcription factors, displayed
differential expression when cancer cells becomes more metastatic. Overall, the
number of protein expression changes was evenly distributed across mildly (
approximately 30%), moderately ( approximately 40%) and aggressively (
approximately 30%) metastatic cancer cells. Some changes were found to be
specific to one while others were required for two or more phenotypes. KEGG
Orthology suggests major reprogramming in cell metabolism and to smaller extents 
in genetic and environmental information processing. Ten novel
metastasis-associated proteins were identified and the iTRAQ-based expression
profiles of 7 proteins were verified to be congruent with antibody-based methods.
With the use of tissue microarrays comprising 50 matched cases of invasive and
metastatic lesions, the expression profiles of SH3GLB1 and SUB1, SND1, TRIM28
were validated to be down- and up-regulated, respectively, during clinical
progression of carcinoma in situ to invasive and metastatic carcinomas. Our study
has unraveled proteome-wide molecular aberrations and potentially new players in 
breast cancer metastasis.

PMID: 19086899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):818-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.036.

KAP1-mediated epigenetic repression in the forebrain modulates behavioral
vulnerability to stress.

Jakobsson J(1), Cordero MI, Bisaz R, Groner AC, Busskamp V, Bensadoun JC, Cammas 
F, Losson R, Mansuy IM, Sandi C, Trono D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, National Center of Competence in Research, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):733-5.

KAP1 is an essential cofactor of KRAB-zinc finger proteins, a family of
vertebrate-specific epigenetic repressors of largely unknown functions encoded in
the hundreds by the mouse and human genomes. Here, we report that KAP1 is
expressed at high levels and necessary for KRAB-mediated repression in mature
neurons of the mouse brain. Mice deleted for KAP1 in the adult forebrain exhibit 
heightened levels of anxiety-like and exploratory activity and stress-induced
alterations in spatial learning and memory. In the hippocampus, a small number of
genes are dysregulated, including some imprinted genes. Chromatin analyses of the
promoters of two genes markedly upregulated in knockout mice reveal decreased
histone 3 K9-trimethylation and increased histone 3 and histone 4 acetylation. We
propose a model in which the tethering of KAP1-associated chromatin remodeling
factors via KRAB-ZFPs epigenetically controls gene expression in the hippocampus,
thereby conditioning responses to behavioral stress.

PMID: 19081377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):733-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.002.

Putting a KAP on transcription and stress.

Alter MD(1), Hen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2008 Dec 10;60(5):818-31.

Chromatin regulation plays an important role in brain development and the
generation of phenotypic diversity. In this issue of Neuron, Jakobsson et al.
find that disruption in neurons of KAP1, a key component of transcriptional
repressor complexes in the brain, results in increased anxiety-like behavior and 
sensitivity to stress.

PMID: 19081366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 26;105(34):12521-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805540105. Epub 2008 Aug 19.

TRIM28 mediates primer binding site-targeted silencing of Lys1,2 tRNA-utilizing
retroviruses in embryonic cells.

Wolf D(1), Hug K, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Murine leukemia viruses (MLVs) and related retroelements are potently restricted 
in embryonic cells by postintegration transcriptional silencing, likely to
protect the germ line from insertional mutagenesis. This silencing is in large
part attributable to the presence of a nuclear repression complex, which targets 
a sequence element of the proviral DNA, the repressor-binding site. The
repressor-binding site closely overlaps the tRNA primer binding site, a highly
conserved sequence essential for virus replication and defining the site of
initiation of DNA synthesis during reverse transcription. We have recently
demonstrated that the cellular corepressor TRIM28 is recruited to the proline
tRNA primer-binding site used by many MLVs and is required to mediate this
silencing. Here, we show that TRIM28 is also required for the restriction of
retroviruses using a completely distinct tRNA for the priming of their DNA
synthesis, namely Lys-1,2 tRNA. These results generalize the role of TRIM28 in
retroviral restriction and suggest that this system has evolved to restrict
multiple retroviruses.

PMCID: PMC2518094
PMID: 18713861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FASEB J. 2008 Nov;22(11):3853-65. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-113464. Epub 2008 Aug 1.

The histone subcode: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp-1) and Parp-2 control
cell differentiation by regulating the transcriptional intermediary factor
TIF1beta and the heterochromatin protein HP1alpha.

Quénet D(1), Gasser V, Fouillen L, Cammas F, Sanglier-Cianferani S, Losson R,
Dantzer F.

Author information: 
(1)Département IDG, UMR7175, ESBS, Bld. S. Brant, 67412 Illkirch, France.
fdantzer@esbs.u-strasbg.fr

Recent advances reveal emerging unique functions of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
(Parp-1) and Parp-2 in heterochromatin integrity and cell differentiation.
However, the chromatin-mediated molecular and cellular events involved remain
elusive. Here we describe specific physical and functional interactions of Parp-1
and Parp-2 with the transcriptional intermediary factor (TIF1beta) and the
heterochromatin proteins (HP1) that affect endodermal differentiation. We show
that Parp-2 binds to TIF1beta with high affinity both directly and through
HP1alpha. Both partners colocalize at pericentric heterochromatin in primitive
endoderm-like cells. Parp-2 also binds to HP1beta but not to HP1gamma. In
contrast Parp-1 binds weakly to TIF1beta and HP1beta only. Both Parps selectively
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ate HP1alpha. Using shRNA approaches, we provide evidence for
distinct participation of both Parps in endodermal differentiation. Whereas
Parp-2 and its activity are required for the relocation of TIF1beta to
heterochromatic foci during primitive endodermal differentiation, Parp-1 and its 
activity modulate TIF1beta-HP1alpha association with consequences on parietal
endodermal differentiation. Both Parps control TIF1beta transcriptional activity.
In addition, this work identifies both Parps as new modulators of the
HP1-mediated subcode histone.-Quénet, D., Gasser, V., Fouillen, L., Cammas, F.,
Sanglier-Cianferani, S., Losson, R., Dantzer, F. The histone subcode:
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (Parp-1) and Parp-2 control cell differentiation by
regulating the transcriptional intermediary factor TIF1beta and the
heterochromatin protein HP1alpha.

PMID: 18676401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 3;382(2):257-65. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.07.031. Epub 2008
Jul 17.

The novel protein complex with SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 binds to the vicinity of TSS.

Okazaki N(1), Ikeda S, Ohara R, Shimada K, Yanagawa T, Nagase T, Ohara O, Koga H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Department of Human Genome Research, Kazusa
DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818, Japan.

The SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 protein is structurally classified into the SWI2/SNF2
superfamily of DNA-dependent ATPases that are catalytic subunits of
chromatin-remodeling complexes. Although the importance of other members of the
SWR1-like subfamily in chromatin remodeling (EP400, INOC1, and SRCAP) has already
been elucidated, the biological function of SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 in transcriptional 
regulation remains to be clarified. To gain insight into the role of this
protein, we generated a specific antibody against SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 and used it
for chromatin and protein immunoprecipitation assays. We employed high-resolution
genome tiling microarrays in chromatin immunoprecipitation and found the binding 
sites of SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 in the vicinity of the transcriptional start site of
69 candidate target genes. In the protein immunoprecipitation assay, we found
that endogenous SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 binds with TRIM28, a recently highlighted
transcriptional regulator in the cancer field. From these findings, we propose a 
novel model for gene regulation via the SMARCAD1/KIAA1122 protein complex.

PMID: 18675275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell. 2008 Jul 25;31(2):167-77. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.05.017.

ATM signaling facilitates repair of DNA double-strand breaks associated with
heterochromatin.

Goodarzi AA(1), Noon AT, Deckbar D, Ziv Y, Shiloh Y, Löbrich M, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, East Sussex BN1 9RQ,
UK.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2008 Aug 8;31(3):303-4.

Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated (ATM) signaling is essential for the repair of a
subset of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs); however, its precise role is unclear. 
Here, we show that < or =25% of DSBs require ATM signaling for repair, and this
percentage correlates with increased chromatin but not damage complexity.
Importantly, we demonstrate that heterochromatic DSBs are generally repaired more
slowly than euchromatic DSBs, and ATM signaling is specifically required for DSB 
repair within heterochromatin. Significantly, knockdown of the transcriptional
repressor KAP-1, an ATM substrate, or the heterochromatin-building factors HP1 or
HDAC1/2 alleviates the requirement for ATM in DSB repair. We propose that ATM
signaling temporarily perturbs heterochromatin via KAP-1, which is critical for
DSB repair/processing within otherwise compacted/inflexible chromatin. In support
of this, ATM signaling alters KAP-1 affinity for chromatin enriched for
heterochromatic factors. These data suggest that the importance of ATM signaling 
for DSB repair increases as the heterochromatic component of a genome expands.

PMID: 18657500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Jul 1;9:61. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-61.

Phosphorylation at Ser473 regulates heterochromatin protein 1 binding and
corepressor function of TIF1beta/KAP1.

Chang CW(1), Chou HY, Lin YS, Huang KH, Chang CJ, Hsu TC, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. ginthrpi@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: As an epigenetic regulator, the transcriptional intermediary factor
1beta (TIF1beta)/KAP1/TRIM28) has been linked to gene expression and chromatin
remodeling at specific loci by association with members of the heterochromatin
protein 1 (HP1) family and various other chromatin factors. The interaction
between TIF1beta and HP1 is crucial for heterochromatin formation and
maintenance. The HP1-box, PXVXL, of TIF1beta is responsible for its interaction
with HP1. However, the underlying mechanism of how the interaction is regulated
remains poorly understood.
RESULTS: This work demonstrates that TIF1beta is phosphorylated on Ser473, the
alteration of which is dynamically associated with cell cycle progression and
functionally linked to transcriptional regulation. Phosphorylation of
TIF1beta/Ser473 coincides with the induction of cell cycle gene cyclin A2 at the 
S-phase. Interestingly, chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that the
promoter of cyclin A2 gene is occupied by TIF1beta and that such occupancy is
inversely correlated with Ser473 phosphorylation. Additionally, when HP1beta was 
co-expressed with TIF1beta/S473A, but not TIF1beta/S473E, the colocalization of
TIF1beta/S473A and HP1beta to the promoters of Cdc2 and Cdc25A was enhanced.
Non-phosphorylated TIF1beta/Ser473 allowed greater TIF1beta association with the 
regulatory regions and the consequent repression of these genes. Consistent with 
possible inhibition of TIF1beta's corepressor function, the phosphorylation of
the Ser473 residue, which is located near the HP1-interacting PXVXL motif,
compromised the formation of TIF1beta-HP1 complex. Finally, we found that the
phosphorylation of TIF1beta/Ser473 is mediated by the PKCdelta pathway and is
closely linked to cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: The modulation of HP1beta-TIF1beta interaction through the
phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation of TIF1beta/Ser473 may constitute a molecular 
switch that regulates the expression of particular genes. Higher levels of
phosphorylated TIF1beta/Ser473 may be associated with the expression of key
regulatory genes for cell cycle progression and the proliferation of cells.

PMCID: PMC2474647
PMID: 18590578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Jun;15(6):626-33. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1416. Epub 2008 May
18.

Structural insights into human KAP1 PHD finger-bromodomain and its role in gene
silencing.

Zeng L(1), Yap KL, Ivanov AV, Wang X, Mujtaba S, Plotnikova O, Rauscher FJ 3rd,
Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York University, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The tandem PHD finger-bromodomain, found in many chromatin-associated proteins,
has an important role in gene silencing by the human co-repressor KRAB-associated
protein 1 (KAP1). Here we report the three-dimensional solution structure of the 
tandem PHD finger-bromodomain of KAP1. The structure reveals a distinct scaffold 
unifying the two protein modules, in which the first helix, alpha(Z), of an
atypical bromodomain forms the central hydrophobic core that anchors the other
three helices of the bromodomain on one side and the zinc binding PHD finger on
the other. A comprehensive mutation-based structure-function analysis correlating
transcriptional repression, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 9 (UBC9) binding and
SUMOylation shows that the PHD finger and the bromodomain of KAP1 cooperate as
one functional unit to facilitate lysine SUMOylation, which is required for KAP1 
co-repressor activity in gene silencing. These results demonstrate a previously
unknown unified function for the tandem PHD finger-bromodomain as an
intramolecular small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) E3 ligase for transcriptional
silencing.

PMCID: PMC3331790
PMID: 18488044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Trends Biochem Sci. 2008 May;33(5):191-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2008.02.003. Epub
2008 Apr 9.

It takes a PHD to SUMO.

Peng J(1), Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

PHD fingers and bromodomains are found in close proximity to each other in many
chromatin-associated proteins and can functionally synergize. Recently, it has
been demonstrated that the PHD finger of the KAP1 co-repressor functions as an E3
SUMO ligase for the adjacent bromodomain. This PHD-mediated SUMOylation
stabilizes the association of the bromodomain with the chromatin modifiers SETDB1
and the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex, thereby promoting
establishment of the silent gene expression state.

PMID: 18406149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 30;370(2):366-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.104. Epub 2008 Mar 31.

KAP1 regulates type I interferon/STAT1-mediated IRF-1 gene expression.

Kamitani S(1), Ohbayashi N, Ikeda O, Togi S, Muromoto R, Sekine Y, Ohta K,
Ishiyama H, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Kita-Ku Kita 12 Nishi 6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) mediate cell
proliferation, differentiation, and survival in immune responses, hematopoiesis, 
neurogenesis, and other biological processes. Recently, we showed that KAP1 is a 
novel STAT-binding partner that regulates STAT3-mediated transactivation. KAP1 is
a universal co-repressor protein for the KRAB zinc finger protein superfamily of 
transcriptional repressors. In this study, we found KAP1-dependent repression of 
interferon (IFN)/STAT1-mediated signaling. We also demonstrated that endogenous
KAP1 associates with endogenous STAT1 in vivo. Importantly, a small-interfering
RNA-mediated reduction in KAP1 expression enhanced IFN-induced STAT1-dependent
IRF-1 gene expression. These results indicate that KAP1 may act as an endogenous 
regulator of the IFN/STAT1 signaling pathway.

PMID: 18381204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Virol. 2008 Jun;82(11):5127-36. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02647-07. Epub 2008 Mar 19.

Inhibition of transcription and DNA replication by the papillomavirus E8-E2C
protein is mediated by interaction with corepressor molecules.

Ammermann I(1), Bruckner M, Matthes F, Iftner T, Stubenrauch F.

Author information: 
(1)Sektion Experimentelle Virologie, Institut fuer Medizinische Virologie und
Epidemiologie der Viruskrankheiten, Universitaetsklinikum Tuebingen, Elfriede
Aulhorn Str. 6, D72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Papillomavirus genomes replicate as nuclear plasmids at a low copy number in
undifferentiated keratinocytes. Papillomaviruses encode the E1 and E2 proteins
that bind to the origin of replication and are required for the activation of
replication. In addition to E2, several papillomaviruses express an E8-E2C
protein, which is generated by alternative splicing and functions as a
transcriptional repressor and inhibitor of the E1/E2-dependent replication of the
viral origin. Previous analyses suggested that the E8 domain functions as a
transferable repression domain. In this report we present evidence that the E8
domain is responsible for the interaction with cellular corepressor molecules
such as histone deacetylases, the histone methyltransferase SETDB1, and the
TRIM28/KAP-1/TIF1beta/KRIP-1 protein. Whereas the interaction with histone
deacetylases is involved only in transcriptional repression, the interaction with
TRIM28/KAP-1/TIF1beta/KRIP-1 contributes to the inhibition of E1/E2-dependent
replication. The corepressor TRIM28/KAP-1/TIF1beta/KRIP-1 has been described to
be part of multicomponent complexes involved in transcriptional regulation and
functions as a scaffold protein. Since neither histone deacetylases nor the
histone methyltransferase SETDB1 appears to be involved in the inhibition of
E1/E2-dependent replication, most likely the modification of non-histone proteins
contributes to the replication repression activity of E8-E2C.

PMCID: PMC2395219
PMID: 18353941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Virol. 2008 May;82(9):4675-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02445-07. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Primer binding site-dependent restriction of murine leukemia virus requires HP1
binding by TRIM28.

Wolf D(1), Cammas F, Losson R, Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Columbia University, HHSC 1310, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY
10032, USA.

TRIM28 is a transcriptional corepressor which is required for primer binding site
(PBS)-dependent restriction of murine leukemia virus (MLV) replication in
embryonic stem and embryonic carcinoma (EC) cells. PBS-dependent restriction of
MLV leads to transcriptional silencing of the integrated provirus and has been
shown to correlate with TRIM28-mediated recruitment of HP1 to the silenced loci. 
Here we show, using a cell line with a point mutation in the HP1 binding domain
of TRIM28, that interaction with HP1 is absolutely required for the PBS-dependent
restriction of MLV in the F9 EC cell line.

PMCID: PMC2293057
PMID: 18287239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Hum Reprod. 2008 Mar;14(3):157-68. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gam088. Epub 2008 Jan 
18.

Differential gene expression in cumulus cells as a prognostic indicator of embryo
viability: a microarray analysis.

van Montfoort AP(1), Geraedts JP, Dumoulin JC, Stassen AP, Evers JL, Ayoubi TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Research Institute Growth and
Development (GROW), Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
avmn@sgyn.azm.nl

Besides the established selection criteria based on embryo morphology and
blastomere number, new parameters for embryo viability are needed to improve the 
clinical outcome of IVF and more particular of elective single-embryo transfer.
Genome-wide gene expression in cumulus cells was studied, since these cells
surround the oocyte inside the follicle and therefore possibly reflect oocyte
developmental potential. Early cleavage (EC) was chosen as a parameter for embryo
viability. Gene expression in cumulus cells from eight oocytes resulting in an EC
embryo (EC-CC; n = 8) and from eight oocytes resulting in a non-EC (NEC) embryo
(NEC-CC; n = 8) was analysed using microarrays (n = 16). A total of 611 genes
were differentially expressed (P < 0.01), mainly involved in cell cycle,
angiogenesis, apoptosis, epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth factor and
platelet-derived growth factor signalling, general vesicle transport and
chemokine and cytokine signalling. Of the 25 selected differentially expressed
genes analysed by quantitative real-time PCR 15 (60%) genes could be validated in
the original samples. Of these 8 (53%) could also be validated in 24 (12-EC-CC
and 12 NEC-CC) extra independent samples. The most differentially expressed genes
among these were CCND2, CXCR4, GPX3, CTNND1 DHCR7, DVL3, HSPB1 and TRIM28, which 
probably point to hypoxic conditions or a delayed oocyte maturation in NEC-CC
samples. This opens up perspectives for new molecular embryo or oocyte selection 
parameters which might also be useful in countries where the selection has to be 
made at the oocyte stage before fertilization instead of at the embryonic stage.

PMID: 18204071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Cell. 2007 Dec 14;28(5):823-37.

PHD domain-mediated E3 ligase activity directs intramolecular sumoylation of an
adjacent bromodomain required for gene silencing.

Ivanov AV(1), Peng H, Yurchenko V, Yap KL, Negorev DG, Schultz DC, Psulkowski E, 
Fredericks WJ, White DE, Maul GG, Sadofsky MJ, Zhou MM, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Tandem PHD and bromodomains are often found in chromatin-associated proteins and 
have been shown to cooperate in gene silencing. Each domain can bind specifically
modified histones: the mechanisms of cooperation between these domains are
unknown. We show that the PHD domain of the KAP1 corepressor functions as an
intramolecular E3 ligase for sumoylation of the adjacent bromodomain. The RING
finger-like structure of the PHD domain is required for both Ubc9 binding and
sumoylation and directs modification to specific lysine residues in the
bromodomain. Sumoylation is required for KAP1-mediated gene silencing and
functions by directly recruiting the SETDB1 histone methyltransferase and the
CHD3/Mi2 component of the NuRD complex via SUMO-interacting motifs. Sumoylated
KAP1 stimulates the histone methyltransferase activity of SETDB1. These data
provide a mechanistic explanation for the cooperation of PHD and bromodomains in 
gene regulation and describe a function of the PHD domain as an intramolecular E3
SUMO ligase.

PMCID: PMC4348069
PMID: 18082607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Feb 1;366(1):226-32. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

A novel GDNF-inducible gene, BMZF3, encodes a transcriptional repressor
associated with KAP-1.

Suzuki C(1), Murakumo Y, Kawase Y, Sato T, Morinaga T, Fukuda N, Enomoto A,
Ichihara M, Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8850, Japan.

The Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-containing zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) comprise
the largest family of zinc finger transcription factors that function as
transcriptional repressors. In the study of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor (GDNF)-RET signaling, we have identified bone marrow zinc finger 3
(BMZF3), encoding a KRAB-ZFP, as a GDNF-inducible gene by differential display
analysis. The expression of BMZF3 transcripts in the human neuroblastoma cell
line TGW increased 1h after GDNF stimulation, as determined by Northern blotting 
and quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. The BMZF3
possesses transcriptional repressor activity in the KRAB domain. BMZF3 interacts 
with a co-repressor protein, KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP-1), through the KRAB 
domain and siRNA-mediated knockdown of KAP-1 abolished the transcriptional
repressor activity of BMZF3, indicating that KAP-1 is necessary for BMZF3
function. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated silencing of BMZF3 inhibited cell
proliferation. These findings suggest that BMZF3 is a transcriptional repressor
induced by GDNF that plays a role in cell proliferation.

PMID: 18060868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2008 May 8;27(21):3054-9. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Physical and functional interactions between STAT3 and KAP1.

Tsuruma R(1), Ohbayashi N, Kamitani S, Ikeda O, Sato N, Muromoto R, Sekine Y,
Oritani K, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) mediate cell
proliferation, differentiation and survival in immune responses, hematopoiesis,
neurogenesis and other biological processes. For example, STAT3 has been reported
to be constitutively activated in numerous cancer cells. To clarify the molecular
mechanisms underlying the STAT activation, we performed yeast two-hybrid
screening and identified KAP1/TIF1beta as a novel STAT-binding partner. KAP1 is a
universal corepressor protein for the Kruppel-associated box zinc-finger protein 
superfamily of transcriptional repressors. We found endogenous KAP1 associated
with endogenous STAT3 in vivo. Importantly, small-interfering RNA-mediated
reduction of KAP1 expression enhanced interleukin (IL)-6-induced STAT3-dependent 
transcription and gene expression. Furthermore, reduction of KAP1 expression
resulted in the marked accumulation of STAT3 phosphorylated on Ser727 in the
nucleus, a modification that regulates its transcriptional activation. These
results indicate that KAP1 may serve as a transcriptional regulator of the
IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway.

PMID: 18037959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Hematol. 2007 Oct;86(3):282-5.

Low-level expression of ETV6/TEL in patients with Myelodysplastic syndrome.

Yamagata T, Nakamura Y, Mitani K.

PMID: 17988997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;67(20):9954-62.

MAGE-A, mMage-b, and MAGE-C proteins form complexes with KAP1 and suppress
p53-dependent apoptosis in MAGE-positive cell lines.

Yang B(1), O'Herrin SM, Wu J, Reagan-Shaw S, Ma Y, Bhat KM, Gravekamp C, Setaluri
V, Peters N, Hoffmann FM, Peng H, Ivanov AV, Simpson AJ, Longley BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.
byang@dermatology.wisc.edu

The MAGE-A, MAGE-B, and MAGE-C protein families comprise the class-I MAGE/cancer 
testes antigens, a group of highly homologous proteins whose expression is
suppressed in all normal tissues except developing sperm. Aberrant expression of 
class I MAGE proteins occurs in melanomas and many other malignancies, and MAGE
proteins have long been recognized as tumor-specific targets; however, their
functions have largely been unknown. Here, we show that suppression of class I
MAGE proteins induces apoptosis in the Hs-294T, A375, and S91 MAGE-positive
melanoma cell lines and that members of all three families of MAGE class I
proteins form complexes with KAP1, a scaffolding protein that is known as a
corepressor of p53 expression and function. In addition to inducing apoptosis,
MAGE suppression decreases KAP1 complexing with p53, increases immunoreactive and
acetylated p53, and activates a p53 responsive reporter gene. Suppression of
class I MAGE proteins also induces apoptosis in MAGE-A-positive, p53wt/wt
parental HCT 116 colon cancer cells but not in a MAGE-A-positive HCT 116 p53-/-
variant, indicating that MAGE suppression of apoptosis requires p53. Finally,
treatment with MAGE-specific small interfering RNA suppresses S91 melanoma growth
in vivo, in syngenic DBA2 mice. Thus, class I MAGE protein expression may
suppress apoptosis by suppressing p53 and may actively contribute to the
development of malignancies and by promoting tumor survival. Because the
expression of class I MAGE proteins is limited in normal tissues, inhibition of
MAGE antigen expression or function represents a novel and specific treatment for
melanoma and diverse malignancies.

PMID: 17942928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 14;282(50):36177-89. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Role for KAP1 serine 824 phosphorylation and sumoylation/desumoylation switch in 
regulating KAP1-mediated transcriptional repression.

Li X(1), Lee YK, Jeng JC, Yen Y, Schultz DC, Shih HM, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

As a multifunctional protein, KRAB domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is
reportedly subjected to multiple protein posttranslational modifications,
including phosphorylation and sumoylation. However, gaps exist in our knowledge
of how KAP1 phosphorylation cross-talks with KAP1 sumoylation and what the
biological consequence is. Here, we show that doxorubicin (Dox) treatment induces
KAP1 phosphorylation at Ser-824 via an ataxia telangiectasia mutated
(ATM)-dependent manner, correlating with the transcriptional de-repression of
p21WAF1/CIP1 and Gadd45alpha. A S824A substitution of KAP1, which ablates the
ATM-induced phosphorylation, results in an increase of KAP1 sumoylation and
repression of p21 transcription in Dox-treated cells. By contrast, a S824D
mutation of KAP1, which mimics constitutive phosphorylation of KAP1, leads to a
decrease of KAP1 sumoylation and stimulation of p21 transcription before the
exposure of Dox. We further provide evidence that SENP1 deSUMOylase is involved
in activating basal, but not Dox-induced, KAP1 Ser-824 phosphorylation, rendering
a stimulation of p21 and Gadd45alpha transcription. Moreover, KAP1 and
differential sumoylation of KAP1 were also demonstrated to fine-tune the
transcription of three additional KAP1-targeted genes, including Bax, Puma, and
Noxa. Taken together, our results suggest a novel role for ATM that selectively
stimulates KAP1 Ser-824 phosphorylation to repress its sumoylation, leading to
the de-repression of expression of a subset of genes involved in promoting cell
cycle control and apoptosis in response to genotoxic stresses.

PMID: 17942393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):46-57.

TRIM28 mediates primer binding site-targeted silencing of murine leukemia virus
in embryonic cells.

Wolf D(1), Goff SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 
10032, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):13-4.

Moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MLV) replication is restricted in embryonic
carcinoma (EC) and embryonic stem (ES) cells, likely to protect the germ line
from insertional mutagenesis. Proviral DNAs are potently silenced at the level of
transcription in these cells. This silencing is largely due to an unidentified
trans-acting factor that is thought to bind to the primer binding site (PBS) of
M-MLV and repress transcription from the viral promoter. We have partially
purified a large PBS-mediated silencing complex and identified TRIM28 (Kap-1), a 
known transcriptional silencer, as an integral component of the complex. We show 
that RNAi-mediated knockdown of TRIM28 in EC and ES cells relieves the
restriction and that TRIM28 is bound to the PBS in vivo when restriction takes
place. The identification of TRIM28 as a retroviral silencer adds to the growing 
body of evidence that many TRIM family proteins are involved in retroviral
restriction.

PMID: 17923087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):13-4.

Retrovirus silencing by an epigenetic TRIM.

Ellis J(1), Hotta A, Rastegar M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, SickKids Hospital, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. jellis@sickkids.ca

Comment on
    Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):46-57.

Embryonic cells silence transcription by retroviruses, but how do they recognize 
virus DNA? In this issue, Wolf and Goff (2007) report that a TRIM28 corepressor
complex binds to the retrovirus primer binding site. Epigenetic silencing of
retrovirus transcription is accomplished by "writing" a dimethyl mark on lysine 9
of histone H3 that is read by the heterochromatin protein HP1gamma.

PMID: 17923079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):29902-9. Epub 2007 Aug 17.

Regulation of E2F1 function by the nuclear corepressor KAP1.

Wang C(1), Rauscher FJ 3rd, Cress WD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

KAP1 is a nuclear corepressor with conserved domains for RING finger, B boxes,
leucine zipper alpha helical coiled-coil region, plant homeo domain finger, and
bromo domain. The plant homeo domain finger and bromo domain of KAP1
cooperatively function as a transcription repression domain by recruiting the
histone deacetylase complex NuRD and histone H3 lysine 9-specific
methyltransferase SETDB1. Here we report that KAP1 binds the E2F1 transcription
factor in a retinoblastoma protein (pRb)-independent fashion and inhibits E2F1
activity. KAP1 stimulates formation of E2F1-HDAC1 complex and inhibits E2F1
acetylation. Ectopic expression of KAP1 represses E2F1 transcription and
apoptosis functions independent of pRb. Depletion of endogenous KAP1 in
pRb-deficient Saos2 cells by RNA interference increases E2F1 acetylation level,
stimulates E2F1 transcriptional activity, and sensitizes apoptosis response to
DNA damage. Therefore, KAP1 contributes to the negative regulation of E2F1 and
may serve as a partial backup to prevent E2F1-mediated apoptosis in the absence
of pRb.

PMID: 17704056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Genome Res. 2007 Jun;17(6):807-17.

Identification of an OCT4 and SRY regulatory module using integrated
computational and experimental genomics approaches.

Jin VX(1), O'Geen H, Iyengar S, Green R, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Genome Center, University of
California-Davis, Davis, California 95616, USA.

ChIP-chip studies have revealed that many in vivo binding sites have a weak match
to the consensus sequence for the transcription factor being analyzed. Possible
explanations for these observations include (1) the in vitro-derived consensus
site does not represent the in vivo binding site and/or (2) the factor is
recruited to a weak binding site via interaction with another protein. To address
these possibilities, we developed an approach (ChIPMotifs) that incorporates a
bootstrap resampling method to statistically infer the optimal cutoff threshold
for a position weight matrix (PWM) of a motif identified from ChIP-chip data by
ab initio motif discovery programs. Using OCT4 ChIP-chip data and the ChIPMotifs 
approach, we first developed a refined OCT4 PWM. We then used the refined PWM and
a ChIPModules approach to identify transcription factors colocalizing with OCT4
in Ntera2 testicular embryonal carcinoma cells. We found that the consensus
binding site for SRY, a transcription factor critical for testis development,
colocalizes with the OCT4 PWM. To further characterize the relationship between
OCT4 and SRY, we performed ChIP-chip experiments with human promoter microarrays,
and found that 49% of the top approximately 1000 OCT4 target promoters were also 
bound by SRY. This analysis represents the first identification of SRY target
promoters. Interestingly, we determined that promoters bound by OCT4 and SRY, but
not those bound by SRY alone, were also bound by the transcriptional repressor
KAP1. Our studies not only validate the ChIPMotifs and ChIPModules combinatorial 
approach but also identify a possible new regulatory partner of OCT4.

PMCID: PMC1891340
PMID: 17567999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jul 6;370(2):269-89. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

The structurally disordered KRAB repression domain is incorporated into a
protease resistant core upon binding to KAP-1-RBCC domain.

Peng H(1), Gibson LC, Capili AD, Borden KL, Osborne MJ, Harper SL, Speicher DW,
Zhao K, Marmorstein R, Rock TA, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The KRAB domain is a 75 amino acid transcriptional repression module that is
encoded by more than 400 zinc finger protein genes, making it the most abundant
repression domain in the human proteome. KRAB-mediated gene silencing requires a 
direct high affinity interaction with the RBCC domain of KAP-1 co-repressor. The 
structures of the free KRAB domain or the KRAB-RBCC complex are unknown. To
address this, we have performed a systematic biophysical analysis of all KRAB
isoforms using purified recombinant proteins. All KRAB domains are predominantly 
monomeric either alone or in a complex with KAP-1-RBCC protein, while a KRAB-SCAN
isoform exists as a stable dimer. The KRAB:KAP-1-RBCC interaction requires only
the A box in the context of the KRAB(Ab) or KRAB(AC) but both A and B boxes in
the context of KRAB(AB). All isoforms bind the KAP-1-RBCC in a stable, zinc
dependent fashion with a stoichiometry of KRAB1:3 RBCC with a zinc content of
four atoms per RBCC monomer. Limited proteolysis, mass spectrometry and
N-terminal sequence analyses suggest that a core complex comprises the entire
RBCC domain of KAP-1 and the AB box of the KRAB domain rendering it resistant to 
proteolysis. NMR spectroscopy showed that unbound KRAB domain does not exist as a
well-folded globular protein in solution but may fold into an ordered structure
upon binding to the KAP-1-RBCC protein. This is the first example of a
structurally disordered repressor domain that is the most widely conserved
silencing domain in tetrapods.

PMID: 17512541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Differentiation. 2007 Sep;75(7):627-37. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Dynamic and selective interactions of the transcriptional corepressor TIF1 beta
with the heterochromatin protein HP1 isotypes during cell differentiation.

Cammas F(1), Janoshazi A, Lerouge T, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch-Cedex, France.
florence.cammas@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

Cell differentiation is a multi-step process marked by progressive silencing of
gene expression through mechanisms believed to involve heterochromatin. We have
previously shown that interaction between the Krüppel associated box-containing
zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFP) corepressor TIF1beta and the heterochromatin
proteins HP1 is essential for progression through differentiation of embryonal
carcinoma F9 cells. This analysis clearly demonstrated the link between gene
specific repressors, components of heterochromatin and cell differentiation. In
mammals, there are three HP1 isotypes, HP1alpha, beta, and gamma, that appear to 
be involved in both eu- and heterochromatin, but whose individual functions are
still poorly defined. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to determine in
vivo (i) which HP1 isotypes interact with TIF1beta, (ii) in which sub-nuclear
compartments these interactions occur and (iii) whether these interactions are
regulated during cell differentiation. To address these questions, we established
stable F9 cell lines co-expressing TIF1beta fused to the ECFP fluorophore and
HP1alpha, beta, or gamma fused to the EYFP fluorophore. Using the Föster
resonance energy transfer (FRET) technology, we map the physical interaction
between TIF1beta-CFP and the different HP1-YFP isotypes in living F9 cells. We
demonstrate that in non-differentiated cells, TIF1beta-CFP/HP1-YFP interaction
occurs only within euchromatin and involves selectively HP1beta-YFP and
HP1gamma-YFP, but not HP1alpha-YFP. Furthermore, in differentiated cells,
TIF1beta-CFP selectively associates with HP1beta-YFP within heterochromatin,
while TIF1beta-CFP/HP1gamma-YFP is exclusively present within euchromatin. No
physical TIF1beta-CFP/HP1alpha-YFP interaction is detected in neither non
differentiated nor differentiated cells. These results support the notion that,
in vivo, HP1 isotypes have specific nonredundant functions and provide evidence
for HP1beta playing an essential role in the shuttling of TIF1beta from eu- to
heterochromatin during cell differentiation.

PMID: 17381543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Yi Chuan. 2007 Feb;29(2):131-6.

[KAP-1, a scaffold protein in transcription regulation].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang D(1), Jiang Y, He FC.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Beijing, China. yangdong@hupo.org.cn

KAP-1 (Alternative names: TIF1beta or TRIM28) is one member of transcriptional
intermediary factors, which acts as a scaffold in many transcription regulation
complexes. The N-terminal RBCC domain of KAP-1 can interact with KRAB-ZFPs, MDM2,
MM1, C/EBPbeta, etc. KAP-1's C-terminal PHD and Bromodomain is two integrated
transcriptional repression domains, which interact with SETDB1, Mi-2alpha and
other proteins to form complexes with histone deacetylase or methyltransferase
activity. In addition, KAP-1 can interact with HP1s (heterochromatin protein 1)
and then bind to histones via its HP1BD which is a small segment in the central
region of KAP-1. It is indicated by many researches that KAP-1, a scaffold
protein in transcription regulation, mainly acts as a corepressor in many
repression complexes. Meanwhile, it also acts as a coactivator sometimes. It is
reported that KAP-1 related transcription regulation complexes exert functions
essential for spermiogenesis and early embryo development. This regulation is one
pattern of epigenetic regulations.

PMID: 17369165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 6;282(14):10190-202. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Sumoylation of the transcriptional intermediary factor 1beta (TIF1beta), the
Co-repressor of the KRAB Multifinger proteins, is required for its
transcriptional activity and is modulated by the KRAB domain.

Mascle XH(1), Germain-Desprez D, Huynh P, Estephan P, Aubry M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, 
Canada.

Small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) has emerged as a key post-translational
modulator of protein functions. Here we show that TIF1beta, a developmental
regulator proposed to act as a universal co-repressor for the large family of
KRAB domain-containing zinc finger proteins, is a heavily SUMO-modified
substrate. A combined analysis of deletion and punctual mutants identified
TIF1beta as a multilysine acceptor for SUMO which specifically targets six lysine
residues (Lys(554), Lys(575), Lys(676), Lys(750), Lys(779), and Lys(804)) within 
the TIF1beta C-terminal repressive region. Reporter gene assays indicate that
TIF1beta requires SUMO-modification for its repressive activity. Indeed,
sumoylation-less mutants failed to recapitulate TIF1beta-dependent repression.
TIF1beta homodimerization properties and interaction with the KRAB domain are
preserved in the mutants with lysine to arginine substitutions as confirmed by in
vivo bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET). Using histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) inhibitors, we also demonstrate that TIF1beta sumoylation is a
prerequisite for the recruitment of HDAC and that TIF1beta SUMO-dependent
repressive activity involves both HDAC-dependent and HDAC-independent components.
Finally, we report that, in addition to relying on the integrity of its PHD
finger and on its self-oligomerization, TIF1beta sumoylation is positively
regulated by its interaction with KRAB domain-containing proteins. Altogether,
our results provide new mechanistic insights into TIF1beta transcriptional
repression and suggest that KRAB multifinger proteins not only recruit TIF1beta
co-repressor to target genes but also increase its repressive activity through
enhancement of its sumoylation.

PMID: 17298944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Clin Invest. 2007 Feb;117(2):482-91.

A proximal activator of transcription in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Venkov CD(1), Link AJ, Jennings JL, Plieth D, Inoue T, Nagai K, Xu C, Dimitrova
YN, Rauscher FJ, Neilson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, D-3100 MCN, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Feb;117(2):304-6.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is an important mechanism for phenotypic 
conversion in normal development and disease states such as tissue fibrosis and
metastasis. While this conversion of epithelia is under tight transcriptional
control, few of the key transcriptional proteins are known. Fibroblasts produced 
by EMT express a gene encoding fibroblast-specific protein 1 (FSP1), which is
regulated by a proximal cis-acting promoter element called fibroblast
transcription site-1 (FTS-1). In mass spectrometry, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and siRNA studies, we used FTS-1 as a unique probe for
mediators of EMT and identified a complex of 2 proteins, CArG box-binding
factor-A (CBF-A) and KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP-1), that bind this site.
Epithelial cells engineered to conditionally express recombinant CBF-A (rCBF-A)
activate the transcription of FSP1 and undergo EMT. The FTS-1 response element
also exists in the promoters modulating a broader EMT transcriptome, including
Twist, and Snail, as well as E-cadherin, beta-catenin, ZO 1, vimentin, alpha1(I) 
collagen, and alpha-smooth muscle actin, and the induction of rCBF-A
appropriately alters their expression as well. We believe formation of the
CBF-A/KAP-1/FTS-1 complex is sufficient for the induction of FSP1 and a novel
proximal activator of EMT.

PMCID: PMC1783826
PMID: 17273560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):11594-9.

KAP1, a novel substrate for PIKK family members, colocalizes with numerous damage
response factors at DNA lesions.

White DE(1), Negorev D, Peng H, Ivanov AV, Maul GG, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The DNA damage response requires a coordinated nucleo-cytoplasmic cascade of
events, which ultimately converge on damaged DNA packaged in chromatin. Few
connections between the proteins that remodel chromatin and the proteins that
mediate this damage response have been shown. We have investigated the DNA
damage-induced phosphorylation of the KRAB-ZFP-associated protein 1 (KAP1), the
dedicated corepressor for Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) zinc finger protein (ZFP)
proteins. We show that KAP1 is rapidly phosphorylated following DNA damage by
members of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-like family of kinases. This
phosphorylation occurs at a single amino acid residue that is conserved from mice
to humans and is located adjacent to the bromodomain, suggesting that it may
regulate chromatin recognition by that module. Phosphorylated KAP1 rapidly
localizes to sites of DNA strand breaks in the nucleus in response to ionizing
radiation. This discovery provides a novel link between chromatin-mediated
transcriptional repression and the recognition/repair of DNA, which must be
accomplished by the cellular DNA damage response.

PMID: 17178852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Gene. 2007 Feb 15;388(1-2):102-9. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Transcriptional and subcellular regulation of the TRIP-Br family.

Lai IL(1), Wang SY, Yao YL, Yang WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, 250 Kuo-Kuang
Road, Taichung 40227, Taiwan.

TRIP-Brs are a recently discovered set of proteins whose functions remain poorly 
characterized. Here we report the identification of TRIP-Br3 as a member of the
TRIP-Br family along with evidence showing that TRIP-Brs interact with
bromodomain-containing transcriptional cofactors PCAF, STAF65gamma, and KAP1.
PCAF, a histone acetyltransferase; STAF65gamma, a protein associated with histone
acetylation activity; and KAP1, a corepressor, influence the transcriptional
activity of TRIP-Brs differentially. Finally, while all three TRIP-Brs are
localized to the nucleus, TRIP-Br2 and TRIP-Br3 are also present in the cytoplasm
through interaction with CRM1. Our results suggest that different TRIP-Brs
function by interacting with a wide variety of bromodomain-containing
transcriptional regulators in different subcellular locales.

PMID: 17141982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Int J Hematol. 2006 Nov;84(4):377-80.

TEL/ETV6 binds to corepressor KAP1 via the HLH domain.

Nakamura Y(1), Yamagata T, Maki K, Sasaki K, Kitabayashi I, Mitani K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Dokkyo Medical University School of Medicine,
Tochigi, Japan.

PMID: 17118767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 19;282(3):1595-606. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Doxorubicin down-regulates Kruppel-associated box domain-associated protein 1
sumoylation that relieves its transcription repression on p21WAF1/CIP1 in breast 
cancer MCF-7 cells.

Lee YK(1), Thomas SN, Yang AJ, Ann DK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, Norris Cancer Center,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The role of post-translational modification, such as sumoylation, in modulating
the efficacy of doxorubicin (Dox) treatment remains unclear. Transcriptional
cofactor KRAB domain-associated protein 1 (KAP1) has been shown to complex with
the KRAB zinc finger protein, ZBRK1, to repress the transcription of target
genes. Through a combination of proteomic screening and site-directed mutagenesis
approaches, we have identified lysines 554, 779, and 804 as the major sumoylation
sites in KAP1. We then present evidence that Dox-mediated induction of cell cycle
regulator p21 expression is differentially regulated by KAP1 sumoylation status. 
Moreover, the KAP1 sumoylation level was transiently decreased upon Dox exposure,
and transfection with the KAP1 sumoylation mimetic, SUMO-1-KAP1, desensitizes
breast cancer MCF-7 cells to Dox-elicited cell death. The sumoylation-dependent
stimulation of KAP1 function is achieved by enhancing the methylation of H3-K9
and attenuating the acetylation of H3-K9 and H3-K14 at the p21 core promoter. We 
also show that occupancy of ZBRK1 response elements located at the p21 promoter
by ZBRK1.KAP1 is independent of KAP1 sumoylation. Hence, sumoylation of KAP1
represses p21 transcription via a chromatin-silencing process without affecting
interaction between KAP1.ZBRK1 and DNA, thus providing a novel mechanistic basis 
for the understanding of Dox-induced de-repression of p21 transcription. Taken
together, our results suggest that Dox-induced decrease in KAP1 sumoylation is
essential for Dox to induce p21 expression and subsequent cell growth inhibition 
in MCF-7 cells.

PMID: 17079232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 8;351(1):216-22. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

KAP1 dictates p53 response induced by chemotherapeutic agents via Mdm2
interaction.

Okamoto K(1), Kitabayashi I, Taya Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Radiobiology Division, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. kojokamo@gan2.res.ncc.go.jp

KAP1 recruits many proteins involved in gene silencing and functions as an
integral part of co-repressor complex. KAP1 was identified as Mdm2-binding
protein and shown to form a complex with Mdm2 and p53 in vivo. We examined the
role of KAP1 in p53 activation after the treatment of cells with different types 
of external stresses. KAP1 reduction markedly enhanced the induction of p21, a
product of the p53 target gene, after treatment with actinomycin D or
gamma-irradiation, but not with camptothecin. Treatment with actinomycin D, but
not with camptothecin, augmented the interaction of p53 with Mdm2 and KAP1.
Further, KAP1 reduction in actinomycin D-treated cells facilitated cell cycle
arrest and negatively affected clonal cell growth. Thus, the reduction of KAP1
levels promotes p53-dependent p21 induction and inhibits cell proliferation in
actinomycin D-treated cells. KAP1 may serve as a therapeutic target against
cancer in combination with actinomycin D.

PMID: 17056014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8623-38. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

The KAP1 corepressor functions to coordinate the assembly of de novo
HP1-demarcated microenvironments of heterochromatin required for KRAB zinc finger
protein-mediated transcriptional repression.

Sripathy SP(1), Stevens J, Schultz DC.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, Department of Pharmacology and Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4965, USA.

KAP1/TIF1beta is proposed to be a universal corepressor protein for the KRAB zinc
finger protein (KRAB-zfp) superfamily of transcriptional repressors. To
characterize the role of KAP1 and KAP1-interacting proteins in transcriptional
repression, we investigated the regulation of stably integrated reporter
transgenes by hormone-responsive KRAB and KAP1 repressor proteins. Here, we
demonstrate that depletion of endogenous KAP1 levels by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly inhibited KRAB-mediated transcriptional repression of a
chromatin template. Similarly, reduction in cellular levels of
HP1alpha/beta/gamma and SETDB1 by siRNA attenuated KRAB-KAP1 repression. We also 
found that direct tethering of KAP1 to DNA was sufficient to repress
transcription of an integrated transgene. This activity is absolutely dependent
upon the interaction of KAP1 with HP1 and on an intact PHD finger and bromodomain
of KAP1, suggesting that these domains function cooperatively in transcriptional 
corepression. The achievement of the repressed state by wild-type KAP1 involves
decreased recruitment of RNA polymerase II, reduced levels of histone H3 K9
acetylation and H3K4 methylation, an increase in histone occupancy, enrichment of
trimethyl histone H3K9, H3K36, and histone H4K20, and HP1 deposition at proximal 
regulatory sequences of the transgene. A KAP1 protein containing a mutation of
the HP1 binding domain failed to induce any change in the histone modifications
associated with DNA sequences of the transgene, implying that HP1-directed
nuclear compartmentalization is required for transcriptional repression by the
KRAB/KAP1 repression complex. The combination of these data suggests that KAP1
functions to coordinate activities that dynamically regulate changes in histone
modifications and deposition of HP1 to establish a de novo microenvironment of
heterochromatin, which is required for repression of gene transcription by
KRAB-zfps.

PMCID: PMC1636786
PMID: 16954381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 20;349(2):573-81. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Transcriptional repression activity of PAX3 is modulated by competition between
corepressor KAP1 and heterochromatin protein 1.

Hsieh MJ(1), Yao YL, Lai IL, Yang WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung
40227, Taiwan.

Pax3 is a transcription factor crucial for normal development and tumorigenesis. 
Pax3 has been known to cause Waardenburg syndrome and pediatric alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma, but how Pax3 regulates transcription is not clear. Here, we
report that Pax3 represses transcription and selectively interacts with
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) and KAP1. KAP1 functions as a transcriptional
corepressor by recruiting HP1 to facilitate the formation of a closed chromatin
through histone deacetylation and methylation. We found that KAP1 is a
corepressor for Pax3 by augmenting the repressional activity of Pax3.
Unexpectedly, HP1gamma diminishes the repressional activity of Pax3. On target
promoters, KAP1 and HP1gamma compete for binding with Pax3 on the N-terminal
paired domain, and the C-terminal domain of Pax3 governs the subcellular
localization of Pax3. Taken together, our results indicate that Pax3 represses
transcription through a novel mechanism involving competition between corepressor
KAP1 and the heterochromatin-binding protein HP1gamma.

PMID: 16945326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;8(8):870-6. Epub 2006 Jul 23.

Chromatin relaxation in response to DNA double-strand breaks is modulated by a
novel ATM- and KAP-1 dependent pathway.

Ziv Y(1), Bielopolski D, Galanty Y, Lukas C, Taya Y, Schultz DC, Lukas J,
Bekker-Jensen S, Bartek J, Shiloh Y.

Author information: 
(1)The David and Inez Myers Laboratory for Genetic Research, Department of
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel. yaelz@post.tau.ac.il

The cellular DNA-damage response is a signaling network that is vigorously
activated by cytotoxic DNA lesions, such as double-strand breaks (DSBs). The DSB 
response is mobilized by the nuclear protein kinase ATM, which modulates this
process by phosphorylating key players in these pathways. A long-standing
question in this field is whether DSB formation affects chromatin condensation.
Here, we show that DSB formation is followed by ATM-dependent chromatin
relaxation. ATM's effector in this pathway is the protein KRAB-associated protein
(KAP-1, also known as TIF1beta, KRIP-1 or TRIM28), previously known as a
corepressor of gene transcription. In response to DSB induction, KAP-1 is
phosphorylated in an ATM-dependent manner on Ser 824. KAP-1 is phosphorylated
exclusively at the damage sites, from which phosphorylated KAP-1 spreads rapidly 
throughout the chromatin. Ablation of the phosphorylation site of KAP-1 leads to 
loss of DSB-induced chromatin decondensation and renders the cells hypersensitive
to DSB-inducing agents. Knocking down KAP-1, or mimicking a constitutive
phosphorylation of this protein, leads to constitutive chromatin relaxation.
These results suggest that chromatin relaxation is a fundamental pathway in the
DNA-damage response and identify its primary mediators.

PMID: 16862143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem J. 2006 Oct 1;399(1):141-50.

The KRAB-associated co-repressor KAP-1 is a coiled-coil binding partner,
substrate and activator of the c-Fes protein tyrosine kinase.

Delfino FJ(1), Shaffer JM, Smithgall TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

The c-Fes protein tyrosine kinase is implicated in the differentiation of a
number of cell types including neuronal, endothelial and myeloid cells.
Structurally, Fes consists of a unique N-terminal region, followed by SH2 (Src
homology domain 2) and kinase domains. Two coiled-coil (CC) domains (CC1 and CC2)
located within the unique N-terminal region are critical regulators of Fes
activity in vivo and may function to recruit Fes activators and/or substrates. A 
yeast two-hybrid screen, utilizing a K-562 cell cDNA library and the Fes CC2
domain as bait, identified an interacting clone encoding the CC domain and B-box 
motifs (residues 114-357) of the transcriptional co-repressor KRAB-associated
protein (KAP)-1. KAP-1(114-357) interacted with full-length Fes in yeast, and the
KAP-1 CC domain was sufficient to bind the Fes N-terminal region in Sf-9 cells.
Co-expression of Fes with full-length KAP-1 in human 293T cells stimulated Fes
autophosphorylation and led to KAP-1 tyrosine phosphorylation. Association of
endogenous Fes and KAP-1 was also observed in HL-60 myeloid leukaemia cells.
Together, these data identify a novel Fes-KAP-1 interaction, and suggest a dual
role for KAP-1 as both a Fes activator and downstream effector.

PMCID: PMC1570157
PMID: 16792528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Semin Cancer Biol. 2006 Jun;16(3):225-34. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Regulation of the p53-MDM2 pathway by 14-3-3 sigma and other proteins.

Lee MH(1), Lozano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 77030, USA. mhlee@mdanderson.org

The 14-3-3 sigma (sigma) protein, a unique member of 14-3-3 family, is a negative
regulator of the cell cycle and is induced by p53 to initiate cell cycle
checkpoint control after DNA damage. Among the 14-3-3 family members, 14-3-3
sigma is uniquely induced by p53 and has a positive feedback effect on p53
activity in response to DNA damage. Although 14-3-3 sigma is linked to
p53-regulated cell cycle checkpoint control, the detailed mechanisms of cell
cycle regulation by 14-3-3 sigma remain unclear. Decreased expression of 14-3-3
sigma was reported in several types of carcinomas, suggesting that the negative
regulatory role of 14-3-3 sigma in the cell cycle is compromised during
tumorigenesis. Given the fact that p53's tumor suppressive function is lost in
almost half of all human cancers and that 14-3-3 sigma's activity is linked to
the p53 network, a perspective regarding the p53/14-3-3 sigma relationship is
needed for cancer research. Here we discuss the mechanisms by which 14-3-3
sigma-stabilizes p53 with the hope that these insights may be applied to develop 
targeted therapeutic strategies for cancer treatment.

PMID: 16697215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Gene. 2005 Oct 10;359:35-43.

The Krüppel-like zinc-finger protein ZNF224 represses aldolase A gene
transcription by interacting with the KAP-1 co-repressor protein.

Medugno L(1), Florio F, De Cegli R, Grosso M, Lupo A, Costanzo P, Izzo P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli
Federico II, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy.

Transcription factors belonging to the Krüppel-like zinc finger family of
proteins participate in the regulation of cell differentiation and development.
Although many of these proteins have been identified, little is known about their
structure and function. We recently purified ZNF224, a new Krüppel-like zinc
finger protein, that contains a Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain at the NH2
terminus, and 19 Cys2-His2 zinc-finger domains at the COOH terminus. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation and transient transfection assays, we demonstrate
that ZNF224 binds in vivo to the distal promoter of the aldolase A gene and
represses its transcription. The results of transient co-transfection experiments
show that ZNF224-mediated transcription repression requires the 45-amino acid
long KRAB A domain. The ability of KRAB-containing ZNF224 protein to repress
transcription depends on specific interaction with the KAP-1 co-repressor
molecule. Finally, using selective treatment with the HDAC1 inhibitor
trichostatin A, we demonstrate that ZNF224-mediated repression requires histone
deacetylases.

PMID: 16150558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. EMBO J. 2005 Sep 21;24(18):3279-90. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

MDM2 interaction with nuclear corepressor KAP1 contributes to p53 inactivation.

Wang C(1), Ivanov A, Chen L, Fredericks WJ, Seto E, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H Lee Moffitt Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

MDM2 is a RING domain ubiquitin E3 ligase and a major regulator of the p53 tumor 
suppressor. MDM2 binds to p53, inactivates p53 transcription function, inhibits
p53 acetylation, and promotes p53 degradation. Here, we present evidence that
MDM2 interacts with the nuclear corepressor KAP1. The binding is mediated by the 
N-terminal coiled-coil domain of KAP1 and the central acidic domain of MDM2. KAP1
stimulates formation of p53-HDAC1 complex and inhibits p53 acetylation by
interacting with MDM2. Expression of KAP1 cooperates with MDM2 to promote p53
ubiquitination and degradation. The tumor suppressor ARF competes with KAP1 in
MDM2 binding; oncogene induction of ARF expression reduces MDM2-KAP1 interaction.
Depletion of endogenous KAP1 expression by RNAi stimulates p53 transcriptional
activity, sensitizes p53 response to DNA damage, and increases apoptosis.
Therefore, MDM2 interaction with KAP1 contributes to p53 functional regulation.
ARF may regulate p53 acetylation and stability in part by inhibiting KAP1-MDM2
binding.

PMCID: PMC1224681
PMID: 16107876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2004 Nov;33(6):651-3.

[Gene expression differences between the anti-BPDE-transformed and normal cells
by suppression subtractive hybridization].

[Article in Chinese]

An S(1), Chen J, Chen X, Zhao Y, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Tongji Medical College, Huazhong Science and Technology University, Wuhan
430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the gene expression differences between the BPDE-transformed
and normal cells.
METHODS: Suppression subtractive hybridization was performed to profile
differentially expressed genes between BPDE and normal 16HBE cells. The
BPDE-transformed cells was used as tester, and the normal cells as driver. The
nested PCR products were inserted into TA vector after two subtractive
hybridization and two PCR. The clones were picked up randomly and analyzed with
PCR. Dot blot was used to test the same source with the tester. The overexpressed
cDNA fragments in BPDE cells were sequenced and compared with known genes in
Genbank.
RESULTS: Seven genes were identified being overexpressed in BPDE-transformed
cells: translation elongation factor 1 alpha 1, mitochondrion gene, solute
carrier family 25, EphA2, tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase
activation protein, lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), tripartite motif-containing
28 (TRIM28), etc. One fragment could not be found in the known genes, it could be
found in the EST database.
CONCLUSION: These over-expressed genes may be related to the carcinogenesis of
BPDE, in addition, one unknown gene may be responsible for the malignant
transforming effect of BPDE.

PMID: 15727167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Virol. 2005 Jan;79(1):245-56.

The Epstein-Barr virus replication protein BBLF2/3 provides an origin-tethering
function through interaction with the zinc finger DNA binding protein ZBRK1 and
the KAP-1 corepressor.

Liao G(1), Huang J, Fixman ED, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Herpesviruses encode a set of core proteins essential for lytic replication of
their genomes. Three of these proteins form a tripartite helix-primase complex
that, in the case of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), consists of the helicase BBLF4,
the primase BSLF1, and the linker protein BBLF2/3. BBLF2/3 and its homologs in
the other herpesviruses remain relatively poorly characterized. To better
understand the contribution to replication made by BBLF2/3, a yeast two-hybrid
screen was performed with BBLF2/3 as the bait protein. This screen identified as 
interactors a number of cell replication-related proteins such as DNA polymerase 
beta and subunits of DNA polymerase delta along with the EBV-encoded DNase BGLF5.
The screen also identified the DNA binding zinc finger protein ZBRK1 and the
ZBRK1 corepressor KAP-1 as BBLF2/3 interactors. Interaction between BBLF2/3 and
ZBRK1 and KAP-1 was confirmed in coimmunoprecipitation assays. A binding site for
ZBRK1 in the EBV oriLyt enhancer was identified by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. ZBRK1, KAP-1, and the ZBRK1 binding protein BRCA1 were shown by indirect
immunofluorescence to be present in replication compartments in lytically induced
D98-HR1 cells, and additionally, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays determined 
that these proteins associated with oriLyt DNA. Replication of an oriLyt plasmid 
and a variant oriLyt (DeltaZBRK1) plasmid was examined in lytically induced
D98-HR1 cells. Exogenous ZBRK1, KAP-1, or BRCA1 increased the efficiency of
oriLyt replication, while deletion of the ZBRK1 binding site impaired
replication. These experiments identify ZBRK1 as another cell protein that,
through BBLF2/3, provides a tethering point on oriLyt for the EBV replication
complex. The data also suggest that BBLF2/3 may serve as a contact interface for 
cell proteins involved in replication of EBV oriLyt.

PMCID: PMC538732
PMID: 15596820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genes Dev. 2004 Sep 1;18(17):2147-60.

Association of the transcriptional corepressor TIF1beta with heterochromatin
protein 1 (HP1): an essential role for progression through differentiation.

Cammas F(1), Herzog M, Lerouge T, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch, France.

The transcriptional intermediary factor 1beta (TIF1beta) is a corepressor for
KRAB-domain-containing zinc finger proteins and is believed to play essential
roles in cell physiology by regulating chromatin organization at specific loci
through association with chromatin remodeling and histone-modifying activities
and recruitment of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) proteins. In this study, we
have engineered a modified embryonal carcinoma F9 cell line (TIF1beta(HP1box/-)) 
expressing a mutated TIF1beta protein (TIF1beta(HP1box)) unable to interact with 
HP1 proteins. Phenotypic analysis of TIF1beta(HP1box/-) and TIF1beta(+/-) cells
shows that TIF1beta-HP1 interaction is not required for differentiation of F9
cells into primitive endoderm-like (PrE) cells on retinoic acid (RA) treatment
but is essential for further differentiation into parietal endoderm-like (PE)
cells on addition of cAMP and for differentiation into visceral endoderm-like
cells on treatment of vesicles with RA. Complementation experiments reveal that
TIF1beta-HP1 interaction is essential only during a short window of time within
early differentiating PrE cells to establish a selective transmittable competence
to terminally differentiate on further cAMP inducing signal. Moreover, the
expression of three endoderm-specific genes, GATA6, HNF4, and Dab2, is
down-regulated in TIF1beta(HP1box/-) cells compared with wild-type cells during
PrE differentiation. Collectively, these data demonstrate that the interaction
between TIF1beta and HP1 proteins is essential for progression through
differentiation by regulating the expression of endoderm differentiation master
players.

PMCID: PMC515292
PMID: 15342492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. FEBS Lett. 2004 Aug 13;572(1-3):211-5.

Repression of the c-fms gene in fibroblast cells by c-Myc-MM-1-TIF1beta complex.

Satou A(1), Hagio Y, Taira T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku,
Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

MM-1 has been reported to repress the E-box-dependent transcription activity of
c-Myc by recruiting histone deacetylase 1 complex via TIF1beta/KAP1. In this
study, to identify target genes for c-Myc-MM-1-TIF1beta, we established rat-1
cells harboring the dominant-negative form of TIF1beta to abrogate the pathway
from TIF1beta to MM-1-c-Myc. This cell line, in which transcription activity of
c-Myc was activated, was found to be tumorigenic. By DNA-microarray analysis of
this cell line, expression and promoter activity of the c-fms oncogene were found
to be upregulated. Of the two promoters, pE1 and pE2, in the c-fms gene, pE1
promoter activity was found to be activated in an E-box-dependent manner.

PMID: 15304350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16715-26. Epub 2004 Feb 3.

Oncogenic activation of c-Myb correlates with a loss of negative regulation by
TIF1beta and Ski.

Nomura T(1), Tanikawa J, Akimaru H, Kanei-Ishii C, Ichikawa-Iwata E, Khan MM, Ito
H, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 Koyadai,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

The c-myb proto-oncogene product (c-Myb) regulates proliferation of hematopoietic
cells by inducing the transcription of a group of target genes. Removal or
mutations of the negative regulatory domain (NRD) in the C-terminal half of c-Myb
leads to increased transactivating capacity and oncogenic activation. Here we
report that TIF1beta directly binds to the NRD and negatively regulates the
c-Myb-dependent trans-activation. In addition, three corepressors (Ski, N-CoR,
and mSin3A) bind to the DNA-binding domain of c-Myb together with TIF1beta and
recruit the histone deacetylase complex to c-Myb. Furthermore, the Drosophila
TIF1beta homolog, Bonus, negatively regulates Drosophila Myb activity. The Ski
corepressor competes with the coactivator CBP for binding to c-Myb, indicating
that the selection of coactivators and corepressors is a key event for
c-Myb-dependent transcription. Mutations or deletion of the NRD of c-Myb and the 
mutations found in the DNA-binding domain of v-Myb decrease the interaction with 
these corepressors and weaken the corepressor-induced negative regulation of Myb 
activity. These observations have conceptual implications for understanding how
the nuclear oncogene is activated.

PMID: 14761981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mamm Genome. 2004 Jan;15(1):35-40.

A novel Krüppel-Associated Box identified in a panel of mammalian zinc finger
proteins.

Looman C(1), Hellman L, Abrink M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Krüppel-related zinc finger proteins probably constitute the largest individual
family of transcription factors in mammals. These proteins often carry a potent
repressor domain called the Krüppel Associated Box (KRAB), which is known to
effectively repress transcription through interaction with transcriptional
intermediary factor 1beta (TIF1beta). Here we report the isolation and
characterization of a novel human KRAB A zinc finger protein, HZF12. The gene
encoding HZF12 is located on Chromosome (Chr) 19p13.11-p12, and a 4.4-kb
transcript from this gene is expressed in a variety of adult and fetal tissues.
Two additional, larger transcripts are expressed in testis only. Interestingly,
the KRAB A domain of HZF12 is followed by a 21-amino acid domain, encoded by a
separate exon. This domain, which we designate KRAB C, was also identified in
more than 25 additional human, mouse, and rat KRAB zinc finger proteins. On the
basis of results from a previous study, we conclude that this novel KRAB domain
strengthens the interaction with TIF1beta, thereby improving the ability of these
KRAB zinc finger proteins to recruit TIF1beta to specific sites.

PMID: 14727140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Blood. 2004 Apr 1;103(7):2530-40. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Differential gene expression of human stem progenitor cells derived from early
stages of in utero human hematopoiesis.

Shojaei F(1), Gallacher L, Bhatia M.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
London, ON, Canada.

Hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs) are highly enriched in a rare subset 
of Lin-CD34+CD38- cells. Independent of stage of human development, HSPC function
segregates to the subset of Lin-CD34+CD38- cells. However, fetal-derived HSPCs
demonstrate distinct self-renewal and differentiation capacities compared with
their adult counterparts. Here, to characterize the molecular nature of fetal
HSPCs, suppressive subtractive hybridization was used to compare gene expression 
of HSPCs isolated from fetal blood (FB-HSPCs) versus adult mobilized peripheral
blood (MPB-HSPCs). We identified 97 differentially expressed genes that could be 
annotated into distinct groups that include transcription factors, cell cycle
regulators, and genes involved in signal transduction. Candidate regulators, such
as Lim only domain-2 (LMO2), nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), tripartite motif
28 (Trim28), and N-myc protooncogene (MYCN), and a novel homeobox gene product
were among transcripts that were found to be differentially expressed and could
be associated with specific proliferation and differentiation properties unique
to FB-HSPCs. Interestingly, the majority of genes associated with signal
transduction belong to Ras pathway, highlighting the significance of Ras
signaling in FB-HSPCs. Genes differentially expressed in FB-HSPCs versus adult
MPB-HSPCs were verified using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(Q-PCR). This approach also resulted in the identification of a transcript that
is highly expressed in FB-HSPCs but not detectable in more differentiated
Lin-CD34+CD38+ FB progenitors. Our investigation represents the first study to
compare phenotypically similar, but functionally distinct, HSPC populations and
to provide a gene profile of unique human HSPCs with higher proliferative
capacity derived from early in utero human blood development.

PMID: 14656878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):28799-811. Epub 2003 May 13.

Identification of a novel Krüppel-associated box domain protein, Krim-1, that
interacts with c-Myc and inhibits its oncogenic activity.

Hennemann H(1), Vassen L, Geisen C, Eilers M, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Virchowstrasse 173, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

We have used the Ras recruitment system to screen for proteins that interact with
the N-terminally located transactivation domain of c-Myc. The Ras recruitment
system is based on the activation of the mitogenic RAS signaling pathway in yeast
by the mammalian GTPase Ha-Ras. This screen led to the identification of two
novel nuclear proteins termed Krim-1A and Krim-1B that both contain an N-terminal
KRAB box domain and 12 or 9 Krüppel C2H2 type zinc fingers at the C terminus,
respectively. We found that sequences covering the Myc box II homology region are
essential for the interaction with the Krim-1 proteins and that the second
N-terminal zinc finger of Krim-1 is essential for Myc binding. Both Krim-1A and
-B genes appear to be expressed ubiquitously with highest levels in spleen and
lymph nodes. In particular, Krim-1B and, to a lesser extent, Krim-1A are able to 
decrease E-box-dependent transcriptional transactivation by c-Myc-Max complexes
and also the ability of Myc to malignantly transform primary rat embryo
fibroblasts, which is consistent with the functional repressive properties of
their KRAB domains. The transcriptional corepressor Tif-1beta is a binding
partner for Krim-1 and stabilizes the protein. Our findings suggest that
Myc-mediated functions can be negatively regulated by Krim-1, potentially in a
complex with Tif-1beta.

PMID: 12748187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. EMBO J. 2003 Apr 15;22(8):1857-67.

The VHL protein recruits a novel KRAB-A domain protein to repress HIF-1alpha
transcriptional activity.

Li Z(1), Wang D, Na X, Schoen SR, Messing EM, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology and Pathology, and The James PWilmot Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor (pVHL) is a component of an E3 ubiquitin
ligase and targets hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) for
ubiquitylation and degradation under normoxic conditions. pVHL also directly
inhibits HIF-1alpha transactivation by recruiting histone deacetylases. Here, we 
report a novel pVHL-interacting protein that functions as a negative regulator of
HIF-1alpha transactivation. This protein, generated from the ZnF197 locus by
alternative splicing, contains a Kruppel-associated box (KRAB)-A domain and a
SCAN domain, but lacks the 22 C2H2-type zinc fingers present in ZnF197.
Therefore, we named this protein pVHL-associated KRAB-A domain-containing protein
(VHLaK). We demonstrate that the KRAB-A domain in VHLaK mediates pVHL binding and
functions as a transcriptional repression module. The SCAN domain mediates VHLaK 
homo-oligomerization, which enhances VHLaK repressive activity. pVHL can recruit 
VHLaK to repress HIF-1alpha transcriptional activity and HIF-1alpha-induced VEGF 
expression. Finally, we demonstrate that pVHL, VHLaK and KAP1/TIF-1beta can be
recruited into a single complex, indicating that KAP1/TIF-1beta may participate
in pVHL-mediated transcriptional repression of HIF-1alpha. Our findings provide a
novel mechanism for the modulation of HIF-1alpha transactivation by pVHL.

PMCID: PMC154465
PMID: 12682018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 26;99(24):15404-9. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

Control of biochemical reactions through supramolecular RING domain
self-assembly.

Kentsis A(1), Gordon RE, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York 10029, USA.

RING domains act in a variety of unrelated biochemical reactions, with many of
these domains forming key parts of supramolecular assemblies in cells. Here, we
observe that purified RINGs from a variety of functionally unrelated proteins,
including promyelocytic leukemia protein, KAP-1TIF1beta, Z, Mel18, breast cancer 
susceptibility gene product 1 (BRCA1), and BRCA1-associated RING domain (BARD1), 
self-assemble into supramolecular structures in vitro that resemble those they
form in cells. RING bodies form polyvalent binding surfaces and scaffold multiple
partner proteins. Separation of RING bodies from monomers reveals that
self-assembly controls and amplifies their specific activities in two unrelated
biochemistries: reduction of 5' mRNA cap affinity of eIF4E by promyelocytic
leukemia protein and Z, and E3 ubiquitin conjugation activity of BARD1:BRCA1.
Functional significance of self-assembly is underscored by partial restoration of
assembly and E3 activity of cancer predisposing BRCA1 mutant by forced
oligomerization. RING self-assembly creates bodies that act structurally as
polyvalent scaffolds, thermodynamically by amplifying activities of partner
proteins, and catalytically by spatiotemporal coupling of enzymatic reactions.
These studies reveal a general paradigm of how supramolecular structures may
function in cells.

PMCID: PMC137729
PMID: 12438698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):41879-87. Epub 2002 Aug 7.

Binding of two nuclear complexes to a novel regulatory element within the human
S100A9 promoter drives the S100A9 gene expression.

Kerkhoff C(1), Hofmann HA, Vormoor J, Melkonyan H, Roth J, Sorg C, Klempt M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Dermatology, 48149 Muenster, Germany.
kerkhoc@uni-muenster.de

S100A9, also referred to as MRP14, is a calcium-binding protein whose expression 
is tightly regulated during differentiation of myeloid cells. The present study
was performed to study the cell type- and differentiation-specific
transcriptional regulation of the S100A9 gene. Analysis of the S100A9 promoter in
MonoMac-6 cells revealed evidence for a novel regulatory region from position
-400 to -374 bp, termed myeloid-related protein regulatory element (MRE). MRE
deletion resulted in a 5.2-fold reduction of promoter activity. By
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis two nuclear complexes binding to this
region were identified and referred to as MRE-binding complex A (MbcA) and
MRE-binding complex B (MbcB). By mutagenesis the MRE-binding motif could be
narrowed to a 12-bp region. The relevance of MRE is deduced from the observations
that the formation of either MRE-binding complex A or MRE-binding complex B
strongly correlated with S100A9 gene expression in a cell type-specific,
activation- and differentiation-dependent manner. Moreover, DNA affinity
chromatography and Western blot studies indicate that a Kruppel-related zinc
finger protein and the transcriptional intermediary factor 1beta (TIF1beta) are
involved in an MRE-binding complex, thereby regulating the S100A9 gene
expression.

PMID: 12167632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Cell Sci. 2002 Sep 1;115(Pt 17):3439-48.

Cell differentiation induces TIF1beta association with centromeric
heterochromatin via an HP1 interaction.

Cammas F(1), Oulad-Abdelghani M, Vonesch JL, Huss-Garcia Y, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP163, 67404 Illkirch-Cedex, France.

The transcriptional intermediary factor 1 (TIF1) family protein TIF1beta is a
corepressor for Krüppel-associated box (KRAB)-domain-containing zinc finger
proteins and plays a critical role in early embryogenesis. Here, we examined
TIF1beta distribution in the nucleus of mouse embryonic carcinoma F9 cells during
retinoic-acid-induced primitive endodermal differentiation. Using confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy, we show that, although TIF1beta is diffusely
distributed throughout the nucleoplasm of undifferentiated cells, it relocates
and concentrates into distinct foci of centromeric heterochromatin in
differentiated cells characterized by a low proliferation rate and a well
developed cytokeratin network. This relocation was not observed in
isoleucine-deprived cells, which are growth arrested, or in compound RXR
alpha(-/-)/RAR gamma(-/-) null mutant cells, which are resistant to RA-induced
differentiation. Amino-acid substitutions in the PxVxL motif of TIF1beta, which
abolish interaction with members of the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family,
prevent its centromeric localization in differentiated cells. Collectively, these
data provide compelling evidence for a dynamic nuclear compartmentalization of
TIF1beta that is regulated during cell differentiation through a mechanism that
requires HP1 interaction.

PMID: 12154074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cancer Res. 2002 Jul 1;62(13):3773-81.

A common DNA-binding site for SZF1 and the BRCA1-associated zinc finger protein, 
ZBRK1.

Peng H(1), Zheng L, Lee WH, Rux JJ, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

More than 220 Kruppel-associated box-zinc finger protein (KRAB-ZFP) genes are
encoded in the human genome. KRAB-ZFPs function as transcriptionalrepressors by
binding DNA through their tandem zinc finger motifs.Gene silencing is mediated by
the highly conserved KRAB domain, which recruits histone deacetylase complexes,
histone methylases, and heterochromatin proteins. However, little is known of the
biological programs regulated by KRAB-ZFPs, in large part because of the
difficulty in identifying DNA-binding sites recognized by long arrays of zinc
fingers. In an attempt to identify the natural target genes for a KRAB-ZFP, we
chose SZF1, a hematopoietic progenitor-restricted, KRAB-ZFP that contains only
four C(2)H(2) zinc finger motifs. Using recombinant SZF1 protein and a PCR-based 
binding site selection strategy, we identified a 15-bp consensus DNA sequence
recognized by SZF1. Remarkably, this sequence is similar to the core DNA-binding 
site described recently for ZBRK1, a KRAB-ZFP that binds to BRCA1 and is involved
in coordinating the cellular DNA damage response. The SZF1 and ZBRK1 proteins
bind to both the experimentally derived SZF1 site and the canonical ZBRK1 site.
The KRAB domain from SZF1 bound directly to the KAP-1 corepressor and displayed
intrinsic silencing activity. Moreover, full-length SZF1 repressed a promoter
containing ZBRK1 recognition sequences. Thus, SZF1 and ZBRK1 may regulate a
common set of target genes in vivo.

PMID: 12097288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Mol Biol. 2002 Jul 12;320(3):629-44.

Hetero-oligomerization among the TIF family of RBCC/TRIM domain-containing
nuclear cofactors: a potential mechanism for regulating the switch between
coactivation and corepression.

Peng H(1), Feldman I, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The RING-B box-coiled-coil (RBCC) motif (also re-named recently as the tripartite
motif (TRIM)) is a widely distributed motif that is hypothesized to be a
protein-protein interface. The RBCC/TRIM domain of the corepressor KAP-1 is both 
necessary and sufficient to interact directly with the transcription repressor
KRAB domain. Each subdomain of the KAP-1-RBCC contributes directly to the
oligomerization and/or ligand recognition. Little is known about the function or 
the natural binding ligands for the RBCC/TRIM domain of the other TIF family
members. In order to investigate whether hetero-oligomerization might be a
biological regulatory mechanism, we have evaluated the hetero-oligomerization
potential of the TIF family members including KAP-1, TIF1alpha, TIF1gamma, and
the RBCC/TRIM family members including PML1, and MID1. We have reconstituted and 
characterized the oligomerization for these proteins using baculovirus and
mammalian expression systems by biochemical approaches. Our data indicate that
the RBCC/TRIM domains of KAP-1, TIF1alpha and TIF1gamma exist in a
homo-oligomeric state. However, there is little cross-talk between KAP-1 and
other TIF family members, suggesting that a high degree of specificity for
oligomerization interface and ligand recognition is intrinsically built into the 
RBCC/TRIM domain of KAP-1. Finally, we demonstrate that TIF1alpha interacts with 
TIF1gamma and the coiled-coil region of TIF1gamma is necessary for this
interaction. The hetero-oligomerization between TIF1alpha and TIF1gamma implies a
potential regulatory mechanism for transcriptional regulation.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12096914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2329-37.

Germ cell expression of the transcriptional co-repressor TIF1beta is required for
the maintenance of spermatogenesis in the mouse.

Weber P(1), Cammas F, Gerard C, Metzger D, Chambon P, Losson R, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP163, 67404 Illkirch-cedex, France.

The gene for transcriptional intermediary factor 1beta (TIF1beta) encodes a
transcriptional co-repressor known to play essential roles in chromatin
remodeling as well as in early embryonic development. During spermatogenesis,
TIF1beta is preferentially associated with heterochromatin structures of Sertoli 
cells and round spermatids, as well as with meiotic chromosomes. Its expression
is tightly regulated within spermatocyte and spermatid populations, and it is
undetectable in spermatogonia. Spatiotemporally controlled ablation of TIF1beta
by using a germ cell lineage-specific CreER(T)/loxP system leads to testicular
degeneration. This degeneration is not due to impairment of chromatin remodeling 
processes during meiosis and spermiogenesis, as TIF1beta-deficient spermatocytes 
are able to complete their differentiation into spermatozoa. It rather occurs as 
a consequence of shedding of immature germ cells (spermatocytes and spermatids), 
and disappearance of stem spermatogonia. These results indicate that TIF1beta has
important functions in the homeostasis of the seminiferous epithelium, and
probably plays a crucial role in the network of paracrine interactions between
germ cell subpopulations and/or Sertoli cells.

PMID: 11973266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 15;16(8):919-32.

SETDB1: a novel KAP-1-associated histone H3, lysine 9-specific methyltransferase 
that contributes to HP1-mediated silencing of euchromatic genes by KRAB
zinc-finger proteins.

Schultz DC(1), Ayyanathan K, Negorev D, Maul GG, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. dcs17@po.cwru.edu

Posttranslational modification of histones has emerged as a key regulatory signal
in eukaryotic gene expression. Recent genetic and biochemical studies link
H3-lysine 9 (H3-K9) methylation to HP1-mediated heterochromatin formation and
gene silencing. However, the mechanisms that target and coordinate these
activities to specific genes is poorly understood. Here we report that the KAP-1 
corepressor for the KRAB-ZFP superfamily of transcriptional silencers binds to
SETDB1, a novel SET domain protein with histone H3-K9-specific methyltransferase 
activity. Although acetylation and phosphorylation of the H3 N-terminal tail
profoundly affect the efficiency of H3-K9 methylation by SETDB1, we found that
methylation of H3-K4 does not affect SETDB1-mediated methylation of H3-K9. In
vitro methylation of the N-terminal tail of histone H3 by SETDB1 is sufficient to
enhance the binding of HP1 proteins, which requires both an intact chromodomain
and chromoshadow domain. Indirect immunofluoresence staining of interphase nuclei
localized SETDB1 predominantly in euchromatic regions that overlap with HP1
staining in nonpericentromeric regions of chromatin. Moreover, KAP-1, SETDB1,
H3-MeK9, and HP1 are enriched at promoter sequences of a euchromatic gene
silenced by the KRAB-KAP-1 repression system. Thus, KAP-1 is a molecular scaffold
that is targeted by KRAB-ZFPs to specific loci and coordinates both histone
methylation and the deposition of HP1 proteins to silence gene expression.

PMCID: PMC152359
PMID: 11959841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Genes Dev. 2001 Nov 15;15(22):3023-38.

TIF1beta functions as a coactivator for C/EBPbeta and is required for induced
differentiation in the myelomonocytic cell line U937.

Rooney JW(1), Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia School for Physicians and Surgeons, New
York, New York 10032, USA.

Retraction in
    Calame K. Genes Dev. 2002 Aug 15;16(16):2170.

Comment in
    NIH Guide Grants Contracts. 2003 Jun 30;:NOT-OD-03-050.

Representational difference analysis (RDA) cloning has identified transcriptional
intermediary factor 1 beta (TIF1beta) as a gene inducibly expressed early during 
myeloid differentiation of the promyelocytic cell lines HL-60 and U937. To assess
the role of TIF1beta, U937 cell lines were made that expressed
antisense-hammerhead ribozymes targeted specifically against TIF1beta mRNA. These
cells failed to differentiate into macrophages, as determined by several
criteria: a nonadherent morphology, a failure to arrest cell cycle, lowered
levels of macrophage-specific cell surface markers, resistance to Legionella
pneumophila infection, a loss of the ability to phagocytose and chemotax, and
decreased expression of chemokine mRNAs. One way TIF1beta acts in macrophage
differentiation is to augment C/EBPbeta transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we
show by EMSA supershifts and coimmunoprecipitation that C/EBPbeta and TIF1beta
physically interact. Although TIF1beta is necessary for macrophage
differentiation of U937 cells, it is not sufficient, based on the inability of
ectopically expressed TIF1beta to induce or augment phorbol ester-induced
macrophage differentiation. We conclude that TIF1beta plays an important role in 
the terminal differentiation program of macrophages, which involves the
coactivation of C/EBPbeta and induction of C/EBPbeta-responsive myeloid genes.

PMCID: PMC312827
PMID: 11711437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46562-7. Epub 2001 Oct 3.

A novel transrepression pathway of c-Myc. Recruitment of a transcriptional
corepressor complex to c-Myc by MM-1, a c-Myc-binding protein.

Satou A(1), Taira T, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12,
Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060, Japan.

The protooncogene product c-Myc plays a role in transcription regulation both for
activation and repression. While transactivation pathways of c-Myc either from
the N-proximal or the C-proximal region that is linked to the chromatin
remodeling complex have been identified, a transrepression pathway had been
identified only from the C-proximal region via Max and Mad that recruit the
histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex. We have reported that a novel c-Myc-binding
protein, MM-1, repressed the E-box-dependent transcription activity of c-Myc
(Mori, K., Maeda, Y., Kitaura, H., Taira, T., Iguchi-Ariga, S. M. M., and Ariga, 
H. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 29794-29800). To clarify the molecular mechanisms
of MM-1 toward c-Myc, cDNAs encoding MM-1-binding proteins were screened by the
two-hybrid method with MM-1 as a bait using a human HeLa cDNA library, and a cDNA
encoding TIF1 beta/KAP1, a transcriptional corepressor, was obtained. MM-1 was
found to bind to the central portion of TIF1 beta in vitro and in vivo, and these
proteins were found to be colocalized in the nucleus. MM-1 and TIF1 beta complex 
in human HeLa cells was found to also contain c-Myc, mSin3, and HDAC1.
Introduction of the C-terminal half of TIF1 beta as a dominant negative form
abrogated the inhibitory activity of MM-1 toward c-Myc and greatly stimulated the
transcription activity of c-Myc. Moreover, the inhibitory activity of MM-1 toward
c-Myc was canceled by trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC1. These results
indicate that MM-1 is a connecting factor that forms a novel transcription
repression pathway of c-Myc.

PMID: 11585818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biol Chem. 2001 Apr;382(4):637-44.

Transcriptional repression mediated by the KRAB domain of the human C2H2 zinc
finger protein Kox1/ZNF10 does not require histone deacetylation.

Lorenz P(1), Koczan D, Thiesen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Röstock, Germany.

The KRAB domain of human Kox1, a member of the KRAB C2H2 zinc finger family,
confers strong transcriptional repressor activities even to remote promoter
positions. Here, HDAC inhibitors were used to demonstrate that histone
deacetylation is not required for mediating transcriptional repression of KRAB
zinc finger proteins. Two reporter systems with either stably integrated or
transiently transfected templates, both under control of strong viral promoters, 
were analyzed. Under all circumstances, HDAC inhibition did not alter the
repression potential of the KRAB domain. In case of the stably integrated
luciferase reporter gene system, neither expression levels of the KRAB fusion
protein nor complex formation with its putative co-repressor TIF1beta were
significantly changed. Furthermore, the TIF1beta/KRAB complex was devoid of
mSin3A and HDAC1. In the transient transfection system, the transcriptional
repression induced by TIF1beta and HP1alpha was not diminished by HDAC
inhibitors, whereas the repressory activity of TIF1alpha was significantly
affected. Thus, KRAB, TIF1beta and HP1alpha are likely to be functionally linked.
In conclusion, HDAC activity is not essential for the strong transcriptional
repressor activity mediated by the KRAB domain of Kox1 in particular and,
presumably, by KRAB domains in general. This feature might be helpful in
identifying and characterizing target genes under the control of

PMID: 11405226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. EMBO J. 2001 May 1;20(9):2273-85.

TRIP-Br: a novel family of PHD zinc finger- and bromodomain-interacting proteins 
that regulate the transcriptional activity of E2F-1/DP-1.

Hsu SI(1), Yang CM, Sim KG, Hentschel DM, O'Leary E, Bonventre JV.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

We report the isolation of TRIP-Br1, a transcriptional regulator that interacts
with the PHD-bromodomain of co-repressors of Krüppel-associated box
(KRAB)-mediated repression, KRIP-1(TIF1beta) and TIF1alpha, as well as the
co-activator/adaptor p300/CBP. TRIP-Br1 and the related protein TRIP-Br2 possess 
transactivation domains. Like MDM2, which has a homologous transactivation
domain, TRIP-Br proteins functionally contact DP-1, stimulating E2F-1/DP-1
transcriptional activity. KRIP-1 potentiates TRIP-Br protein co-activation of
E2F-1/DP-1. TRIP-Br1 is a component of a multiprotein complex containing E2F-1
and DP-1. Co-expression of the retinoblastoma gene product (RB) abolishes
baseline E2F-1/DP-1 transcriptional activity as well as TRIP-Br/KRIP-1
co-activation, both of which are restored by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein.
These features suggest that TRIP-Br proteins function at E2F-responsive promoters
to integrate signals provided by PHD- and/or bromodomain- containing
transcription factors. TRIP-Br1 is identical to the cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(cdk4)-binding protein p34(SEI-1), which renders the activity of cyclin D/cdk4
resistant to the inhibitory effect of p16(INK4a) during late G(1).
TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) is differentially overexpressed during the G(1) and S phases
of the cell cycle, consistent with a dual role for TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) in the
regulation of cell cycle progression through sequential effects on the
transcriptional activity of E2F-responsive promoters during G(1) and S phases.

PMCID: PMC125435
PMID: 11331592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. EMBO J. 2001 Jan 15;20(1-2):165-77.

Solution structure of the PHD domain from the KAP-1 corepressor: structural
determinants for PHD, RING and LIM zinc-binding domains.

Capili AD(1), Schultz DC, RauscherIII FJ, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Plant homeodomain (PHD) domains are found in >400 eukaryotic proteins, many of
which are transcriptional regulators. Naturally occurring point mutations or
deletions of this domain contribute to a variety of human diseases, including
ATRX syndrome, myeloid leukemias and autoimmune dysfunction. Here we report the
first structural characterization of a PHD domain. Our studies reveal that the
PHD domain from KAP-1 corepressor binds zinc in a cross-brace topology between
anti-parallel ss-strands reminiscent of RING (really interesting new gene)
domains. Using a mutational analysis, we define the structural features required 
for transcriptional repression by KAP-1 and explain naturally occurring,
disease-causing mutations in PHD domains of other proteins. From a comparison of 
this PHD structure with previously reported RING and LIM (Lin11/Isl-1/Mec-3)
structures, we infer sequence determinants that allow discrimination among PHD,
RING and LIM motifs.

PMCID: PMC140198
PMID: 11226167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1422-6. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Conserved interaction between distinct Krüppel-associated box domains and the
transcriptional intermediary factor 1 beta.

Abrink M(1), Ortiz JA, Mark C, Sanchez C, Looman C, Hellman L, Chambon P, Losson 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Biomedical Center, Box 596, S-751 24
Uppsala, Sweden.

The Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain, originally identified as a 75-aa
sequence present in numerous Krüppel-type zinc-finger proteins, is a potent
DNA-binding-dependent transcriptional repression domain that is believed to
function through interaction with the transcriptional intermediary factor 1
(TIF1) beta. On the basis of sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis, we
have recently defined three distinct subfamilies of KRAB domains. In the present 
study, individual members of each subfamily were tested for transcriptional
repression and interaction with TIF1 beta and two other closely related family
members (TIF1 alpha and TIF1 gamma). All KRAB variants were shown, (i) to repress
transcription when targeted to DNA through fusion to a heterologous DNA-binding
domain in mammalian cells, and (ii) to interact specifically with TIF1 beta, but 
not with TIF1 alpha or TIF1 gamma. Taken together, these results implicate TIF1
beta as a common transcriptional corepressor for the three distinct subfamilies
of KRAB zinc-finger proteins and suggest a high degree of conservation in the
molecular mechanism underlying their transcriptional repression activity.

PMCID: PMC29272
PMID: 11171966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(3):928-39.

Sequence-specific transcriptional repression by KS1, a
multiple-zinc-finger-Krüppel-associated box protein.

Gebelein B(1), Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA.

The vertebrate genome contains a large number of Krüppel-associated box-zinc
finger genes that encode 10 or more C(2)-H(2) zinc finger motifs. Members of this
gene family have been proposed to function as transcription factors by binding
DNA through their zinc finger region and repressing gene expression via the KRAB 
domain. To date, however, no Krüppel-associated box-zinc finger protein
(KRAB-ZFP) and few proteins with 10 or more zinc finger motifs have been shown to
bind DNA in a sequence-specific manner. Our laboratory has recently identified
KS1, a member of the KRAB-ZFP family that contains 10 different C(2)-H(2) zinc
finger motifs, 9 clustered at the C terminus with an additional zinc finger
separated by a short linker region. In this study, we used a random
oligonucleotide binding assay to identify a 27-bp KS1 binding element (KBE).
Reporter assays demonstrate that KS1 represses the expression of promoters
containing this DNA sequence. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis reveal that 
KS1 requires nine C-terminal zinc fingers and the KRAB domain for transcriptional
repression through the KBE site, whereas the isolated zinc finger and linker
region are dispensable for this function. Additional biochemical assays
demonstrate that the KS1 KRAB domain interacts with the KAP-1 corepressor, and
mutations that abolish this interaction alleviate KS1-mediated transcriptional
repression. Thus, this study provides the first direct evidence that a KRAB-ZFP
binds DNA to regulate gene expression and provides insight into the mechanisms
used by multiple-zinc-finger proteins to recognize DNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC86683
PMID: 11154279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40463-70.

A novel nuclear receptor corepressor complex, N-CoR, contains components of the
mammalian SWI/SNF complex and the corepressor KAP-1.

Underhill C(1), Qutob MS, Yee SP, Torchia J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Oncology, and Biochemistry, Cancer
Research Laboratories, London Regional Cancer Centre, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Transcriptional silencing by many transcription factors is mediated by the
nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR). The mechanism by which N-CoR represses
basal transcription involves the direct or indirect recruitment of histone
deacetylases (HDACs). We have isolated two multiprotein N-CoR complexes,
designated N-CoR-1 and N-CoR-2, which possess histone deacetylase activity that
is mediated by distinct HDACs. Based on Western blotting using antibodies against
known subunits, the only HDAC found in the N-CoR-1 complex was HDAC3. In
contrast, N-CoR-2 contained predominantly HDAC1 and HDAC2 as well as several
other subunits that are found in the Sin3A.HDAC complex. Using mass spectrometry 
and Western blotting, we have identified several novel components of the N-CoR-1 
complex including the SWI/SNF-related proteins BRG1, BAF 170, BAF 155, BAF
47/INI1, and the corepressor KAP-1 that is involved in silencing heterochromatin.
Indirect immunofluorescence has revealed that both KAP-1 and N-CoR colocalize
throughout the nucleus. These results suggest that N-CoR is found in distinct
multiprotein complexes, which are involved in multiple pathways of
transcriptional repression.

PMID: 11013263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gene. 2000 Aug 8;253(2):231-5.

Correlation of the exon/intron organization to the conserved domains of the mouse
transcriptional corepressor TIF1beta.

Cammas F(1), Garnier J, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch-Cedex, Strasbourg,
France.

TIF1beta, a member of the transcriptional intermediary factor 1 family, has been 
reported to function as a corepressor for the large class of KRAB
domain-containing zinc finger proteins of the Krüppel type. In this study, we
report the genomic organization and nucleotide sequence of the mouse TIF1beta
gene. This gene comprises 17 coding exons located within 7 kb of genomic DNA.
Exon sizes vary from 37 bp (exon 10) to 901 bp (exon 1), and intron sizes range
from 71 bp to 1843 bp. All introns have the conserved GT and AG dinucleotides
present at the donor and acceptor sites, respectively. The functional/homology
regions of the TIF1beta protein are encoded by distinct exons. The amino-terminal
RING finger is encoded by two exons interrupted by a small intron. The B boxes
lie within individual exons. Similarly to the RING finger, the PHD finger is
encoded by two exons. Three exons constitute the carboxy-terminal bromodomain,
and their position correlates well with the secondary structure elements of the
domain as predicted by computer modeling. Taken together, these results will
facilitate the genetic manipulation of TIF1beta for future in vivo
structure-function studies.

PMID: 10940561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6449-65.

Molecular determinants for targeting heterochromatin protein 1-mediated gene
silencing: direct chromoshadow domain-KAP-1 corepressor interaction is essential.

Lechner MS(1), Begg GE, Speicher DW, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The KRAB domain is a highly conserved transcription repression module commonly
found in eukaryotic zinc finger proteins. KRAB-mediated repression requires
binding to the KAP-1 corepressor, which in turn recruits members of the
heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family. The HP1 proteins are nonhistone
chromosomal proteins, although it is unclear how they are targeted to unique
chromosomal domains or promoters. In this report, we have reconstituted and
characterized the HP1-KAP-1 interaction using purified proteins and have compared
KAP-1 to three other known HP1 binding proteins: SP100, lamin B receptor (LBR),
and the p150 subunit from chromatin assembly factor (CAF-1 p150). We show that
the chromoshadow domain (CSD) of HP1 is a potent repression domain that binds
directly to all four previously described proteins. For KAP-1, we have mapped the
CSD interaction region to a 15-amino-acid segment, termed the HP1BD, which is
also present in CAF-1 p150 but not SP100 or LBR. The region of KAP-1 harboring
the HP1BD binds as a monomer to a dimer of the CSD, as revealed by gel
filtration, analytical ultracentrifugation, and optical biosensor analyses. The
use of a spectrum of amino acid substitutions in the human HP1alpha CSD revealed 
a strong correlation between CSD-mediated repression and binding to KAP-1, CAF-1 
p150, and SP100 but not LBR. Differences among the HP1 binding partners could
also be discerned by fusion to a heterologous DNA binding domain and by the
potential to act as dominant negative molecules. Together, these results strongly
suggest that KAP-1 is a physiologically relevant target for HP1 function.

PMCID: PMC86120
PMID: 10938122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5019-31.

An engineered PAX3-KRAB transcriptional repressor inhibits the malignant
phenotype of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cells harboring the endogenous PAX3-FKHR
oncogene.

Fredericks WJ(1), Ayyanathan K, Herlyn M, Friedman JR, Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The t(2;13) chromosomal translocation in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma tumors (ARMS) 
creates an oncogenic transcriptional activator by fusion of PAX3 DNA binding
motifs to a COOH-terminal activation domain derived from the FKHR gene. The
dominant oncogenic potential of the PAX3-FKHR fusion protein is dependent on the 
FKHR activation domain. We have fused the KRAB repression module to the PAX3 DNA 
binding domain as a strategy to suppress the activity of the PAX3-FKHR oncogene. 
The PAX3-KRAB protein bound PAX3 target DNA sequences and repressed
PAX3-dependent reporter plasmids. Stable expression of the PAX3-KRAB protein in
ARMS cell lines resulted in loss of the ability of the cells to grow in low-serum
or soft agar and to form tumors in SCID mice. Stable expression of a PAX3-KRAB
mutant, which lacks repression function, or a KRAB protein alone, lacking a PAX3 
DNA binding domain, failed to suppress the ARMS malignant phenotype. These data
suggest that the PAX3-KRAB repressor functions as a DNA-binding-dependent
suppressor of the transformed phenotype of ARMS cells, probably via competition
with the endogenous PAX3-FKHR oncogene and repression of target genes required
for ARMS tumorigenesis. The engineered repressor approach that directs a
transcriptional repression domain to target genes deregulated by the PAX3-FKHR
oncogene may be a useful strategy to identify the target genes critical for ARMS 
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC85952
PMID: 10866659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 2000 Jul;127(13):2955-63.

Mice lacking the transcriptional corepressor TIF1beta are defective in early
postimplantation development.

Cammas F(1), Mark M, Dollé P, Dierich A, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, France.

TIF1beta, a member of the transcriptional intermediary factor 1 family, has been 
reported to function as a corepressor for the large class of KRAB
domain-containing zinc finger proteins of the Krüppel type. To address the
biological function of TIF1beta, we have generated TIF1beta-deficient mice by
gene disruption. TIF1beta protein was detected in wild-type but not TIF1beta(-/-)
blastocysts. Homozygous mutant embryos, which developed normally until the
blastocyst stage and underwent uterine implantation, were arrested in their
development at the early egg-cylinder stage at about embryonic day (E) 5.5 and
were completely resorbed by E8.5. Taken together, these results provide genetic
evidence that TIF1beta is a developmental regulatory protein that exerts
function(s) essential for early postimplantation development.

PMID: 10851139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Mol Biol. 2000 Feb 4;295(5):1139-62.

Reconstitution of the KRAB-KAP-1 repressor complex: a model system for defining
the molecular anatomy of RING-B box-coiled-coil domain-mediated protein-protein
interactions.

Peng H(1), Begg GE, Schultz DC, Friedman JR, Jensen DE, Speicher DW, Rauscher FJ 
3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA.

The KRAB domain is a 75 amino acid residue transcriptional repression module
commonly found in eukaryotic zinc-finger proteins. KRAB-mediated gene silencing
requires binding to the corepressor KAP-1. The KRAB:KAP-1 interaction requires
the RING-B box-coiled coil (RBCC) domain of KAP-1, which is a widely distributed 
motif, hypothesized to be a protein-protein interface. Little is known about
RBCC-mediated ligand binding and the role of the individual sub-domains in
recognition and specificity. We have addressed these issues by reconstituting and
characterizing the KRAB:KAP-1-RBCC interaction using purified components. Our
results show that KRAB binding to KAP-1 is direct and specific, as the related
RBCC domains from TIF1alpha and MID1 do not bind the KRAB domain. A combination
of gel filtration, analytical ultracentrifugation, chemical cross-linking,
non-denaturing gel electrophoresis, and site-directed mutagenesis techniques has 
revealed that the KAP-1-RBCC must oligomerize likely as a homo-trimer in order to
bind the KRAB domain. The RING finger, B2 box, and coiled-coil region are
required for oligomerization of KAP-1-RBCC and KRAB binding, as mutations in
these domains concomitantly abolished these functions. KRAB domain binding
stabilized the homo-oligomeric state of the KAP-1-RBCC as detected by chemical
cross-linking and velocity sedimentation studies. Mutant KAP-1-RBCC molecules
hetero-oligomerize with the wild-type KAP-1, but these complexes were inactive
for KRAB binding, suggesting a potential dominant negative activity. Substitution
of the coiled-coil region with heterologous dimerization, trimerization, or
tetramerization domains failed to recapitulate KRAB domain binding. Chimeric
KAP-1-RBCC proteins containing either the RING, RING-B box, or coiled-coil
regions from MID1 also failed to bind the KRAB domain. The KAP-1-RBCC mediates a 
highly specific, direct interaction with the KRAB domain, and it appears to
function as an integrated, possibly cooperative structural unit wherein each
sub-domain contributes to oligomerization and/or ligand recognition. These
observations provide the first principles for RBCC domain-mediated
protein-protein interaction and have implications for identifying new ligands for
RBCC domain proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10653693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 15;18(22):6385-95.

Interaction with members of the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family and
histone deacetylation are differentially involved in transcriptional silencing by
members of the TIF1 family.

Nielsen AL(1), Ortiz JA, You J, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Khechumian R, Gansmuller A,
Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, 67404 Illkirch-Cedex, France.

Mammalian TIF1alpha and TIF1beta (KAP-1/KRIP-1) are related transcriptional
intermediary factors that possess intrinsic silencing activity. TIF1alpha is
believed to be a euchromatic target for liganded nuclear receptors, while
TIF1beta may serve as a co-repressor for the large family of KRAB
domain-containing zinc finger proteins. Here, we report an association of
TIF1beta with both heterochromatin and euchromatin in interphase nuclei.
Co-immunoprecipitation of nuclear extracts shows that endogenous TIF1beta, but
not TIF1alpha, is associated with members of the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) 
family. However, in vitro, both TIF1alpha and TIF1beta interact with and
phosphorylate the HP1 proteins. This interaction involves a conserved amino acid 
motif, which is critical for the silencing activity of TIF1beta but not
TIF1alpha. We further show that trichostatin A, an inhibitor of histone
deacetylases, can interfere with both TIF1 and HP1 silencing. The silencing
activity of TIF1alpha appears to result chiefly from histone deacetylation,
whereas that of TIF1beta may be mediated via both HP1 binding and histone
deacetylation.

PMCID: PMC1171701
PMID: 10562550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell. 1999 Oct;4(4):529-40.

Heterochromatin dynamics in mouse cells: interaction between chromatin assembly
factor 1 and HP1 proteins.

Murzina N(1), Verreault A, Laue E, Stillman B.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Molecular Recognition, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Mechanisms contributing to the maintenance of heterochromatin in proliferating
cells are poorly understood. We demonstrate that chromatin assembly factor 1
(CAF-1) binds to mouse HP1 proteins via an N-terminal domain of its p150 subunit,
a domain dispensable for nucleosome assembly during DNA replication. Mutations in
p150 prevent association with HP1 in heterochromatin in cells that are not in S
phase and the formation of CAF-1-HP1 complexes in nascent chromatin during DNA
replication in vitro. We suggest that CAF-1 p150 has a heterochromatin-specific
function distinct from its nucleosome assembly function during S phase. Just
before mitosis, CAF-1 p150 and some HP1 progressively dissociate from
heterochromatin concomitant with histone H3 phosphorylation. The HP1 proteins
reassociate with chromatin at the end of mitosis, as histone H3 is
dephosphorylated.

PMID: 10549285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 4;274(23):16412-22.

Two novel Krüppel-associated box-containing zinc-finger proteins, KRAZ1 and
KRAZ2, repress transcription through functional interaction with the corepressor 
KAP-1 (TIF1beta/KRIP-1).

Agata Y(1), Matsuda E, Shimizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan.

We have isolated two novel Krüppel-like zinc finger proteins containing the
evolutionarily conserved Krüppel-associated box (KRAB), KRAZ1 and KRAZ2, and
demonstrated that they repress transcription when heterologously targeted to DNA.
Their repression activity appeared to be mediated by the putative corepressor
KAP-1 (KRAB-associated protein-1), because KRAZ1/2 bind to KAP-1, but KRAB
mutants of KRAZ1/2 that are unable to interact with KAP-1 lack repression
activity, and KAP-1 has intrinsic repressor activity and potentiates
KRAZ1/2-mediated repression. We dissected the KAP-1 protein into a
KRAB-interacting domain and a region necessary for repression. Using a mammalian 
two-hybrid assay, we further demonstrated that KAP-1 deletions lacking repression
activity fused to the VP16 transactivation domain strongly activated
transcription when coexpressed with KRAZ1. In contrast, VP16-KAP-1 fusions
retaining repression activity resulted in repression. These results provide the
first evidence that KAP-1 functionally interacts with KRAB in mammalian cells and
seems to exert repressor activity in the DNA-bound KRAB-KAP-1 complex, and they
further support the hypothesis that KAP-1 functions as a corepressor for the
large class of KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins.

PMID: 10347202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4366-78.

KAP-1 corepressor protein interacts and colocalizes with heterochromatic and
euchromatic HP1 proteins: a potential role for Krüppel-associated box-zinc finger
proteins in heterochromatin-mediated gene silencing.

Ryan RF(1), Schultz DC, Ayyanathan K, Singh PB, Friedman JR, Fredericks WJ,
Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domains are present in approximately one-third of
all human zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) and are potent transcriptional repression
modules. We have previously cloned a corepressor for the KRAB domain, KAP-1,
which is required for KRAB-mediated repression in vivo. To characterize the
repression mechanism utilized by KAP-1, we have analyzed the ability of KAP-1 to 
interact with murine (M31 and M32) and human (HP1alpha and HP1gamma) homologues
of the HP1 protein family, a class of nonhistone heterochromatin-associated
proteins with a well-established epigenetic gene silencing function in
Drosophila. In vitro studies confirmed that KAP-1 is capable of directly
interacting with M31 and hHP1alpha, which are normally found in centromeric
heterochromatin, as well as M32 and hHP1gamma, both of which are found in
euchromatin. Mapping of the region in KAP-1 required for HP1 interaction showed
that amino acid substitutions which abolish HP1 binding in vitro reduce KAP-1
mediated repression in vivo. We observed colocalization of KAP-1 with M31 and M32
in interphase nuclei, lending support to the biochemical evidence that M31 and
M32 directly interact with KAP-1. The colocalization of KAP-1 with M31 is
sometimes found in subnuclear territories of potential pericentromeric
heterochromatin, whereas colocalization of KAP-1 and M32 occurs in punctate
euchromatic domains throughout the nucleus. This work suggests a mechanism for
the recruitment of HP1-like gene products by the KRAB-ZFP-KAP-1 complex to
specific loci within the genome through formation of heterochromatin-like
complexes that silence gene activity. We speculate that gene-specific repression 
may be a consequence of the formation of such complexes, ultimately leading to
silenced genes in newly formed heterochromatic chromosomal environments.

PMCID: PMC104396
PMID: 10330177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 26;445(2-3):415-9.

Differential effects of retinoic acid isomers on the expression of nuclear
receptor co-regulators in neuroblastoma.

Lovat PE(1), Annicchiarico-Petruzzelli M, Corazzari M, Dobson MG, Malcolm AJ,
Pearson AD, Melino G, Redfern CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, Medical School, University of Newcastle, Newcastle
Upon Tyne, UK.

Retinoic acid modulates growth and induces differentiation and apoptosis of
neuroblastoma cells in vitro, with the all-trans and 9-cis isomers having
different biological properties. Transcriptional activation in response to
retinoic acid isomers is mediated by retinoic acid receptors and retinoid X
receptors. The differential expression of co-activators and co-repressors which
preferentially interact with retinoic acid receptors or retinoid X receptors may 
be a mechanism leading to different cellular responses to 9-cis and all-trans
retinoic acid. To test this hypothesis, we have studied the expression of the
nuclear receptor co-regulators TIF1alpha, TIF1beta, SUG1 and SMRT in the N-type
and S-type neuroblastoma cell lines SH SY 5Y and SH S EP. Transcripts for all
four co-regulators were expressed in these neuroblastoma cells. The expression of
TIF1alpha, TIF1beta and SUG1 did not change in response to retinoic acid;
however, SMRT was induced in both neuroblastoma cell lines, but particularly by
all-trans retinoic acid in SH S EP cells. An additional co-activator, Trip3, was 
isolated by differential mRNA display and shown to be preferentially induced by
9-cis retinoic acid in SH SY 5Y and SH S EP cells. These data suggest that
retinoic acid isomer-specific induction of nuclear receptor co-regulators may
determine, in part, the differential biological effects of retinoic acid isomers.

PMID: 10094499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 19;274(12):7640-8.

Expression of the transcriptional repressor protein Kid-1 leads to the
disintegration of the nucleolus.

Huang Z(1), Philippin B, O'Leary E, Bonventre JV, Kriz W, Witzgall R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology I, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

The rat Kid-1 gene codes for a 66-kDa protein with KRAB domains at the NH2
terminus and two Cys2His2-zinc finger clusters of four and nine zinc fingers at
the COOH terminus. It was the first KRAB-zinc finger protein for which a
transcriptional repressor activity was demonstrated. Subsequently, the KRAB-A
domain was identified as a widespread transcriptional repressor motif. We now
present a biochemical and functional analysis of the Kid-1 protein in transfected
cells. The full-length Kid-1 protein is targeted to the nucleolus and adheres
tightly to as yet undefined nucleolar structures, leading eventually to the
disintegration of the nucleolus. The tight adherence and nucleolar distribution
can be attributed to the larger zinc finger cluster, whereas the KRAB-A domain is
responsible for the nucleolar fragmentation. Upon disintegration of the
nucleolus, the nucleolar transcription factor upstream binding factor disappears 
from the nucleolar fragments. In the absence of Kid-1, the KRIP-1 protein, which 
represents the natural interacting partner of zinc finger proteins with a KRAB-A 
domain, is homogeneously distributed in the nucleus, whereas coexpression of
Kid-1 leads to a shift of KRIP-1 into the nucleolus. Nucleolar run-ons
demonstrate that rDNA transcription is shut off in the nucleolar fragments. Our
data demonstrate the functional diversity of the KRAB and zinc finger domains of 
Kid-1 and provide new functional insights into the regulation of the nucleolar
structure.

PMID: 10075651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncogene. 1999 Feb 4;18(5):1209-17.

TIF1gamma, a novel member of the transcriptional intermediary factor 1 family.

Venturini L(1), You J, Stadler M, Galien R, Lallemand V, Koken MH, Mattei MG,
Ganser A, Chambon P, Losson R, de Thé H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Propre de Recherche 9051, 
Laboratoire Associé au Comité de Paris de la Ligue contre le Cancer, Hôpital St. 
Louis, France.

We report the cloning and characterization of a novel member of the
Transcriptional Intermediary Factor 1 (TIF1) gene family, human TIF1gamma.
Similar to TIF1alpha and TIF1beta, the structure of TIF1beta is characterized by 
multiple domains: RING finger, B boxes, Coiled coil, PHD/TTC, and bromodomain.
Although structurally related to TIF1alpha and TIF1beta, TIF1gamma presents
several functional differences. In contrast to TIF1alpha, but like TIF1beta, TIF1
does not interact with nuclear receptors in yeast two-hybrid or GST pull-down
assays and does not interfere with retinoic acid response in transfected
mammalian cells. Whereas TIF1alpha and TIF1beta were previously found to interact
with the KRAB silencing domain of KOX1 and with the HP1alpha, MODI (HP1beta) and 
MOD2 (HP1gamma) heterochromatinic proteins, suggesting that they may participate 
in a complex involved in heterochromatin-induced gene repression, TIF1gamma does 
not interact with either the KRAB domain of KOX1 or the HP1 proteins.
Nevertheless, TIF1gamma, like TIF1alpha and TIF1beta, exhibits a strong silencing
activity when tethered to a promoter. Since deletion of a novel motif unique to
the three TIF1 proteins, called TIF1 signature sequence (TSS), abrogates
transcriptional repression by TIF1gamma, this motif likely participates in TIF1
dependent repression.

PMID: 10022127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5880-7.

Coactivator TIF1beta interacts with transcription factor C/EBPbeta and
glucocorticoid receptor to induce alpha1-acid glycoprotein gene expression.

Chang CJ(1), Chen YL, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The transcription of the alpha1-acid glycoprotein gene is induced by inflammatory
cytokines and glucocorticoids. C/EBPbeta is a major transcription factor involved
in the induction of the agp gene by some cytokines. In this report, we have
identified a novel transcriptional intermediary factor, TIF1beta, which could
enhance the transcription of the agp gene by the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and
C/EBPbeta. TIF1beta belongs to a subgroup of RING (really interesting new gene)
finger proteins that contain a RING finger preceding two B box-type fingers and a
putative coiled-coil domain (RBCC domain). Immunoprecipitation experiments showed
that the interaction between GR and TIF1beta is ligand independent. The
overexpression of the TIF1beta gene enhances GR-regulated expression in a ligand-
and glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE)-dependent manner. TIF1beta can also
augment C/EBPbeta-mediated activity on wild-type and GRE-mutated agp genes, but
this augmentation is diminished when all three C/EBPbeta-binding elements are
mutated. Functional and biochemical characterizations indicated that the bZIP
domain of C/EBPbeta and the RBCC domain, plant homeodomain finger, and
bromodomain of TIF1beta are crucial for the interactions of these proteins. Taken
together, these results suggest that TIF1beta serves as a converging mediator of 
signal transduction pathways of glucocorticoids and some inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC109174
PMID: 9742105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1998 Apr;65(1-6):43-50.

TIF1alpha: a possible link between KRAB zinc finger proteins and nuclear
receptors.

Le Douarin B(1), You J, Nielsen AL, Chambon P, Losson R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch.

Ligand-induced gene activation by nuclear receptors (NRs) is thought to be
mediated by transcriptional intermediary factors (TIFs), that interact with their
ligand-dependent AF-2 activating domain. Included in the group of the putative
AF-2 TIFs identified so far is TIF1alpha, a member of a new family of proteins
which contains an N-terminal RBCC (RING finger-B boxes-coiled coil) motif and a
C-terminal bromodomain preceded by a PHD finger. In addition to these conserved
domains present in a number of transcriptional regulatory proteins, TIF1alpha was
found to contain several protein-protein interaction sites. Of these, one
specifically interacts with NRs bound to their agonistic ligand and not with NR
mutants that are defective in the AF-2 activity. Immediately adjacent to this 'NR
box', TIF1alpha contains an interaction site for members of the chromatin
organization modifier (chromo) family, HP1alpha and MOD1, which both are
heterochromatinic proteins. Finally, TIF1alpha also has a binding site for KRAB
silencing domains of C2H2 zinc finger proteins. TIF1beta, another member of the
TIF1 gene family, has some interacting partners in common with TIF1alpha.
TIF1beta can interact with HP1alpha, MOD1 and KRAB domains, but apparently not
with NRs. Both TIF1alpha and TIF1beta repress transcription when fused to a DNA
binding domain in transiently transfected mammalian cells. A model discussing the
potential function(s) of TIF1s in the control of transcription at the level of
the chromatin template will be presented.

PMID: 9699856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biol Chem. 1997 Jul;378(7):579-81.

KRAB zinc finger proteins and nuclear receptors: a possible cross-talk.

Losson R.

PMID: 9278136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15299-304.

A novel member of the RING finger family, KRIP-1, associates with the KRAB-A
transcriptional repressor domain of zinc finger proteins.

Kim SS(1), Chen YM, O'Leary E, Witzgall R, Vidal M, Bonventre JV.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The Krüppel-associated box A (KRAB-A) domain is an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional repressor domain present in approximately one-third of zinc
finger proteins of the Cys2-His2 type. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we
report the isolation of a cDNA encoding a novel murine protein, KRAB-A
interacting protein 1 (KRIP-1) that physically interacts with the KRAB-A region. 
KRIP-1 is a member of the RBCC subfamily of the RING finger, or Cys3HisCys4,
family of zinc binding proteins whose other members are known to play important
roles in differentiation, oncogenesis, and signal transduction. The KRIP-1
protein has high homology to TIF1, a putative modulator of ligand-dependent
activation function of nuclear receptors. A 3.5-kb mRNA for KRIP-1 is
ubiquitously expressed among all adult mouse tissues studied. When a GAL4-KRIP-1 
fusion protein is expressed in COS cells with a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter construct with five GAL4 binding sites, there is dose-dependent
repression of transcription. Thus, KRIP-1 interacts with the KRAB-A region of
C2H2 zinc finger proteins and may mediate or modulate KRAB-A transcriptional
repressor activity.

PMCID: PMC26399
PMID: 8986806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 15;24(24):4859-67.

Transcriptional repression by RING finger protein TIF1 beta that interacts with
the KRAB repressor domain of KOX1.

Moosmann P(1), Georgiev O, Le Douarin B, Bourquin JP, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie der Universität, Abteilung II, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Many of the vertebrate zinc finger factors of the Kruppel type (C2H2 zinc
fingers) contain in their N-terminus a conserved sequence referred to as the KRAB
(Kruppel-associated box) domain that, when tethered to DNA, efficiently represses
transcription. Using the yeast two-hybrid system, we have isolated an 835 amino
acid RING finger (C3HC4 zinc finger) protein, TIF1 beta (also named KAP-1), that 
specifically interacts with the KRAB domain of the human zinc finger factor
KOX1/ZNF10. TIF1 beta, TIF1 alpha, PML and efp belong to a characteristic
subgroup of RING finger proteins that contain one or two other Cys/His-rich
clusters (B boxes) and a putative coiled-coil in addition to the classical C3HC4 
RING finger motif (RBCC configuration). Like TIF1 alpha, TIF1 beta also contains 
an additional Cys/His cluster (PHD finger) and a bromo-related domain. When
tethered to DNA, TIF1 beta can repress transcription in transiently transfected
mammalian cells both from promoter-proximal and remote (enhancer) positions,
similarly to the KRAB domain itself. We propose that TIF1 beta is a mediator of
the transcriptional repression exerted by the KRAB domain.

PMCID: PMC146346
PMID: 9016654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genes Dev. 1996 Aug 15;10(16):2067-78.

KAP-1, a novel corepressor for the highly conserved KRAB repression domain.

Friedman JR(1), Fredericks WJ, Jensen DE, Speicher DW, Huang XP, Neilson EG,
Rauscher FJ 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The KRAB repression domain is one of the most widely distributed transcriptional 
effector domains yet identified, but its mechanism of repression is unknown. We
have cloned a corepressor, KAP-1, which associates with the KRAB domain but not
with KRAB mutants that have lost repression activity. KAP-1 can enhance
KRAB-mediated repression and is a repressor when directly tethered to DNA. KAP-1 
contains a RING finger, B boxes, and a PHD finger; the RING-B1-B2 structure is
required for KRAB binding and corepression. We propose that KAP-1 may be a
universal corepressor for the large family of KRAB domain-containing
transcription factors.

PMID: 8769649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


