
1. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2016 Apr 8;45(4):237-242. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2016.04.005.

[Cytology of basaloid squamous cell carcinoma and small cell carcinoma of lung: a
comparative study].

[Article in Chinese]

He SR(1), Bai YP, Gong H, Di J, Chen L, Dai WD, Hu ST, Liu DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing 100730, China.

Objective: To evaluate the roles of cytomorphology and immunohistochemistry in
distinguishing between basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSC) and small cell
carcinoma (SCC) of lung. Methods: The direct smears and/or liquid-based cytology 
preparation (ThinPrep) of bronchial brushing/washing and fine-needle aspiration
(FNA) specimens from 17 cases of biopsy-proven BSC of lung were retrospectively
reviewed and compared with those from 17 cases of SCC. The cytomorphologic
parameters analyzed included proportion of cohesive cell clusters, cell
palisades/rosettes, adenoid cystic features, crushing artifact, nuclear maximum
diameter, nuclear molding, scantiness of cytoplasm,"salt-and-pepper"nuclei,
distinct nucleoli, spindly configuration, individual cell keratinization,
necrosis, hyaline material, apoptosis and mitotic activity.
Immunocytochemical/immunohistochemical study of 25 cases was performed. Ten FNA
samples of basaloid squamous cell carcinoma were also analyzed for epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in exons 18, 19, 20 and 21 using amplification
refractory mutation system. Results: Most of the 17 BSC cases (15/17) showed a
predominance of tightly cohesive tumor cell clusters. The proportion of isolated 
tumor cells was high in SCC (more than 60% in 14 cases). The nuclear maximum
diameter of BSC was slightly larger than that of SCC (9 to 11 µm in BSC versus 7 
to 9 µm in SCC)."Salt-in-pepper"nuclei, nuclear molding and crushing artifact
were detected in all SCC cases (15/17, 17/17 and 14/17, respectively). These
features were only occasionally found in BSC group. Nucleoli were present in BSC 
and rarely (2/17) in SCC. Only 9 of 17 BSC cases showed individual cell
keratinization. The differences in the above-mentioned cytomorphologic features
were statistically significance (P<0.05). The results of immunohistochemistry
performed on the cell block sections and immunocytochemistry performed on the
ThinPrep slides were identical to that performed on the corresponding biopsy
specimens. The tumor cells in BSC were consistently positive for CK5, p40 and
p63. TTF1, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and CD56 were positive in most of SCC.
One of SCC cases showed focal PAX5 expression. No EGFR mutations were detected in
the 10 BSC cases studied. Conclusions: Selected cytomorphologic features,
including presence of cohesive cell clusters, larger nuclear size, distinct
nucleoli, lack of crushing artifact, absence of nuclear molding and presence of
individual cell keratinization, are helpful in diagnosing BSC on cytology
specimens. Immunohistochemistry using a panel of TTF1, CK5, p40/p63 and
chromogranin A/synaptophysin/CD56 provides further clues in differential
diagnosis between BSC and SCC. EGFR mutation study is often negative in lung BSC.

PMID: 27033386  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Ann Oncol. 2016 Mar 24. pii: mdw122. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumourigenic Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Mesenchymal Circulating Tumour Cells - A 
Clinical Case Study.

Morrow CJ(1), Trapani F(1), Metcalf RL(1), Bertolini G(2), Hodgkinson CL(1),
Khandelwal G(3), Kelly P(1), Galvin M(1), Carter L(1), Simpson KL(1), Williamson 
S(1), Wirth C(4), Simms N(1), Frankliln L(1), Frese K(1), Rothwell DG(1), Nonaka 
D(5), Miller CJ(3), Brady G(1), Blackhall FH(6), Dive C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology Group, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. (2)Tumour Genomics Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology and 
Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(3)RNA Biology Group. (4)Computational Biology Support Team, Cancer Research UK
Manchester Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester UK. (5)The Christie
NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. (6)The Christie NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, UK.
(7)Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology Group, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, UK.

BACKGROUND: Over the past decade numerous reports describe the generation and
increasing utility of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) from tissue biopsies. While PDX have proven useful for genetic
profiling and preclinical drug testing, the requirement of a tissue biopsy limits
the available patient population, particularly those with advanced
oligometastatic disease. Conversely, 'liquid biopsies' such as circulating tumour
cells (CTCs) are minimally invasive and easier to obtain. Here we present a
clinical case study of NSCLC patient with advanced metastatic disease, a never
smoker whose primary tumour was EGFR and ALK wild type. We demonstrate for the
first time, tumorigenicity of their CTCs to generate a patient CTC Derived
eXplant (CDX).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CTCs were enriched at diagnosis and again two months later
during disease progression from 10ml blood from a 48 year old NSCLC patient and
implanted into immunocompromised mice. Resultant tumours were morphologically,
immunohistochemically, and genetically compared to the donor patient's diagnostic
specimen. Mice were treated with cisplatin and pemetrexed to assess preclinical
efficacy of the chemotherapy regimen given to the donor patient.
RESULTS: The NSCLC CDX expressed lung lineage markers TTF1 and CK7 and was
unresponsive to cisplatin and pemetrexed. Examination of blood samples matched to
that used for CDX generation revealed absence of CTCs using the CellSearch EpCAM 
dependent platform, whereas size based CTC enrichment revealed abundant
heterogeneous CTCs of which ~80% were mesenchymal marker vimentin positive.
Molecular analysis of the CDX, mesenchymal and epithelial CTCs revealed a common 
somatic mutation confirming tumour origin and showed CDX RNA and protein profiles
consistent with the predominantly mesenchymal phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that absence of NSCLC CTCs detected by CellSearch
(EpCAM(+)) does not preclude CDX generation highlighting epithelial to
mesenchymal transition and the functional importance of mesenchymal CTCs in
dissemination of this disease.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology.

PMID: 27013395  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Diagnostic Utility of Orthopedia Homeobox (OTP) in Pulmonary Carcinoid Tumors.

Nonaka D(1), Papaxoinis G, Mansoor W.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Histopathology ‡Medical Oncology, The Christie NHS Foundation 
Trust †Institute of Cancer Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK.

Recently, Orthopedia Homeobox (OTP) was described as a prognostic marker for
pulmonary carcinoid tumors; however, little is known about the function and
distribution pattern of this transcription factor in normal organs/tissues and in
tumors. Consequently, OTP expression was investigated in a variety of tumors,
with special interest in pulmonary and nonpulmonary neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) 
and high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas. OTP immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on a total of 162 pulmonary carcinoid tumors, 31 pulmonary
neuroendocrine hyperplasias, 104 pulmonary high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas
(large cell neuroendocrine and small cell neuroendocrine), 102 nonpulmonary NETs 
(G1/G2 NETs, small cell and large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, and Merkel cell
carcinomas), 150 endocrine tumors (thyroid, parathyroid, adrenocortical, and
pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas), 279 adenocarcinomas, and 88 squamous cell
carcinomas of various organs, including those of the lungs and others. In
addition, normal tissues from various organs were studied. OTP nuclear expression
was seen in 80% of lung carcinoid tumors. Among other tumors, 4 small-cell
carcinomas showed focal expression (2 pulmonary and 2 bladder), but all other
tumors were completely negative. Overall, the sensitivity and specificity of OTP 
were 80.2% and 99.4%, respectively. All TTF1-positive lung carcinoid tumors were 
diffusely positive for OTP, but none of the OTP-negative carcinoid tumors was
positive for TTF1. OTP expression was not seen in any normal tissues/organs. OTP 
was also negative in neuroendocrine cells of the normal bronchus/bronchiole.
However, OTP was strongly expressed in neuroendocrine hyperplasia, including
reactive and preneoplastic hyperplasia. Our results suggest that OTP may serve as
a useful diagnostic marker for lung carcinoid tumors.

PMID: 26927888  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2015 Dec 23;5:114-7. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2015.12.055.
eCollection 2016.

Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the endometrium with pulmonary metastasis:
A clinicopathologic study of a case and a brief review of the literature.

D'Antonio A(1), Addesso M(2), Caleo A(1), Guida M(3), Zeppa P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathologic Anatomy and Oncology, A.U.O. "San Giovanni di Dio e
Ruggi d'Aragona", via S. Leonardo, Salerno, Italy. (2)Unit f Pathologic Anatomy, 
ASL Salerno, Hospital Tortora, Pagani, SA, Italy. (3)University of Medicine and
Surgery, Unit Obstetrics and Gynecology, Salerno, Italy. (4)University of
Medicine and Surgery, Unit Pathologic Anatomy, Salerno, Italy.

Neuroendocrine carcinomas (NEC) of the female genital tract are aggressive and
rare tumors that usually involve the cervix and ovary, and are seen rarely in the
endometrium in perimenopausal or postmenopausal women. We presented a case of a73
year-old postmenopausal woman with vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain. A
subsequent computerized tomography (CT) scan of pelvis showed an enlarged uterus 
(20,0 × 12,0 cm) with para-aortic and pelvic lymph node metastases. She underwent
surgical debulking and staging of an endometrial tumor with omental metastasis
and positive lymph nodes. The pathological diagnosis was primary small cell
carcinoma (SCC) combined with endometrioid carcinoma of uterine corpus. Her final
FIGO stage was IVB. Three months after surgery CT-total body showed a metastasis 
to left lung of SCC. Because the small-cell component of endometrial tumor showed
a strong positivity for TTF1 as pulmonary counterpart a differential diagnosis
with a primary small cell carcinoma of the lung should be made. Identifying an
appropriate therapeutic management for SCC of endometrium is challenging since
these are extremely rare tumors. An optimal initial therapeutic approach to this 
rare disease, especially at an advanced stage, has not yet been clearly defined. 
However, in these a multidisciplinary therapy, including surgery, chemotherapy,
and radiotherapy represent until this time the only therapeutic option.

PMCID: PMC4723730
PMID: 26900464  [PubMed]


5. Hum Pathol. 2016 Mar;49:99-106. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.10.006. Epub 2015 Nov
2.

Histomolecular profiling of pleomorphic, spindle cell, and giant cell carcinoma
of the lung for targeted therapies.

Forest F(1), Yvorel V(2), Karpathiou G(2), Stachowicz ML(2), Vergnon JM(3),
Fournel P(4), Tiffet O(5), Trombert B(6), Péoc'h M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Saint-Etienne University Hospital, North Hospital, 42055
Saint Étienne CEDEX 2, France. Electronic address:
fabien.forest@chu-st-etienne.fr. (2)Pathology Department, Saint-Etienne
University Hospital, North Hospital, 42055 Saint Étienne CEDEX 2, France.
(3)Pneumology Department, Saint-Etienne University Hospital, North Hospital,
42055 Saint Étienne CEDEX 2, France. (4)Lucien Neuwirth Cancer Institute, 42270
Saint Priest en Jarez, France. (5)Thoracic Surgery Department, Saint-Etienne
University Hospital, North Hospital, 42055 Saint Étienne CEDEX 2, France.
(6)Public Health and Medical Informatics Department, Saint-Etienne University
Hospital, North Hospital, 42055 Saint Étienne CEDEX 2, France.

In pleomorphic, spindle cell, and giant cell carcinoma (PSCGC) of the lung, we
wondered if an integrated diagnosis including morphological and
immunohistochemical features could be related to molecular status. We performed
immunohistochemistry on 35 PSCGCs against TTF1, napsin A, p40, ALK, ROS1, and
c-MET. Mutational status regarding EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, HER2, and PIK3CA genes was
established. Of 18 PSCGCs with adenocarcinomatous or "undifferentiated" carcinoma
differentiation, 8 were mutated for EGFR (n = 1), KRAS (n = 2), BRAF (n = 1),
HER2 (n = 3), and PIK3CA (n = 1). No PSCGC (0/4) with only squamous cell or
adenosquamous (0/2) differentiation was mutated. c-MET overexpression was only
seen in PSCGC with adenocarcinomatous or undifferentiated component (n = 5)
without squamous cell component. ROS1 and ALK were negative. The presence of a
"targetable mutation" was correlated to the presence of morphological or
immunohistochemical adenocarcinomatous differentiation (P = .0137). Integrated
diagnosis of an adenocarcinomatous component in PSCGC could be associated with
the presence of targetable gene mutation. Because only PSCGC with
adenocarcinomatous or undifferentiated carcinoma harbors mutations, whereas PSCGC
with only squamous or adenosquamous differentiation does not in our study, this
might represent a prescreening for patients with PSCGC to be tested for molecular
targets. Our results emphasize that careful morphological examination and the use
of immunohistochemistry might be useful for the selection of PSCGC tested for a
mutational target.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26826416  [PubMed - in process]


6. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan 25. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4593. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical and biological significance of transcription termination factor, RNA
polymerase I in human liver hepatocellular carcinoma.

Komatsu H(1), Iguchi T(1), Ueda M(1), Nambara S(1), Saito T(1), Hirata H(1),
Sakimura S(1), Takano Y(1), Uchi R(1), Shinden Y(1), Eguchi H(1), Masuda T(1),
Sugimachi K(1), Eguchi H(2), Doki Y(2), Mori M(2), Mimori K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University, Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Oita, Japan. 
(2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Osaka, Japan.

Recent studies have indicated that increased ribosomal activity contributes to
cancer progression. Transcription termination factor, RNA polymerase I (TTF1)
acts as a transcription factor for RNA polymerase I. However, the role which TTF1
plays in cancer progression still remains unknown. The present study aimed to
determine whether TTF1 plays a critical role in the progression of human liver
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the present study, quantitative real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was conducted to evaluate TTF1
mRNA expression in 60 HCC tissue samples in order to determine the
clinicopathological significance of TTF1. To investigate whether the expression
levels of TTF1 were associated known gene signatures which represented ribosomal 
activity, we applied gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to HCC cases in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) a. We also performed in vitro proliferation assays
using TTF1-overexpressing HCC cells. TTF1 expression was significantly higher in 
HCC tumor tissues than in adjacent liver tissues (P<0.001). The overall survival 
(OS) of patients with high TTF1 expression levels was significantly shorter than 
that of patients with low TTF1 expression (P=0.027). Multivariate analysis
indicated that TTF1 expression was an independent prognostic factor for OS
(P=0.020). GSEA revealed significant associations between TTF1 expression and
gene sets involved in ribosomal function. In vitro, cell proliferation and rRNA
transcription were significantly promoted by overexpression of TTF1 in the HCC
cell lines HuH-7 and HepG2. From these results, it was suggested that TTF1
participate in poor prognoses and play a role in tumor cell growth in HCC,
possibly by upregulating ribosomal activity. In conclusion, we first propose that
TTF1 may be a novel biomarker and therapeutic target in HCC. Increased expression
of TTF1 was significantly associated with poor prognosis in two independent sets 
of HCC cases. Furthermore, in vitro experiments provided an explanation for
clinical data showing that overexpression of TTF1 contributed to the
proliferation of cancer cells.

PMID: 26821084  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2015 Oct-Dec;119(4):1031-6.

EGFR MUTATIONS IN NON-SMALL CELL LUNG CANCER: LOCAL EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL
IMPORTANCE.

Rusu-Cordunean F, Berlea ML, Cernomaz AT, Marinca MV, Peter S, Pavel I, Grigoriu 
BD.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer's dismal prognosis led to new therapeutic approaches
among which TKIs being among most promising;
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Retrospective study at the Regional Institute of Oncology
Iasi of non small cell lung cancer patients which underwent molecular
investigations between November 2013 - September 2014. EGFR mutation status
(positive, negative, undetermined) was assessed with an Entrogen EGFR kit using
DNA extracted from paraffin embedded samples (surgical or endobronchial biopsies)
with the Macherey-Nagel "NucleoSpin FFPE DNAkit" and then amplified on a Applied 
Biosystem 7500 Real Time PCR System.
RESULTS: There were 63 adenocarcinoma samples (17 females, mean age 60,9 +/- 9
years): 49 primary lung tumors and 14 secondary lesions (brain, lymph nodes,
pleural). There was insufficient bioptic material for three cases. TTF1 status
was determined for 46 patients--six were negative. There were twelve mutations
identified (7 female subjects, 5 male)--six L858R, five Del 19 and one G719X; ten
were TTF1 positive for the remaining two TTF1 status was unknown. Female sex
predominance was statistically significant (p = 0.02, chi squared). Mean age for 
mutation positive patients was 64 +/- 10 years; there were three never smokers,
three active smokers and no data on smoking status was available for six
subjects.
CONCLUSION: Although small dimension of the study group precludes statistical
significance EGFR mutations seem to correlate with TTF1 status.

PMID: 26793845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Ann Pathol. 2016 Jan;36(1):73-9. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.11.005. Epub 2016 Jan
8.

[Strategy for molecular testing in pulmonary carcinoma].

[Article in French]

Penault-Llorca F(1), Tixier L(2), Perrot L(2), Cayre A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de pathologie, centre Jean-Perrin, 58, rue Montalembert, 63011
Clermont-Ferrand, France. Electronic address: Frederique.penault-llorca@cjp.fr.
(2)Département de pathologie, centre Jean-Perrin, 58, rue Montalembert, 63011
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

Nowadays, the analysis of theranostic molecular markers is central in the
management of lung cancer. As those tumors are diagnosed in two third of the
cases at an advanced stage, molecular screening is frequently performed on "small
samples". The screening strategy starts by an accurate histopathological
characterization, including on biopsies or cytological specimens. WHO 2015
provided a new classification for small biopsy and cytology, defining categories 
such as non-small cell carcinoma (NSCC), favor adenocarcinoma (TTF1 positive), or
favor squamous cell carcinoma (p40 positive). Only the NSCC tumors, non-squamous,
are eligible to molecular testing. A strategy aiming at tissue sparing for the
small biopsies has to be organized. Tests corresponding to available drugs are
prioritized. Blank slides will be prepared for immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization based tests such as ALK. DNA will then be extracted for the other
tests, EGFR mutation screening first associated or not to KRAS. Then, the
emerging biomarkers (HER2, ROS1, RET, BRAF…) as well as potentially other markers
in case of clinical trials, can been tested. The spread of next generation
sequencing technologies, with a very sensitive all-in-one approach will allow the
identification of minority clones. Eventually, the development of liquid biopsies
will provide the opportunity to monitor the apparition of resistance clones
during treatment. This non-invasive approach allows patients with a
contraindication to perform biopsy or with non-relevant biopsies to access to
molecular screening.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 26778816  [PubMed - in process]


9. Ann Pathol. 2016 Jan;36(1):15-23. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.11.011. Epub 2015
Dec 30.

[Squamous cell carcinoma, basaloid squamous cell carcinoma and adenosquamous
carcinoma in the lung].

[Article in French]

Vignaud JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de pathologie, CHRU de Nancy, 29, avenue du
Maréchal-de-Lattre-de-Tassigny-Co n(o) 34, 54035 Nancy cedex, France. Electronic 
address: jm.vignaud@chu-nancy.fr.

The precise distinction between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC)
has become very important for determining the appropriate therapy for patients
and more specifically to drive the use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors, pemetrexed,
anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody and crizotinib. Squamous pearls and distinct
intercellular bridges identify keratinizing SqCC. In non-keratinizing SqCC,
immuno-histochemistry is required. Recent studies have shown p40 and TTF1 to be
the two best markers of SqCC and adenocarcinoma respectively. Many morphological 
variants of SqCC have been described. Basaloid SqCC is a poorly differentiated
epithelial tumor lacking squamous morphology but showing immuno-histochemical
expression of squamous makers. The pronostic of basaloid carcinoma is considered 
poorer than that of other non-small cell lung cancers. Adenosquamous carcinoma
shows components of both SqCC and adenocarcinoma. Both components must be clearly
identified either on H&E or by immuno-histochemistry. The adenocarcinoma
components justified a screening for gene rearrangements. Finally, the recent WHO
classification of lung tumors did not change the criteria applying for the
grading of preinvasive bronchial lesion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26746368  [PubMed - in process]


10. Ann Pathol. 2016 Jan;36(1):24-33. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2015.11.006. Epub 2015
Dec 28.

[Large cell carcinoma, lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma, NUT carcinoma].

[Article in French]

Copin MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de pathologie, CHRU de Lille, université de Lille, CS 70001, 59037
Lille cedex, France. Electronic address: marie-christine.copin@chru-lille.fr.

The diagnosis of large cell carcinoma can only be made on a sampled resected
tumor and should not be applied to biopsies or cytology. In the 2015 WHO
classification, the definition of large cell carcinoma is restricted to
carcinomas both lacking morphological signs of glandular, squamous or
neuroendocrine differentiation and exhibiting a null or unclear phenotype
(TTF1-/p40 ou p63 ou CK5/6+ focally). These carcinomas have an adenocarcinoma
molecular profile because they harbor a significant number of KRAS and BRAF
mutations, a profile that is more similar to adenocarcinoma than squamous cell
carcinoma. They also have a worse prognosis than the other types of non-small
cell lung carcinoma. Many large cell carcinomas previously classified on
morphological data alone are now reclassified in the adenocarcinoma and squamous 
cell carcinoma types, including immunohistochemical features. The other large
cell carcinoma subtypes from the 2004 WHO classification, i.e. large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma and basaloid carcinoma, are grouped respectively with
the other neuroendocrine tumors and squamous cell carcinomas. Clear cell and
rhabdoid features are now considered as cytological variants that can occur in
any histopathological subtype and not as distinct subtypes.
Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma is moved to the group of other and unclassified 
carcinomas as NUT carcinoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26739900  [PubMed - in process]


11. Clin Chim Acta. 2016 Feb 15;454:33-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.12.020. Epub 2015
Dec 19.

Development of new quantitative mass spectrometry and semi-automatic isofocusing 
methods for the determination of Apolipoprotein E typing.

Hirtz C(1), Vialaret J(1), Nouadje G(2), Schraen S(3), Benlian P(4), Mary S(5),
Philibert P(6), Tiers L(1), Bros P(1), Delaby C(1), Gabelle A(7), Lehmann S(8).

Author information: 
(1)CHRU de Montpellier, Hôpital St Eloi Université de Montpellier, INSERM U1183, 
IRMB, Laboratoire de Biochimie Protéomique Clinique, Montpellier, France.
(2)SEBIA, 91008 Evry, France. (3)Inserm U837, Lille, FRANCE Université Paris
7-Denis Diderot, France. (4)Université Lille 2 and UMR CNRS 8199 Integrative
Genomics and Metabolic Disease Modeling, LILLE France; CHRU de Lille, Unité de
Médecine Moléculaire des Maladies Métaboliques (U4M), Lille, FRANCE.
(5)Université Lille 2 and UMR CNRS 8199 Integrative Genomics and Metabolic
Disease Modeling, LILLE France. (6)CHRU de Montpellier, Service de Biochimie et
d'Hormonologie, Montpellier, France. (7)CHRU de Montpellier, Hôpital St Eloi
Université de Montpellier, INSERM U1183, IRMB, Laboratoire de Biochimie
Protéomique Clinique, Montpellier, France; Centre Mémoire de Ressources et de
Recherche Languedoc-Roussillon, Département de Neurologie, CHRU de Montpellier,
Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. (8)CHRU de Montpellier, Hôpital
St Eloi Université de Montpellier, INSERM U1183, IRMB, Laboratoire de Biochimie
Protéomique Clinique, Montpellier, France. Electronic address:
s-lehmann@chu-montpellier.fr.

BACKGROUND: Apolipoprotein E (Apo E) is a 36Kda glycoprotein involved in lipid
transport. It exists in 3 major isoforms: E2, E3 and E4. ApoE status is known to 
be a major risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's and cardiovascular diseases.
Genotyping is commonly used to obtain ApoE status but can show technical issues
with ambiguous determinations. Phenotyping can be an alternative, not requiring
genetic material. We evaluated the ability to accurately type ApoE isoforms by 2 
phenotyping tests in comparison with genotyping.
METHODS: Two phenotyping techniques were used: (1) LC-MS/MS detection of 4 ApoE
specific peptides (6490 Agilent triple quadripole): After its denaturation, serum
was either reduced and alkylated, or only diluted, and then trypsin digested.
Before analysis, desalting, evaporation and resuspension were performed. (2)
Isoelectric focusing and immunoprecipitation: serum samples were neuraminidase
digested, delipidated and electrophoresed on Hydragel ApoE (Sebia agarose gel)
using Hydrasys 2 Scan instrument (Sebia, Lisses, France). ApoE isoforms bands
were directly immunofixed in the gel using a polyclonal anti human ApoE antibody.
Then, incubation of the gel with HRP secondary antibody followed by TTF1/TTF2
substrate allowed the visualization of ApoE bands. The results of the two
techniques were compared to genotyping.
RESULTS: Sera from 35 patients previously genotyped were analyzed with the 2
phenotyping techniques. 100% concordance between both phenotyping assays was
obtained for the tested phenotypes (E2/E2, E2/E3, E2/E4, E3/E3, E3/E4, E4/E4).
When compared to genotyping, 3 samples were discordant. After reanalyzing them by
both phenotyping tests and DNA sequencing, 2/3 discrepancies were confirmed.
Those can be explained by variants or rare ApoE alleles or by unidentified
technical issues. 102 additional samples were then tested on LC-MS/MS only and
compared to genotyping. The data showed 100% concordance.
CONCLUSION: Our 2 phenotyping methods represent a valuable alternative to
genotyping. LC-MS/MS has the advantage of being fully specific, with
identification of the different isoforms and can be considered as a reference
method. Sebia isofocusing technique was concordant with LC-MS/MS. Plus, it is a
rapid, semi-automated assay that can be easily implemented in clinical
laboratories.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26707914  [PubMed - in process]


12. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Sep;44(9):644-7.

[Expression of p63, p40 and CK5/6 in small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang L(1), Hou L(1), Xie H(1), Dong Z(1), Wu W(1), Kong J(1), Chen G(1), Wu
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tongji University Affiliated Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Tongji University
Affiliated Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China; E-mail:
wuchunyan581@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of squamous cell markers p63, p40 and CK5/6 in
small cell carcinoma of lung (SCLC).
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study for squamous cell markers (p63, p40 and
CK5/6), neuroendocrine markers (chromogranin A, synaptophysin and CD56) and TTF1 
was carried out in 283 cases of SCLC. The diagnostic value of these markers was
evaluated.
RESULTS: The expression rate of p63, p40 and CK5/6 were 20.7% (54/261), 7.9%
(5/63) and 0.5% (1/221), respectively in the cases of SCLC studied. Amongst the
squamous cell markers, CK5/6 had the lowest rate of positivity (P < 0.01). On the
other hand, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and CD56 were positive in 61.8%
(170/275), 85.5% (242/283) and 89.2% (248/278), respectively. The positivity rate
for chromogranin A was lower than that for synaptophysin and CD56 (P < 0.01).
TTF1 was expressed in 77.2% (217/281).
CONCLUSIONS: p63 and p40 are expressed in a subset of SCLC. In contrast, CK5/6 is
rarely positive in SCLC. An immunohistochemical panel of CK5/6, synaptophysin and
CD56 is recommended for differential diagnosis of SCLC.

PMID: 26705280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jul;44(7):499-503.

[Diagnosis value of TTF-1, Napsin A and Ki-67 index in primary salivary
gland-type lung carcinomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang B(1), Lin J(1), Da J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029,
China. (2)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing
100029, China; E-mail: djp02@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic characteristics of primary salivary
gland-type lung carcinomas, and the immunophenotypic value of TTF-1, Napsin A and
Ki-67 in their differential diagnosis.
METHODS: Totally 48 special type lung cancer surgical removal specimens were
collected in China-Japan Friendship Hospital during September 2009 to December
2014. A panel of immunohistochemical markers (TTF-1, Napsin A, Ki-67, CK5/6, CK7 
and p63) were conducted on these specimens.
RESULTS: The 48 cases of special type lung cancer included 25 cases of primary
salivary gland-type lung carcinoma (18 cases of adenoid cystic carcinoma and 7
cases of mucoepidermoid carcinoma), 5 cases pulmonary adenocarcinoma with
mucoepidermoid carcinoma-like or adenoid cystic carcinoma-like structure, and 18 
cases of pulmonary adenosquamous carcinoma. Compared with pulmonary
adenocarcinoma with mucoepidermoid carcinoma-like or adenoid cystic
carcinoma-like structure and pulmonary adenosquamous carcinoma, primary salivary 
gland-type lung carcinomas have special characteristics in median age, sex,
location, tumor size, LN involvement and pleura invasion, with negative TTF-1 and
Napsin A expression as well as lower Ki-67 index detected by
immunohistochemistry. Primary salivary gland-type lung carcinomas usually have an
indolent behavior.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary salivary gland-type lung carcinomas are low-aggressive
entities. The origins of primary salivary gland-type lung carcinomas were
different from that of pulmonary adenocarcinoma with mucoepidermoid
carcinoma-like or adenoid cystic carcinoma-like structure and pulmonary
adenosquamous carcinoma. Negative TTF-1 and Napsin A expression as well as Ki-67 
index lower than 20% have special value for primary salivary gland-type lung
carcinomas in their differential diagnosis.

PMID: 26705042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Dec 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Cervical Carcinomas With Neuroendocrine Differentiation: A Report of 28 Cases
With Immunohistochemical Analysis and Molecular Genetic Evidence of Common Clonal
Origin With Coexisting Squamous and Adenocarcinomas.

Emerson RE(1), Michael H, Wang M, Zhang S, Roth LM, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Cervical neuroendocrine carcinomas are rare, aggressive tumors and their
immunohistochemical features and clonal relationship to coexisting tumors are
incompletely described. Twenty-eight cases were identified (17 small cell, 9
large cell, and 2 mixed), 10 of which had an invasive squamous or adenocarcinoma 
component. Staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, TTF1, c-kit, CD44, and p16
was performed. Analyses for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 5 polymorphic
microsatellite markers (D3S1300, D9S171, D11S914, D13S319, and TP53) and
X-chromosome inactivation were performed. Of 17 cases with available blocks, 13
(76%) were synaptophysin+, 8 (47%) were chromogranin A+, 8 (47%) were TTF1+, 7
(41%) were c-kit+, and 6 (35%) were CD44+. Strong patchy or strong diffuse p16
staining was seen in all cases. LOH and X-chromosome inactivation analysis were
performed for 17 cases, 8 of which had a coexisting squamous or adenocarcinoma
component. Five of the 8 (63%) cases with 2 components showed allelic loss in
both components. All 5 of these cases demonstrated identical LOH between the
neuroendocrine and squamous or adenocarcinoma components. Nonrandom X-chromosome 
inactivation was seen in the neuroendocrine and other components in 4 of the 8
cases. In all 4 cases the pattern of inactivation was identical between the 2
components. Cervical neuroendocrine carcinomas have features similar to other
extrapulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas, including expression of TTF1, c-kit,
and CD44. Consistent staining for p16 is also seen. Concordant genetic
alterations support common clonal origin for neuroendocrine carcinomas with a
coexisting squamous or adenocarcinoma component.

PMID: 26630233  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Nov 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Endometrial Yolk Sac Tumor With Endodermal-Intestinal Differentiation
Masquerading as Metastatic Colorectal Adenocarcinoma.

Damato S(1), Haldar K, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology (S.D.), John Radcliffe Hospital
Gynaecological Oncology Unit (K.H.), Churchill Hospital, Oxford University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford Department of Pathology (W.G.M.), Belfast Health and 
Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.

Yolk sac tumors (YSTs) with a somatic glandular pattern can be difficult to
recognize histologically because they reproduce developing intestinal, hepatic,
or lung tissue and can express markers such as CDX2 and TTF1. We report an
unusual case of a primary endometrial YST showing florid endodermal-intestinal
differentiation in a 63-yr-old woman with a history of colorectal adenocarcinoma.
Histologically, the tumor exhibited a glandular and papillary architecture and
showed widespread immunoreactivity for CDX2 and focal staining for CK20 and CEA, 
mimicking metastatic colorectal carcinoma on biopsy. The presence of subnuclear
cytoplasmic clearing and positive staining for germ cell markers, however,
pointed toward a diagnosis of primary endometrial YST, and this was supported by 
the radiologic and the subsequent pathologic finding of a primary
endometrial-based lesion. YSTs in this age group usually arise in association
with somatic tumors and in this case a small focus of coexistent endometrioid
adenocarcinoma was identified within the uterus. Despite surgery and adjuvant
chemotherapy, the patient showed disease progression with liver and lung
metastases 6 mo postoperatively.

PMID: 26598980  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2015 Oct;66(5):643-52.

Melatonin in the thyroid gland: regulation by thyroid-stimulating hormone and
role in thyroglobulin gene expression.

Garcia-Marin R(1), Fernandez-Santos JM(1), Morillo-Bernal J(1), Gordillo-Martinez
F(1), Vazquez-Roman V(1), Utrilla JC(1), Carrillo-Vico A(2), Guerrero JM(2),
Martin-Lacave I(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Seville, School of Medicine, Department of Normal and
Pathological Cytology and Histology, Seville, Spain. (2)Institute of Biomedicine 
of Seville, Laboratory of Molecular NeuroImmunoEndocrinology, Seville, Spain.
(3)University of Seville, School of Medicine, Department of Normal and
Pathological Cytology and Histology, Seville, Spain. ilacave@us.es.

Melatonin is an indoleamine with multiple functions in both plant and animal
species. In addition to data in literature describing many other important roles 
for melatonin, such as antioxidant, circadian rhythm controlling, anti-aging,
antiproliferative or immunomodulatory activities, our group recently reported
that thyroid C-cells synthesize melatonin and suggested a paracrine role for this
molecule in the regulation of thyroid activity. To discern the role played by
melatonin at thyroid level and its involvement in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, in the present study we have analyzed the
effect of thyrotropin in the regulation of the enzymatic machinery for melatonin 
biosynthesis in C cells as well as the effect of melatonin in the regulation of
thyroid hormone biosynthesis in thyrocytes. Our results show that the key enzymes
for melatonin biosynthesis (AANAT and ASMT) are regulated by thyroid-stimulating 
hormone. Furthermore, exogenous melatonin increases thyroglobulin expression at
mRNA and protein levels on cultured thyrocytes and this effect is not strictly
mediated by the upregulation of TTF1 or, noteworthy, PAX8 transcription factors. 
The present data show that thyroid C-cells synthesize melatonin under
thyroid-stimulating hormone control and, consistently with previous data, support
the hypothesis of a paracrine role for C-cell-synthesised melatonin within the
thyroid gland. Additionally, in the present study we show evidence for the
involvement of melatonin in thyroid function by directly-regulating thyroglobulin
gene expression in follicular cells.

PMID: 26579570  [PubMed - in process]


17. Histopathology. 2015 Oct 20. doi: 10.1111/his.12895. [Epub ahead of print]

Hormone receptor negative, TTF1 positive uterine and ovarian adenocarcinomas:
report of a series of mesonephric-like adenocarcinomas.

McFarland M(1), Quick CM(2), McCluggage WG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, AR, USA.

AIMS: To report a series of uterine corpus (n=7) and ovarian (n=5) neoplasms
which we believe probably represent mesonephric adenocarcinomas based on their
characteristic morphology and immunophenotype.
METHODS AND RESULTS: All neoplasms exhibited a relatively constant and
characteristic morphological appearance with an admixture of architectural
patterns with small glands or tubules, some containing luminal eosinophilic
colloid-like material, typically predominating. Solid and papillary architectures
were also often present. The nuclear features were characteristic with atypical
angulated clear vesicular nuclei which often exhibited overlapping. All the
tumours were "flat" negative with oestrogen receptor and progesterone receptor
and all except one exhibited nuclear staining with TTF1, which was often diffuse.
All tumours exhibited "wild-type" staining with p53. CD10, calretinin and GATA3
were positive in a variable proportion of the neoplasms.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe these neoplasms to represent mesonephric adenocarcinomas 
which have only rarely been reported to arise in the uterine corpus and never in 
the ovary. We recommend they be termed mesonephric-like adenocarcinomas until
their histogenesis is firmly established. This article is protected by copyright.
All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26484981  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Hum Pathol. 2016 Jan;47(1):138-43. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.08.017. Epub 2015 
Sep 16.

Synchronous pituitary adenoma and pituicytoma.

Neidert MC(1), Leske H(2), Burkhardt JK(1), Kollias SS(3), Capper D(4), Schrimpf 
D(4), Regli L(1), Rushing EJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091
Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Zurich,
CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital
Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), CCU Neuropathology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), DE-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Neuropathology, University Hospital Zurich, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: ElisabethJane.Rushing@usz.ch.

Pituicytoma is a rare benign neoplasm arising in the sellar region, usually found
in the posterior lobe and/or pituitary stalk. Here, we report the case of a
67-year-old woman who presented with bitemporal hemianopsia and visual impairment
accompanied by mildly elevated prolactin. Pathologic and molecular examination of
the tissue removed transsphenoidally revealed 2 distinct tumors: pituitary
adenoma and pituicytoma. To the best of our knowledge, histologically proven
pituicytoma and pituitary adenoma have never been reported together.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26476569  [PubMed - in process]


19. Virchows Arch. 2015 Dec;467(6):675-686. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Pulmonary mucinous adenocarcinomas: architectural patterns in correlation with
genetic changes, prognosis and survival.

Geles A(1,)(2), Gruber-Moesenbacher U(3), Quehenberger F(4), Manzl C(5), Al Effah
M(6), Grygar E(6), Juettner-Smolle F(1), Popper HH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic and Hyperbaric Surgery, Medical
University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (2)Department of Surgery, University of
Zuerich, Zuerich, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Pathology Teaching Hospital
Feldkirch, Feldkirch, Austria. (4)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics
and Documentation Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (5)Institute of
Pathology Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (6)Institute of
Pathology, Research Unit Molecular Lung and Pleura Pathology, Medical University 
of Graz, Graz, Austria. (7)Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Molecular Lung
and Pleura Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
helmut.popper@medunigraz.at.

Of pulmonary adenocarcinomas, about 25-30 % of cases is of a mucinous type.
Mucinous adenocarcinomas are regarded as more aggressive compared to their
non-mucinous counterparts. Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma, colloid, and enteric
adenocarcinomas are variants within adenocarcinomas. We investigated 76 invasive 
mucinous adenocarcinomas, including colloid variants, for predominant and
secondary patterns, their different form of mucin storage and release, expression
of cytokeratin 7 and 20, TTF1 and CDX2, MUC1, 2, and 5AC proteins, p14 and p16
proteins, possible rearrangements for EML4ALK and ROS1, as well as KRAS
mutational status, and correlated this with survival. For comparison, 259
non-mucinous adenocarcinomas were selected. Overall survival for invasive
mucinous adenocarcinomas corrected for T and N stage was not different from their
non-mucinous counterpart. Most were of an acinar pattern. Neither pattern, nor
type of mucin storage and release, such as luminal, extracellular, or goblet cell
type had any influence on survival. Of adenocarcinomas expressing CK20, all but
one expressed TTF1 either strongly or at least focally, and 8 co-expressed CDX2
focally. Most mucinous adenocarcinomas expressed either MUC1 or MUC5AC proteins, 
but rarely MUC2, while a few cases co-expressed both or all three. Loss of p16
expression correlated with worse outcome. KRAS mutation was found in 56 % of
mucinous adenocarcinomas. Mutational status was neither correlated with
architectural pattern nor survival. Codon 12 mutations were most frequent, and
one case presented with KRAS mutations in codon 12 and 61. Goblet cell variants
of mucinous adenocarcinomas presented predominantly with codon 12 mutations,
while all colloid variants had KRAS mutation. Two cases had EML4 and ALK1
rearranged; ROS1 rearrangement was not found. Mucinous adenocarcinomas behave
similar to non-mucinous variants. TNM stage is the most important factor followed
by p16 loss predicting overall survival.

PMID: 26450556  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Pediatr Res. 2016 Jan;79(1-1):34-41. doi: 10.1038/pr.2015.173. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Surfactant proteins in pediatric interstitial lung disease.

Griese M(1), Lorenz E(1), Hengst M(1), Schams A(1), Wesselak T(1), Rauch D(1),
Wittmann T(1), Kirchberger V(2), Escribano A(3), Schaible T(4), Baden W(5),
Schulze J(6), Krude H(7), Aslanidis C(8), Schwerk N(9), Kappler M(1), Hartl
D(10), Lohse P(11), Zarbock R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dr von Hauner Children´s Hospital, German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
University of Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Pediatric Pneumology, Charite, Berlin, 
Germany. (3)Hospital Clinico Universitario, Unidad Neumologia Infantil, Valencia,
Spain. (4)Neonatology, University Children's Hospital, Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Pediatric Cardiology, University Children's Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany.
(6)Children´s Hospital, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Pediatric Endocrinology, Charite, Berlin, Germany. (8)Institute for Clinical
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(9)Pediatric Pulmonology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(10)Children's Hospital and Interdisciplinary Center for Infectious Diseases,
University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. (11)Praxis für Humangenetik, CeGaT
GmbH, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Children's interstitial lung diseases (chILD) comprise a broad
spectrum of diseases. Besides the genetically defined surfactant dysfunction
disorders, most entities pathologically involve the alveolar surfactant region,
possibly affecting the surfactant proteins SP-B and SP-C. Therefore, our
objective was to determine the value of quantitation of SP-B and SP-C levels in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) for the diagnosis of chILD.
METHODS: Levels of SP-B and SP-C in BALF from 302 children with chILD and in
controls were quantified using western blotting. In a subset, single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SFTPC promoter were genotyped by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: While a lack of dimeric SP-B was found only in the sole subject with
hereditary SP-B deficiency, low or absent SP-C was observed not only in
surfactant dysfunction disorders but also in patients with other diffuse
parenchymal lung diseases pathogenetically related to the alveolar surfactant
region. Genetic analysis of the SFTPC promoter showed association of a single SNP
with SP-C level.
CONCLUSION: SP-B levels may be used for screening for SP-B deficiency, while low 
SP-C levels may point out diseases caused by mutations in TTF1, SFTPC, ABCA3, and
likely in other genes involved in surfactant metabolism that remain to be
identified. We conclude that measurement of levels of SP-B and SP-C was useful
for the differential diagnosis of chILD, and for the precise molecular diagnosis,
sequencing of the genes is necessary.

PMID: 26375475  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Histochem Cytochem. 2015 Dec;63(12):908-21. doi: 10.1369/0022155415603768. Epub
2015 Sep 15.

Expression of Carcinoembryonic Cell Adhesion Molecule 6 and Alveolar Epithelial
Cell Markers in Lungs of Human Infants with Chronic Lung Disease.

Gonzales LW(1), Gonzalez R(2), Barrette AM(2), Wang P(2), Dobbs L(2), Ballard
PL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania (LWG, PW)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California (RG, LD)Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
(AMB, PLB) lindagon@mail.med.upenn.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (LWG, PW)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California (RG, LD)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, California (AMB, PLB).

The membrane protein carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule (CEACAM6) is
expressed in the epithelium of various tissues, participating in innate immune
defense, cell proliferation and differentiation, with overexpression in
gastrointestinal tract, pancreatic and lung tumors. It is developmentally and
hormonally regulated in fetal human lung, with an apparent increased production
in preterm infants with respiratory failure. To further examine the expression
and cell localization of CEACAM6, we performed immunohistochemical and
biochemical studies in lung specimens from infants with and without chronic lung 
disease. CEACAM6 protein and mRNA were increased ~4-fold in lungs from infants
with chronic lung disease as compared with controls. By immunostaining, CEACAM6
expression was markedly increased in the lung parenchyma of infants and children 
with a variety of chronic lung disorders, localizing to hyperplastic epithelial
cells with a ~7-fold elevated proliferative rate by PCNA staining. Some of these 
cells also co-expressed membrane markers of both type I and type II cells, which 
is not observed in normal postnatal lung, suggesting they are transitional
epithelial cells. We suggest that CEACAM6 is both a marker of lung epithelial
progenitor cells and a contributor to the proliferative response after injury due
to its anti-apoptotic and cell adhesive properties.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26374831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(36):e1246. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000001246.

Replication and Meta-Analysis of Common Gene Mutations in TTF1 and TTF2 with
Papillary Thyroid Cancer.

Gao Y(1), Chen F, Niu S, Lin S, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Nuclear Medicine of Affiliated Hospital of North
Sichuan Medical College, Nanchong 637000, Sichuan Province, China; and Sichuan
Key Laboratory Medical Imaging, Nanchong 637000, Sichuan Province, China.

Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), one of the most common malignant thyroid tumors, 
exits widely in the thyroid of adolescents. Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1)
and 2 (TTF2) were thyroid-specific transcription factors, and regulated
expression of the thyroid-specific genes. Hence, the aim of the present study was
to evaluate the correlation between gene variants of TTF1 and TTF2 and the risk
of PTC in Chinese population.Two tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) 
on TTF1 and TTF2 were selected and genotyped by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDITOF) mass spectrometry in a
hospital-based case-control study of 297 PTC patients and 594 healthy controls.
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of the association between TTF1 and TTF2 and PTC
risk was also performed.We found that the rs944289 on the TTF1 was significantly 
associated with increased PTC risk (TT vs CC, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.53, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.05-2.24;
CT<U+200A>+<U+200A>TT vs TT, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.34, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.00-1.79; T vs C, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.27, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.04-1.55). Similarly, the rs965513 on the TTF2 can also elevate the risk of
PTC significantly (GA vs GG, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.67, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.07-2.59; AA+GA vs AA,
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.37, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.09-1.82; A vs G, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.05-1.59).
Furthermore, results of stratified analysis revealed that the risk effects of
rs944289 and rs965513 were more overpowering in the subgroups of patients with
MNG, as well as subjects without metastasis. Results of meta-analysis from the
previous study and our new data indicated that variants of rs944289 and rs965513 
might be the genetic susceptible factors both in Asians and Caucasians.We get the
conclusion that mutations of TTF1 and TTF2 are significantly associated with an
increasing risk of PTC in Chinese. However, more detailed investigations and
further large-scale studies on genetic functions to provide more conclusive and
accurate evidence are required in the future.

PMCID: PMC4616637
PMID: 26356687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 15;406(2):222-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.017. Epub 2015 
Aug 29.

Wnt4 is essential to normal mammalian lung development.

Caprioli A(1), Villasenor A(2), Wylie LA(3), Braitsch C(4), Marty-Santos L(4),
Barry D(4), Karner CM(5), Fu S(4), Meadows SM(6), Carroll TJ(4), Cleaver O(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology and Physical Sciences, Marymount Univ., 2807 N. Glebe Rd.,
Arlington, VA 22207, USA. (2)Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Heart and Lung Research, Germany. (3)Dept. of Genetics, Univ. of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (4)Dept. of Molecular Biology, Univ. of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(5)Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington Univ. School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO 63131, USA. (6)Dept. of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane Univ., 2000
Percival Stern Hall, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA. (7)Dept. of Molecular Biology,
Univ. of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX
75390, USA. Electronic address: ondine.cleaver@utsouthwestern.edu.

Wnt signaling is essential to many events during organogenesis, including the
development of the mammalian lung. The Wnt family member Wnt4 has been shown to
be required for the development of kidney, gonads, thymus, mammary and pituitary 
glands. Here, we show that Wnt4 is critical for proper morphogenesis and growth
of the respiratory system. Using in situ hybridization in mouse embryos, we
identify a previously uncharacterized site of Wnt4 expression in the anterior
trunk mesoderm. This expression domain initiates as early as E8.25 in the
mesoderm abutting the tracheoesophageal endoderm, between the fusing dorsal
aortae and the heart. Analysis of Wnt4(-/-) embryos reveals severe lung
hypoplasia and tracheal abnormalities; however, aortic fusion and esophageal
development are unaffected. We find decreased cell proliferation in Wnt4(-/-)
lung buds, particularly in tip domains. In addition, we observe reduction of the 
important lung growth factors Fgf9, Fgf10, Sox9 and Wnt2 in the lung bud during
early stages of organogenesis, as well as decreased tracheal expression of the
progenitor factor Sox9. Together, these data reveal a previously unknown role for
the secreted protein Wnt4 in respiratory system development.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26321050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Nov;10(11):1560-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000658.

Dissecting Pulmonary Large-Cell Carcinoma by Targeted Next Generation Sequencing 
of Several Cancer Genes Pushes Genotypic-Phenotypic Correlations to Emerge.

Pelosi G(1), Fabbri A, Papotti M, Rossi G, Cavazza A, Righi L, Tamborini E,
Perrone F, Settanni G, Busico A, Testi MA, Maisonneuve P, De Braud F, Garassino
M, Valeri B, Sonzogni A, Pastorino U.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; †Department of Biomedical and Clinical
Sciences "Luigi Sacco," Università degli Studi, Milan, Italy; ‡Department of
Oncology, University of Turin at San Luigi Hospital, Orbassano, Torino, Italy;
§Pathologic Anatomy, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria, Policlinico di Modena,
Modena, Italy; <U+2016>Department of Oncology and Advanced Technology, Operative Unit of
Pathologic Anatomy, IRCCS Azienda Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia,
Italy; ¶Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, European Institute of
Oncology, Milan, Italy; #Department of Medical Oncology, and **Division of
Thoracic Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Little is known about genotypic and phenotypic correlations in
undifferentiated large-cell carcinoma (LCC) of the lung.
METHODS: Thirty LCC were dissected by unsupervised targeted next generation
sequencing analysis for 50 cancer-associated oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. Cell differentiation lineages were unveiled by using thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF1) for adenocarcinoma (ADC) and p40 for squamous cell carcinoma
(SQC), dichotomizing immunohistochemistry (IHC) results for TTF1 as negative or
positive (whatever its extent) and for p40 as negative, positive, or focal (if
<10% of reactive tumor cells).
RESULTS: Three LCC were wild type (all TTF1+/p40-), whereas the remaining 27
(90%) tumors had at least one gene mutation. Twenty-four cases featuring
TTF1+/p40-, TTF1+/p40±, TTF1-/p40±, or TTF1-/p40- phenotypes comprised ATM, BRAF,
CDKN2A, EGFR, ERBB4, FBXW7, FLT3, KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA, PTPN11, RET, SMAD4, SMO,
STK11, or TP53 mutations in keeping with ADC lineage, whereas three tumors
showing TTF1-/p40+ phenotype harbored TP53 only and no ADC-related mutations in
keeping with SQC lineage. Single, double, triple, quadruple, and quintuple
mutations occurred in 16, 6, 2, 2, and 1 patient, respectively. The occurrence of
three mutations or more but not any immunohistochemistry categorization predicted
shorter overall survival (OS, p = 0.001) and disease-free survival (DFS, p =
0.007), independent of age, sex, and tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Albeit preliminary also because of the relatively small number of
LCC under evaluation, this targeted next generation sequencing study, however,
revealed gene mutation heterogeneity in LCC with some genotypic-phenotypic
correlations. Negativity or focal occurrence of p40 made SQC diagnosis unlikely
on molecular grounds, but suggested ADC confirming validity of the axiom "no p40,
no squamous."

PMID: 26317919  [PubMed - in process]


25. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Nov;43(11):937-40. doi: 10.1002/dc.23329. Epub 2015 Aug
25.

Fine-needle aspiration cytology in a rare case of recurrent mucinous carcinoma of
skin, displaying psammoma bodies on smears.

Rekhi B(1), Deodhar KK(1), Laskar SG(2), D'Cruz A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra,
India. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology (Head and Neck), Tata
Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Primary mucinous carcinoma of skin is an uncommonly documented tumor, especially 
on fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) smears. A 58-year-old gentleman
presented with a recurrent swelling over his right zygoma. Earlier, he had
undergone surgical resection at the same site, on two occasions, 4 years back.
FNAC smears from the recurrent nodule displayed clusters and singly scattered
relatively monomorphic, polygonal to plasmacytoid cells with mild nuclear atypia 
and moderate to abundant cytoplasm, including focal intracytoplasmic vacuoles. At
places, tumor cells were arranged around psammoma bodies against a background of 
mucinous material. Histopathological sections from the subsequent tumor resection
revealed tumor cells arranged in the form of islands, nests, cribriform, and
papillary arrangements amidst mucinous stroma, along with focal psammomatous
calcification, consistent with a recurrent mucinous adenocarcinoma. On
immunohistochemistry, tumor cells were diffusely positive for CK 7, estrogen
receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR), while negative for CDX2, CK20, and
TTF1. Diagnosis of a recurrent mucinous carcinoma of skin was offered. Patient
underwent adjuvant radiotherapy for achieving better loco regional clearance and 
is disease-free, 4 months after. FNAC is a useful diagnostic tool for timely
identification of mucinous carcinoma of skin, including recurrent lesions.
Psammomatous calcification can be identified within this uncommon tumor, in
recurrent lesions. While surgical resection remains the treatment mainstay,
immunohistochemical expression of ER and PR in this tumor perhaps could have
therapeutic impact, especially in recurrent cases.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26302739  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cancer Gene Ther. 2015 Aug;22(8):410-6. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2015.37. Epub 2015 Aug
7.

Novel analogs targeting histone deacetylase suppress aggressive thyroid cancer
cell growth and induce re-differentiation.

Jang S(1), Yu XM(1), Odorico S(1), Clark M(1), Jaskula-Sztul R(1), Schienebeck
CM(2), Kupcho KR(3), Harrison AD(1), Winston-McPherson GN(2), Tang W(2), Chen
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, WI, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin
School of Pharmacy, Madison, WI, USA. (3)Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA.

To develop novel therapies for aggressive thyroid cancers, we have synthesized a 
collection of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor analogs named AB1 to AB13,
which have different linkers between a metal chelating group and a hydrophobic
cap. The purpose of this study was to screen out the most effective compounds and
evaluate the therapeutic efficacy. AB2, AB3 and AB10 demonstrated the lowest
half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values in one metastatic follicular 
and two anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines. Treatment with each of the three
ABs resulted in an increase in apoptosis markers, including cleaved poly
adenosine diphosphate ribose polymerase (PARP) and cleaved caspase 3.
Additionally, the expression of cell-cycle regulatory proteins p21(WAF1) and
p27(Kip1) increased with the treatment of ABs while cyclin D1 decreased.
Furthermore, AB2, AB3 and AB10 were able to induce thyrocyte-specific genes in
the three thyroid cancer cell lines indicated by increased expression levels of
sodium iodide symporter, paired box gene 8, thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF1), TTF2 and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptors. AB2, AB3 and AB10
suppress thyroid cancer cell growth via cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. They
also induce cell re-differentiation, which could make aggressive cancer cells
more susceptible to radioactive iodine therapy.

PMID: 26251030  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Aug;50(8):1251-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.06.015. Epub 
2015 Jun 25.

Lung maturity in esophageal atresia: Experimental and clinical study.

Fragoso AC(1), Martinez L(2), Estevão-Costa J(3), Tovar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain;
Department of Congenital Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz Research Laboratory,
Madrid, Spain; Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Electronic address: catarina.fragoso@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain; Department of Congenital
Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz Research Laboratory, Madrid, Spain. (3)Faculty
of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) survivors
suffer respiratory morbidity of unclear pathogenesis. Defective lung
morphogenesis has been described in the rat model. This study examined fetal lung
growth and maturity in rats and patients with EA-TEF.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either adriamycin or vehicle. Control and
adriamycin-exposed lungs, with and without EA-TEF, were weighed and processed for
RT-PCR, DNA quantification, immunofluorescence and immunoblot analysis of TTF1,
VEGF, Sp-B, and a-sma. Twenty human lungs were also processed for
immunofluorescence and Alcian-blue staining.
RESULTS: Lungs from fetuses with EA-TEF (E21) showed decreased total DNA; FGF7
and TTF1 mRNA expressions were upregulated at E15 and E18, respectively. Protein 
expression and immunofluorescent distribution of maturity markers were similar.
Lungs from stillborns with EA-TEF showed decreased epithelial expression of Sp-B 
and VEGF whereas those from newborns tended to have less Sp-B and more VEGF and
mucous glands.
DISCUSSION: The lungs of rats with EA-TEF were hypoplastic but achieved
near-normal maturity. Stillborns with EA-TEF exhibited an apparently disturbed
differentiation of the airway epithelium. Newborns with EA-TEF demonstrated
subtle differences in the expression of differentiation markers, and increased
number of mucous glands that could influence postnatal respiratory adaptation and
explain some respiratory symptoms of EA-TEF survivors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26220889  [PubMed - in process]


28. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 24;10(7):e0133859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133859.
eCollection 2015.

Comprehensive Molecular Analysis of NSCLC; Clinicopathological Associations.

Chatziandreou I(1), Tsioli P(1), Sakellariou S(1), Mourkioti I(1), Giannopoulou
I(1), Levidou G(1), Korkolopoulou P(1), Patsouris E(1), Saetta AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Laikon General Hospital, Athens University
Medical School, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Selection of NSCLC patients for targeted therapy is currently based
upon the presence of sensitizing mutations in EGFR and EML4/ALK translocations.
The heterogeneity of molecular alterations in lung cancer has led to the ongoing 
discovery of potential biomarkers and targets in order to improve survival.
AIM: This study aimed to detect alterations in EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, MET-gene
copy number and ALK rearrangements in a large cohort of 956 NSCLC patients of
Hellenic origin using highly sensitive techniques and correlations with
clinicopathological characteristics.
RESULTS: Mutations were detected in EGFR 10.6% (101 out of 956 samples), KRAS
26.5% (191 out of 720 samples), BRAF 2.5% (12 out of 471 samples), PIK3CA 3.8% (7
out of 184 samples), MET gene amplification was detected in 18% (31 out of 170)
and ALK rearrangements in 3.7% (4 out of 107 samples). EGFR mutations were
detected in exon 19 (61.4% of mutant cases), exon 21 p.Leu858Arg (19.8%), exon 20
(15.8%), exon 18 (2.9%) and were correlated with gender histology, smoking status
and TTF1 staining. p.Thr790Met mutant cases (3.9%) displayed concurrent mutations
in exons 19 or 21. Negative TTF-1 staining showed strong negative predictive
value for the presence of EGFR mutations. KRAS mutations were associated with
histology, the most common mutation being p.Gly12Cys (38%).
DISCUSSION: In conclusion, only 89 patients were eligible for EGFR -TKIs and ALK 
inhibitors therapy, whereas 257 patients showed other alterations, highlighting
the necessity for a detailed molecular profiling potentially leading to more
efficient individualized therapies for NSCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC4514742
PMID: 26208325  [PubMed - in process]


29. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Jul 25;10:123. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0367-0.

Malignant ameloblastoma (metastatic ameloblastoma) in the lung: 3 cases of
misdiagnosis as primary lung tumor with a unique growth pattern.

Bi R(1,)(2), Shen L(3,)(4), Zhu X(5,)(6), Xu X(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270 Dong An 
Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. br_fdcc@163.com. (2)Department of Oncology,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, 200032,
China. br_fdcc@163.com. (3)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai
Cancer Center, 270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. shenleijin@yahoo.com.
(4)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 270 Dong
An Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. shenleijin@yahoo.com. (5)Department of
Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270 Dong An Road, Shanghai,
200032, China. xiongzengzhu@126.com. (6)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, 270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, 200032, China.
xiongzengzhu@126.com. (7)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai
Cancer Center, 270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. lilysh21@hotmail.com.
(8)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 270 Dong
An Road, Shanghai, 200032, China. lilysh21@hotmail.com.

Malignant ameloblastoma (metastatic ameloblastoma, MA) is currently defined as a 
distinct pathologic entity, MA, despite its histologically benign appearance.
According to the new criteria, the histological and clinical features of MA are
more homogenous. Here, we report three cases of histologically confirmed
pulmonary MA. Two of the three patients complained of chest pain as the primary
symptom, and the other case was detected upon the evaluation of pulmonary nodules
found during a health examination after a local recurrence of mandible
ameloblastoma. All three patients were female with an average age of 48 years.
The intervals between the primary ameloblastoma and metastasis to the lung were
14 years, 19 years and 10 years, averaging 14.3 years. Prior to metastasis to the
lung, only one patient experienced local recurrences, at 5 and 19 years after the
primary tumor resection, while the other two patients both remained disease-free.
Computed tomography (CT) or X-ray evaluation demonstrated multiple bilateral lung
nodules ranging in size from several millimeters up to 2 cm. Histologically, the 
pulmonary metastatic tumors showed a unique growth pattern: the tumor cells grew 
among the interstitial alveoli but did not appear to destructively infiltrate the
surrounding tissue. Immunohistochemically, the MA cells expressed squamous
differentiation markers, such as CK10/13 and p63, while the alveolar epithelial
cells stained for TTF1 and PE10. In this paper, we discuss the clinical behavior,
differential diagnosis and unique growth pattern of pulmonary MA.

PMCID: PMC4513681
PMID: 26205138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 11;290(37):22409-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.636068. Epub
2015 Jul 22.

The miR-200 family and its targets regulate type II cell differentiation in human
fetal lung.

Benlhabib H(1), Guo W(1), Pierce BM(1), Mendelson CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Obstetrics and Gynecology, North
Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038. (2)From the Departments of Biochemistry
and Obstetrics and Gynecology, North Texas March of Dimes Birth Defects Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038
carole.mendelson@utsouthwestern.edu.

Type II cell differentiation and expression of the major surfactant protein,
SP-A, in mid-gestation human fetal lung (HFL) are induced by cAMP and inhibited
by TGF-ß. cAMP induction of SP-A promoter activity is mediated by increased
phosphorylation and DNA binding of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1),
a master regulator of lung development. To further define mechanisms for
developmental induction of surfactant synthesis in HFL, herein, we investigated
the potential roles of microRNAs (miRNAs, miRs). To identify and characterize
differentially regulated miRNAs in mid-gestation HFL explants during type II
pneumocyte differentiation in culture, we performed miRNA microarray of RNA from 
epithelial cells isolated from mid-gestation HFL explants before and after
culture with or without Bt2cAMP. Interestingly, the miR-200 family was
significantly up-regulated during type II cell differentiation; miR-200 induction
was inversely correlated with expression of known targets, transcription factors 
ZEB1/2 and TGF-ß2. miR-200 antagonists inhibited TTF-1 and surfactant proteins
and up-regulated TGF-ß2 and ZEB1 expression in type II cells. Overexpression of
ZEB1 in type II cells decreased DNA binding of endogenous TTF-1, blocked cAMP
stimulation of surfactant proteins, and inhibited miR-200 expression, whereas
cAMP markedly inhibited ZEB1/2 and TGF-ß. Importantly, overexpression of ZEB1 or 
miR-200 antagonists in HFL type II cells also inhibited LPCAT1 and ABCA3, enzymes
involved in surfactant phospholipid synthesis and trafficking, and blocked
lamellar body biogenesis. Our findings suggest that the miR-200 family and ZEB1, 
which exist in a double-negative feedback loop regulated by TGF-ß, serve
important roles in the developmental regulation of type II cell differentiation
and function in HFL.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4566216 [Available on 2016-09-11]
PMID: 26203191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Oct;10(10):1444-50. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000626.

Negative Thyroid Transcription Factor 1 Expression Defines an Unfavorable
Subgroup of Lung Adenocarcinomas.

Zhang Y(1), Wang R, Li Y, Pan Y, Hu H, Zhang Y, Li H, Shen L, Yu Y, Sun Y, Chen
H.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai, China; †Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China; ‡Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai 
Cancer Center, Shanghai, China; and §Section of Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) is a master regulator of
pulmonary differentiation that is downregulated in a subset of lung
adenocarcinoma, of which the clinicopathologic characteristics were not fully
clarified.
METHODS: One thousand forty-two lung adenocarcinoma patients who underwent
surgery were investigated for clinic characteristics, histologic subtyping, and
spectrum of well-identified driver mutations. TTF1 expression was correlated with
these clinicopathologic factors and survival.
RESULTS: Compared with TTF1 positive (TTF1+) patients, the 133 negative
individuals (12.8%, TTF1-) were more likely to be male (p = 0.006) and heavy
smokers (p = 0.002) who had larger tumor size (p < 0.001) and more advanced
disease stage (p < 0.001). TTF1- presented more in solid and invasive
mucinous-predominant carcinomas (both p < 0.001), whereas TTF1+ was identified in
100% patients with adenocarcinoma in situ, minimally invasive and
lepidic-predominant adenocarcinomas. The TTF1- tumors harbored the known driver
mutations in significantly low frequency compared with TTF1+ adenocarcinomas
(57.8% versus 78.1%, p < 0.001), especially in epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) mutations (37.6% versus 60.7%, p < 0.001). There was no significant
difference in recurrence-free survival between the TTF1- and TTF1+ patients,
either for the whole cohort or stratified by pathologic stage, or among the
driver mutation-defined subsets. However, recurrence of multiple metastases was
more likely to occur in patients with TTF1- adenocarcinomas (88.1% versus 32.4%, 
p < 0.001). Multivariate analysis revealed that TTF1- independently predicted
both poor postrecurrence survival (hazard ratio = 1.664; 95% confidence interval 
, 1.097-2.524; p = 0.017) and unfavorable overall survival (hazard ratio = 1.553;
95% confidence interval , 1.013-2.381; p = 0.043).
CONCLUSIONS: TTF1- correlated with solid and invasive mucinous subtypes of lung
adenocarcinoma and lower frequency of EGFR mutations. It defines a subgroup of
lung adenocarcinomas with unfavorable outcomes.

PMID: 26200450  [PubMed - in process]


32. J Cell Commun Signal. 2015 Sep;9(3):207-15. doi: 10.1007/s12079-015-0299-1. Epub 
2015 Jul 22.

Interdependent TTF1 - ErbB4 interactions are critical for surfactant protein-B
homeostasis in primary mouse lung alveolar type II cells.

Marten E(1,)(2), Nielsen HC(1,)(3), Dammann CE(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Floating Hospital for Children at Tufts Medical 
Center, 800 Washington St, Boston, MA, 02111, USA. (2)Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, 30625, Germany. (3)Sackler School for Biomedical Sciences, Tufts
University, Boston, MA, 02111, USA. (4)Division of Newborn Medicine, Floating
Hospital for Children at Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington St, Boston, MA,
02111, USA. cdammann@tuftsmedicalcenter.org. (5)Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, 30625, Germany. cdammann@tuftsmedicalcenter.org. (6)Sackler School for 
Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA, 02111, USA.
cdammann@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

ErbB4 receptor and thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1 are important modulators 
of fetal alveolar type II (ATII) cell development and injury. ErbB4 is an
upstream regulator of TTF-1, promoting its expression in MLE-12 cells, an ATII
cell line. Both proteins are known to promote surfactant protein-B gene (SftpB)
and protein (SP-B) expression, but their feedback interactions on each other are 
not known. We hypothesized that TTF-1 expression has a feedback effect on ErbB4
expression in an in-vitro model of isolated mouse ATII cells. We tested this
hypothesis by analyzing the effects of overexpressing HER4 and Nkx2.1, the genes 
of ErbB4 and TTF-1 on TTF-1 and ErbB4 protein expression, respectively, as well
as SP-B protein expression in primary fetal mouse lung ATII cells. Transient
ErbB4 protein overexpression upregulated TTF-1 protein expression in primary
fetal ATII cells, similarly to results previously shown in MLE-12 cells.
Transient TTF-1 protein overexpression down regulated ErbB4 protein expression in
both cell types. TTF-1 protein was upregulated in primary transgenic
ErbB4-depleted adult ATII cells, however SP-B protein expression in these adult
transgenic ATII cells was not affected by the absence of ErbB4. The observation
that TTF-1 is upregulated in fetal ATII cells by ErbB4 overexpression and also in
ErbB4-deleted adult ATII cells suggests additional factors interact with ErbB4 to
regulate TTF-1 levels. We conclude that the interdependency of TTF-1 and ErbB4 is
important for surfactant protein levels. The interactive regulation of ErbB4 and 
TTF-1 needs further elucidation.

PMCID: PMC4580683
PMID: 26198867  [PubMed]


33. Cancer Discov. 2015 Aug;5(8):860-77. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-1236. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Co-occurring genomic alterations define major subsets of KRAS-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma with distinct biology, immune profiles, and therapeutic
vulnerabilities.

Skoulidis F(1), Byers LA(1), Diao L(2), Papadimitrakopoulou VA(1), Tong P(2),
Izzo J(3), Behrens C(1), Kadara H(3), Parra ER(3), Canales JR(3), Zhang J(4),
Giri U(1), Gudikote J(1), Cortez MA(5), Yang C(1), Fan Y(1), Peyton M(6), Girard 
L(6), Coombes KR(7), Toniatti C(8), Heffernan TP(8), Choi M(9), Frampton GM(10), 
Miller V(10), Weinstein JN(2), Herbst RS(11), Wong KK(12), Zhang J(8), Sharma
P(13), Mills GB(14), Hong WK(15), Minna JD(6), Allison JP(16), Futreal A(4), Wang
J(2), Wistuba II(3), Heymach JV(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Bioinformatics 
and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)Department of
Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. (5)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Hamon Center for Therapeutic
Oncology Research and Simmons Cancer Center, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (7)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Wexner
Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. (8)Institute for
Applied Cancer Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (9)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul 
National University, Seoul, Korea. (10)Foundation Medicine, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (11)Yale Cancer Center and Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New
Haven, New Haven, Connecticut. (12)Department of Medical Oncology and Belfer
Institute for Applied Cancer Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (13)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (14)Department of Systems
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(15)Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas. (16)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (17)Department of Thoracic and Head and
Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. jheymach@mdanderson.org.

The molecular underpinnings that drive the heterogeneity of KRAS-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma are poorly characterized. We performed an integrative analysis of 
genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data from early-stage and chemorefractory 
lung adenocarcinoma and identified three robust subsets of KRAS-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma dominated, respectively, by co-occurring genetic events in
STK11/LKB1 (the KL subgroup), TP53 (KP), and CDKN2A/B inactivation coupled with
low expression of the NKX2-1 (TTF1) transcription factor (KC). We further
revealed biologically and therapeutically relevant differences between the
subgroups. KC tumors frequently exhibited mucinous histology and suppressed
mTORC1 signaling. KL tumors had high rates of KEAP1 mutational inactivation and
expressed lower levels of immune markers, including PD-L1. KP tumors demonstrated
higher levels of somatic mutations, inflammatory markers, immune checkpoint
effector molecules, and improved relapse-free survival. Differences in drug
sensitivity patterns were also observed; notably, KL cells showed increased
vulnerability to HSP90-inhibitor therapy. This work provides evidence that
co-occurring genomic alterations identify subgroups of KRAS-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma with distinct biology and therapeutic
vulnerabilities.SIGNIFICANCE: Co-occurring genetic alterations in STK11/LKB1,
TP53, and CDKN2A/B-the latter coupled with low TTF1 expression-define three major
subgroups of KRAS-mutant lung adenocarcinoma with distinct biology, patterns of
immune-system engagement, and therapeutic vulnerabilities.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4527963
PMID: 26069186  [PubMed - in process]


34. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl 3:1490-8. doi: 10.1245/s10434-015-4652-7. Epub 
2015 Jun 3.

Overexpression of Transcription Termination Factor 1 is Associated with a Poor
Prognosis in Patients with Colorectal Cancer.

Ueda M(1,)(2), Iguchi T(3), Nambara S(3), Saito T(3), Komatsu H(3,)(4), Sakimura 
S(3), Hirata H(3), Uchi R(3), Takano Y(3), Shinden Y(3), Eguchi H(3), Masuda
T(3), Sugimachi K(3), Yamamoto H(4), Doki Y(4), Mori M(4), Mimori K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan.
mueda@beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
mueda@beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu
Hospital, Beppu, Japan. (4)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan. (5)Department of Surgery,
Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan. kmimori@beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: RNA polymerase 1 transcription termination factor (TTF1) mediates the
transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA). In the current study, we investigated the 
clinical and biological significance of the TTF1 gene in colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: The expression of TTF1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in tumor and normal tissues 
from 136 patients with CRC was examined by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). We also performed in vitro
cell proliferation and migration assays in TTF1-expressing CRC cells. The
biological role of TTF1 in CRC was further elucidated using gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) with CRC samples.
RESULTS: TTF1 expression was significantly higher in tumor tissues than in
corresponding normal tissues (p = 0.016). In clinicopathological analysis, the
high-TTF1 expression group showed a higher incidence of liver metastasis and
lymphatic invasion than the low-TTF1 expression group (p < 0.05), and tended to
have more frequent venous invasion than the low-TTF1 expression group.
Furthermore, the high-TTF1 expression group had a significantly poorer prognosis 
than the low-TTF1 expression group (p = 0.011). Moreover, overexpression of TTF1 
enhanced the proliferation and migration capacity of CRC cells in vitro. GSEA
revealed that TTF1 was significantly associated with the RAS and MYC pathways,
and this observation was confirmed in samples from 136 patients with CRC.
CONCLUSION: TTF1 was involved in cancer progression via the RAS and MYC pathways 
in CRC, suggesting that TTF1 may be a prognostic indicator and therapeutic target
in CRC.

PMID: 26036188  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 3;290(27):16906-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.642363. Epub 2015
May 20.

Hippo Component TAZ Functions as a Co-repressor and Negatively Regulates <U+0394>Np63
Transcription through TEA Domain (TEAD) Transcription Factor.

Valencia-Sama I(1), Zhao Y(1), Lai D(1), Janse van Rensburg HJ(1), Hao Y(1), Yang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada
yang@path.queensu.ca.

Transcriptional co-activator with a PDZ binding domain (TAZ) is a WW
domain-containing transcriptional co-activator and a core component of an
emerging Hippo signaling pathway that regulates organ size, tumorigenesis,
metastasis, and drug resistance. TAZ regulates these biological functions by
up-regulating downstream cellular genes through transactivation of transcription 
factors such as TEAD and TTF1. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying 
TAZ-induced tumorigenesis, we have recently performed a gene expression profile
analysis by overexpressing TAZ in mammary cells. In addition to the
TAZ-up-regulated genes that were confirmed in our previous studies, we identified
a large number of cellular genes that were down-regulated by TAZ. In this study, 
we have confirmed these down-regulated genes (including cytokines, chemokines,
and p53 gene family members) as bona fide downstream transcriptional targets of
TAZ. By using human breast and lung epithelial cells, we have further
characterized <U+0394>Np63, a p53 gene family member, and shown that TAZ suppresses
<U+0394>Np63 mRNA, protein expression, and promoter activity through interaction with
the transcription factor TEAD. We also show that TEAD can inhibit <U+0394>Np63 promoter 
activity and that TAZ can directly interact with <U+0394>Np63 promoter-containing TEAD
binding sites. Finally, we provide functional evidence that down-regulation of
<U+0394>Np63 by TAZ may play a role in regulating cell migration. Altogether, this study
provides novel evidence that the Hippo component TAZ can function as a
co-repressor and regulate biological functions by negatively regulating
downstream cellular genes.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505436 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 25995450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;23(5):388-92. doi: 10.1177/1066896915586254. Epub
2015 May 19.

Ovarian Small Cell Carcinoma of Pulmonary Type Arising in Mature Cystic Teratomas
With Metastases to the Contralateral Ovary.

Rubio A(1), Schuldt M(2), Chamorro C(3), Crespo-Lora V(3), Nogales FF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Badajoz, Badajoz, Spain. (2)Hospital
Jose Carrasco Arteaga del IESS, Cuenca, Republic of Ecuador. (3)San Cecilio
University Hospital, University of Granada, Granada, Spain. (4)San Cecilio
University Hospital, University of Granada, Granada, Spain fnogales@ugr.es.

A bilateral small cell ovarian carcinoma pulmonary-type (SCCOPT), arising in
bilateral mature cystic teratomas (MCTs) presented as stage IIIB in a 37-year-old
woman. Microscopically, tumor nests were related to the dermoid protuberance and 
expressed pancytokeratin, EMA, CD56, chromogranin A, NSE, synaptophysin, and
SOX2. SALL4 was also focally positive. CDX2, TTF1, PAX8, CK7, CK20, and several
neuroendocrine gut hormones were negative. Serum NSE was elevated. This case
represents a SCCOPT arising in an MCT in the right ovary with metastasis to the
left one also containing a synchronous MCT. Surface implants and lymphovascular
invasion suggested metastasis from the right ovarian SCCOPT and excluded a
metastatic origin from usual locations of small cell carcinoma (SCC). SCCOPT is
morphologically identical to SCC elsewhere, even sharing NSE serum elevation.
Although the tumor was closely related to teratomatous mature tissues, a complex 
immunohistochemical panel failed to provide a tissue of origin.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25990936  [PubMed - in process]


37. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(10):8085-92. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3478-z. Epub 2015
May 16.

The expression of TTF-1 and Napsin A in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma
correlates with the results of surgical treatment.

Ma Y(1), Fan M(1), Dai L(1), Kang X(1), Liu Y(2), Sun Y(2), Yan W(1), Liang Z(1),
Xiong H(1), Chen K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), The First Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, 52 Fucheng Rd. Haidian District, Beijing, China, 100142.
(2)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, 100142, China. (3)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), The First Department of Thoracic 
Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, 52 Fucheng Rd. Haidian
District, Beijing, China, 100142. chenkeneng@bjmu.edu.cn.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80 % of lung cancers, and lung
adenocarcinoma (ADC) is one of the main types of NSCLC. Although there are
several studies on the relationship between lung ADC immunohistochemical
diagnostic markers (thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and Napsin A) and
survival, some aspects of those studies could be improved. We examined the
significance of the commonly used lung ADC diagnostic markers, including TTF-1,
Napsin A, and CK7, in the prognosis of early-stage lung ADC. One hundred and
nineteen cases of early-stage lung ADC (N0) were selected from the prospective
database of lung cancer (Jan 2000 to Dec 2009). The expression levels of TTF-1,
Napsin A, and CK7 in inventoried specimens were analyzed using tissue microarray 
(TMA) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis, and the effect of the expression
level of each marker on patients' survival was examined. The diagnostic
sensitivity and specificity of each marker for lung ADC were as follows: TTF-1,
87.0 and 90.1 %; Napsin A, 72.2 and 90.4 %; and CK7, 94.6 and 76.0 %,
respectively. Patients with high expression levels of TTF-1 and Napsin A, and
high co-expression levels of TTF-1/Napsin A had better survival rates than those 
with low levels of expression (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The expression levels of CK7 were not
related to patients' survival. Multivariate analysis showed that the expression
levels of Napsin A and TTF-1/Napsin A are independent prognostic factors for
survival. The IHC detection of TTF-1 and Napsin A in specimens should be
routinely performed in postoperative early-stage lung ADC patients. Its
significance lies not only in the differential diagnosis, but also in determining
the prognosis.

PMID: 25982999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Lung Cancer. 2015 Jul;89(1):19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.04.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 20.

Is the current diagnostic algorithm reliable for selecting cases for EGFR- and
KRAS-mutation analysis in lung cancer?

Vincenten JP(1), Smit EF(2), Grünberg K(3), Postmus PE(4), Snijders PJ(3), Witte 
BI(5), Heideman DA(3), Thunnissen E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.vincenten@asz.nl. (2)Department of
Pulmonology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Clatterbridge Cancer Centre, Liverpool Heart & Chest Hospital,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. (5)Department of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Adenocarcinoma (ADC) of the lung may harbor EGFR- or KRAS-mutations, 
which are relevant for treatment decisions. There is no consensus on the
percentages of EGFR- and KRAS-mutations that are allowed to be missed by a
diagnostic algorithm, although a percentage of less than 1% for EGFR-mutations
has been suggested. The current guidelines do not advise to perform EGFR-mutation
analysis in unequivocal squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC). For KRAS-mutations no
threshold for missing cases is suggested yet. To improve segregation between ADC 
and SqCC in small samples, the classification of lung cancer was updated in 2011,
adding immunohistochemistry (IHC) for p63 and TTF-1 to the diagnostic algorithm. 
In this study we examined how many cases with an EGFR- or KRAS-mutation in our
database would have been missed, if the current guideline for selecting cases for
mutation analysis would have been applied.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From an institutional lung cancer database of specimens
analyzed for EGFR- and KRAS-mutations (n=816), cases harboring a mutation without
being treated prior with an EGFR-TKI were selected (n=336). Corresponding
original histological diagnoses and IHC for TTF-1, p63 and PAS-D were collected. 
Cases with SqCC on HE or with an IHC pattern favoring SqCC were reassessed
according to the criteria of the 2011-classification.
RESULTS: From the 336 cases 70% had a KRAS-mutation and 30% an EGFR-mutation. The
number of cases with SqCC on HE and/or an IHC-profile favoring SqCC was 12. After
the reassessment six specimens (1.8%) would not have been tested for
EGFR-/KRAS-mutations, if the current diagnostic algorithm had been used: 2.0% of 
EGFR-mutations and 1.7% KRAS-mutations. All six cases were NSCLC with an
IHC-profile favoring SqCC.
CONCLUSION: Most NSCLC-cases with EGFR- and KRAS-mutations are selected by the
current diagnostic algorithm. As a small but relevant fraction is missed, there
is room for improvement.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25982011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1852(8):1676-86. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.05.005. Epub 2015 May 13.

Dysregulation of clathrin promotes thyroid cell growth and contributes to
multinodular goiter pathogenesis.

Lau ST(1), Zhou T(1), Liu JA(1), Fung EY(2), Che CM(2), Lang BH(1), Ngan ES(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of Synthetic Chemistry, Chemical
Biology Centre, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (3)Department of
Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. Electronic address: engan@hku.hk.

A germline mutation (A339V) in thyroid transcription factor-1 (TITF1/NKX2.1) was 
shown to be associated with multinodular goiter (MNG) and papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC) pathogenesis. The overexpression of A339V TTF1 significantly
promoted hormone-independent growth of the normal thyroid cells, representing a
cause of MNG and/or PTC. Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism still remains
unclear. In this study, we used liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS)-based shotgun proteomics comparing the global protein
expression profiles of normal thyroid cells (PCCL3) that overexpressed the
wild-type or A339V TTF1 to identify key proteins implicated in this process.
Proteomic pathway analysis revealed that the aberrant activation of epidermal
growth factor (EGF) signaling is significantly associated with the overexpression
of A339V TTF1 in PCCL3, and clathrin heavy chain (Chc) is the most significantly 
up-regulated protein of the pathway. Intriguingly, dysregulated Chc expression
facilitated a nuclear accumulation of pStat3, leading to an enhanced cell
proliferation of the A339V clones. Down-regulation and abrogation of Chc-mediated
cellular trafficking, respectively, by knocking-down Chc and ectopic expression
of a dominant-negative (DN) form of Chc could significantly reduce the nuclear
pStat3 and rescue the aberrant cell proliferation of the A339V clones. Subsequent
expression analysis further revealed that CHC and pSTAT3 are co-overexpressed in 
66.7% (10/15) MNG. Taken together, our results suggest that the A339V TTF1 mutant
protein up-regulates the cellular expression of Chc, resulting in a constitutive 
activation of Stat3 pathway, and prompting the aberrant growth of thyroid cells. 
This extensive growth signal may promote the development of MNG.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25981745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Pathologe. 2015 May;36(3):293-300. doi: 10.1007/s00292-015-0025-z.

[New aspects of tumor pathology of the pituitary].

[Article in German]

Saeger W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Neuropathologie der Universität Hamburg, Universitätsklinikum
Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Martinistraße 52, 20246, Hamburg, Deutschland,
w.saeger@uke.de.

Pituitary adenomas have to be studied in detail for structural characteristics,
especially regarding the degree of granulation and immunohistochemical hormone
expression, such as growth hormone (GH), prolactin, adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), follicle stimulating hormone (FSH),
luteinizing hormone (LH) and proliferation markers (e.g. Ki-67 and p53) for
correlation to clinical data and assessment of the prognosis. If histological and
immunostaining data do not correlate to the patient data, explanations for the
discrepancies must be found. All active adenoma types can also be present as
inactive, so-called silent adenomas showing the same features. An increased Ki-67
index (> 3%), significant nuclear expression of protein p53 and mitoses are
characteristic of atypical adenomas. Up to now the biological relevance of these 
atypical adenomas, especially their role as preneoplasms for pituitary carcinomas
has not been fully elucidated. The only proof of a pituitary carcinoma is the
existence of metastases. Extensive local invasion and a greatly increased Ki-67
index are not sufficient for this diagnosis. Craniopharyngiomas have to be
classified into adamantinomatous types (intrasellar and suprasellar) and
papillary types (only suprasellar). Regressive changes are found in
adamantinomatous types only. Strong regression may lead to difficulties in the
differential diagnosis of Rathke's cleft cysts with squamous metaplasia.
Demonstration of nuclear expression of beta-catenin in these cases enables the
diagnosis of craniopharyngioma. Papillary craniopharyngiomas are characterized by
BRAF mutations that may be helpful in the differential diagnosis. All
pituicytomas of the neurohypophysis, all spindle cell oncocytomas of the anterior
pituitary and all granular cell tumors of the posterior pituitary express thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and are thought to be variants of a common uniform
spindle cell tumor of the pituitary.

PMID: 25947224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2015 Aug;19(4):193-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2015.03.007.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Claudin 3, 4, and 15 expression in solid tumors of lung adenocarcinoma versus
malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Chaouche-Mazouni S(1), Scherpereel A(2), Zaamoum R(3), Mihalache A(4), Amir
ZC(5), Lebaïli N(6), Delaire B(4), Gosset P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kouba High School, Algiers, Algeria. Electronic
address: mazouni@ens-kouba.dz. (2)Department of Pulmonary and Thoracic Oncology, 
Lille University Hospital, Lille, France. (3)Department of Pneumophtysiology,
Public Hospital of Rouiba, Algeria. (4)Department of Pathology, Hospital of St
Vincent, GHICL, Lille, France. (5)Department of Pathology, Hospital of Mustapha
Pacha, Algiers, Algeria. (6)Department of Biology, Kouba High School, Algiers,
Algeria.

Epithelioid malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) can easily be confused with lung
adenocarcinomas (ACAs). In serous effusion, claudin (cldn) 3 is shown to be
useful in the diagnosis of mesothelioma vs ACAs. Cldn15 is reported to be
overexpressed in epithelioid mesothelioma and absent in human airway epithelium. 
The aim was to assess the value of cldn3 and cldn4 compared to that of BerEp4 and
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) in differentiating lung ACA from
epithelioid MPM and to examine the expression of cldn15 in these tumors. The
expression of cldn3, cldn4, cldn15, BerEp4, and TTF1 was examined by
immunohistochemistry in a total of 62 human specimen including 28 epithelioid
MPMs and 34 ACAs of the lung. In lung ACA, cldn4 was strongly expressed in all 34
(100%) specimens followed by cldn3 in 33 (97%) of 34. BerEp4 was expressed in 32 
(94.1%) of 34. TTF1 reacted for only 20 (58.82%) of 34 cases of lung ACA. In MPM 
specimens, the expression of cldn3 and4 as well as that of TTF1 was completely
absent. In contrast, BerEp4 was focally expressed in 5 (17.85%) of 28 cases of
epithelioid MPM. Cldn15 was strongly expressed in 53% pf epithelioid MPMs but
also in 50% of lung ACAs. Its expression was moderate in normal pleura and
limited in normal lung. Cldn3 and cldn4 appear to be the best performing
carcinoma markers in discriminating lung ACA from mesothelioma compared with
BerEp4 and TTF1. There is no differential expression of cldn15 between the 2
pathologies. However, the limited cldn15 expression in normal tissues and high
expression in tumors make it an attractive candidate for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25935651  [PubMed - in process]


42. Rev Port Pneumol (2006). 2015 May-Jun;21(3):113-25. doi:
10.1016/j.rppnen.2014.09.009. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Lung adenocarcinoma: Sustained subtyping with immunohistochemistry and EGFR, HER2
and KRAS mutational status.

Sousa V(1), Rodrigues C(2), Silva M(2), Alarcão AM(2), Carvalho L(3).

Author information: 
(1)IAP-FMUC-Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal; Pathology Institute, Coimbra University Hospital, Coimbra,
Portugal. Electronic address: vitorsousa.patol@gmail.com. (2)IAP-FMUC-Institute
of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)IAP-FMUC-Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal; Pathology Institute, Coimbra University Hospital, Coimbra,
Portugal.

Pulmonary adenocarcinomas are still in the process of achieving morphological,
immunohistochemical and genetic standardization. The ATS/ERS/IASLC proposed
classification for lung adenocarcinomas supports the value of the identification 
of histological patterns, specifically in biopsies. Thirty pulmonary
adenocarcinomas were subjected to immunohistochemical study (CK7, CK5, 6, 18,
CK20, TTF1, CD56, HER2, EGFR and Ki-67), FISH and PCR followed by sequencing and 
fragment analysis for EGFR, HER2 and KRAS. Solid pattern showed lower TTF1 and
higher Ki-67 expression. TTF1 expression was higher in non-mucinous lepidic and
micropapillary patterns when compared to acinar and solid and acinar, solid and
mucinous respectively. Higher Ki67 expression was present in lepidic and solid
patterns compared to mucinous. EGFR membranous staining had increasing expression
from non-mucinous lepidic/BA pattern to solid pattern and micropapillary until
acinar pattern. EGFR mutations, mainly in exon 19, were more frequent in females,
together with non-smoking status, while KRAS exon 2 mutations were statistically 
more frequent in males, especially in solid pattern. FISH EGFR copy was
correlated gross, with mutations. HER2 copy number was raised in female tumours
without mutations, in all cases. Although EGFR and KRAS mutations are generally
considered mutually exclusive, in rare cases they can coexist as it happened in
one of this series, and was represented in acinar pattern with rates of 42.9% and
17.9%, respectively. EGFR mutations were more frequent in lepidic/BA and acinar
patterns. Some cases showed different EGFR mutations. The differences identified 
between the adenocarcinoma patterns reinforce the need to carefully identify the 
patterns present, with implications in diagnosis and in pathogenic understanding.
EGFR and KRAS mutational status can be determined in biopsies representing
bronchial pulmonary carcinomas because when a mutation is present it is generally
present in all the histological patterns.

Copyright © 2014 Sociedade Portuguesa de Pneumologia. Published by Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25926253  [PubMed - in process]


43. Rev Port Pneumol (2006). 2015 Sep-Oct;21(5):259-70. doi:
10.1016/j.rppnen.2014.05.006. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Bronchial-pulmonary adenocarcinoma subtyping relates with different molecular
pathways.

Sousa V(1), Bastos B(2), Silva M(2), Alarcão AM(2), Carvalho L(3).

Author information: 
(1)IAP-FMUC-Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal; Pathology Institute, Coimbra University Hospital (HUC-CHUC),
Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: vitorsousa77@netcabo.pt.
(2)IAP-FMUC-Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal. (3)IAP-FMUC-Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; Pathology Institute, Coimbra University
Hospital (HUC-CHUC), Coimbra, Portugal.

Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world with a high mortality 
rate. We analyzed 45 surgical samples of the adenocarcinoma, 13 with lymph node
metastasis. APC, BCL2, chromogranin A, CK 5/6/18 (LP34), CK20, CK7, cyclin D1,
EGFR, ERCC1, HER2, Ki67, LRP, MRP, P53, RB and TTF1 expressions were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Higher Ki67, APC, ERCC1 expressions and lower TTF1
expression were identified in advanced stages (IIA and IIIA) of adenocarcinomas, 
which reflect a more aggressive, less differentiated, possibly a non-TRU
adenocarcinoma. Acinar, micropapillary and BA/lepidic adenocarcinoma patterns
were the most similar patterns and papillary was the most different pattern
followed by solid pattern, according to expression of these markers. Different
adenocarcinoma patterns are engaged with different molecular pathways for
carcinogenesis, based on the differences of expression. Acinar, BA/lepidic and
micropapillary showed higher TTF1 expression (type TRU), and papillary and solid 
patterns revealed less TTF1 expression, exhibiting a non-TRU/bronchial phenotype.
Solid pattern revealed lower HER2 and higher EGFR and ERCC1 (this compared to
papillary) expression; papillary higher HER2 and lower ERCC1 expressions;
micropapillary higher RB expression; and acinar lower ERCC1 and higher EGFR
expressions. Ciclin D1 seems to have more importance in acinar and BA/lepidic
patterns than in micropapillary. ERCC1 protein expression in micropapillary,
solid and BA/lepidic patterns may indicate DNA repair activation. Inhibition of
apoptosis could be explained by BCL2 overexpression, present in all
adenocarcinoma patterns. MRP-1 and LRP were overexpressed in all patterns, which 
may have implications for drug resistance. Further studies are needed to
interpret these data regarding to therapy response in advanced staged
bronchial-pulmonary carcinomas.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedade Portuguesa de Pneumologia. Published by Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25926247  [PubMed - in process]


44. Pathologe. 2015 May;36(3):278-82. doi: 10.1007/s00292-015-0018-y.

[Neuroendocrine tumors of the kidneys].

[Article in German]

Moch H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pathologie, UniversitätsSpital Zürich,
Schmelzbergstrasse 12, 8091, Zürich, Schweiz, holger.moch@usz.ch.

The 2004 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of renal cancer includes 
renal carcinoid and neuroendocrine cancer of the kidneys in the group of primary 
renal neuroendocrine tumors. The histological features of primary renal
carcinoids are similar to those of neuroendocrine tumors found in other
anatomical locations. Primary carcinoid tumors of the kidneys are frequently
misdiagnosed as other kidney cancers, such as papillary renal cell carcinoma,
mesonephric tumors, Wilms tumor (WT) and undifferentiated carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical staining results are consistent with the diagnosis of a
neuroendocrine tumor with immunoreactivity for synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56,
and neuron-specific enolase (NSE). Positive expression of CD99 can also be seen. 
There is mainly absence of WT1, cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, thyroid
transcription factor (TTF1) and LCA, ruling out most other differential
diagnoses. Renal carcinoid tumors are regarded as low-grade neuroendocrine
tumors; however, many studies have demonstrated metastatic disease in patients
with renal carcinoid tumors. The prognostic value of histological parameters is
uncertain. Some studies have correlated poor patient prognosis with increased
mitotic activity, presence of necrosis and cytological atypia. Cases with higher 
mitotic rates of ><U+2009>2 mitoses/10 high power fields (HPF) developed metastases more
frequently; therefore, the WHO classification of neuroendocrine tumors used in
other organs is recommended for primary renal carcinoid tumors.

PMID: 25898936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Apr 2;10:21. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0250-z.

Value of thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1 for diagnosis and prognosis of
patients with locally advanced or metastatic small cell lung cancer.

Misch D(1), Blum T(2), Boch C(3), Weiss T(4), Crolow C(5), Griff S(6), Mairinger 
T(7), Bauer TT(8), Kollmeier J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von
Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11, 14165, Berlin, Germany.
daniel.misch@helios-kliniken.de. (2)Department of Pneumology, Lungenklinik
Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11, 14165, Berlin,
Germany. torsten-gerriet.blum@helios-kliniken.de. (3)Department of Pneumology,
Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11,
14165, Berlin, Germany. christian.boch@helios-kliniken.de. (4)Department of
Pneumology, Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von Behring,
Walterhöferstr. 11, 14165, Berlin, Germany. timo.weiss@helios-kliniken.de.
(5)Department of Pneumology, Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von
Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11, 14165, Berlin, Germany.
catharina.crolow@helios-kliniken.de. (6)Institute of Pathology, HELIOS Klinikum
Emil von Behring, Berlin, Germany. sergej.griff@helios-kliniken.de. (7)Institute 
of Pathology, HELIOS Klinikum Emil von Behring, Berlin, Germany.
thomas.mairinger@helios-kliniken.de. (8)Department of Pneumology, Lungenklinik
Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11, 14165, Berlin,
Germany. torsten.bauer@helios-kliniken.de. (9)Department of Pneumology,
Lungenklinik Heckeshorn, HELIOS Klinik Emil von Behring, Walterhöferstr. 11,
14165, Berlin, Germany. jens.kollmeier@helios-kliniken.de.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to analyze the frequency of Thyroid
Transcription Factor (TTF)-1 expression in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and its 
value for the diagnosis of SCLC, the response to first line treatment as well as 
the prognostic impact on overall survival (OS).
METHODS: We analyzed a total of 294 patients (m, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>184; f, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>110) with SCLC
(stage IIIA, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>32; IIIB, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>87; IV, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>175) diagnosed in our institution
between January 2005 and December 2008. Patient's characteristics comprising age,
gender, histology and first line treatment were included into the analyses. For
the follow-up of patients the governmental death registrar was used. The TTF-1
immunostaining was prospectively performed. CT scans of all patients were
reviewed and response to treatment was evaluated using the Response Evaluation
Criteria In Solid Tumors 1.0 (RECIST) criteria.
RESULTS: A total of 221 of the 294 patients were eligible for analysis. Patients 
with TTF-1-positive SCLC had a median OS of 374 (95% CI 306-442) days. The OS of 
patients with TTF1-negative SCLC was 290 (95% CI 191-389) days, which was not
significantly shorter (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.254). Also stratification for tumor stage did not
reveal significant difference in OS. Analyzing the disease control rate (DCR) in 
patients with metastatic disease (stage IV), we observed a significantly
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006) improved response to treatment in the group of patients with
TTF-1-expression (DCR 86% vs. 56%). Regarding the overall response rates (ORR) in
the entire population, there was no difference observed between both subgroups.
(TTF-1-pos. 75.3% vs. TTF-1-neg. 71.4%; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.642).
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic information of TTF-1 in SCLC seems to be limited.
TTF-1 had no prognostic value concerning OS, but may serve as a predictor for
response to first line chemotherapy.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/5811254651472285.

PMCID: PMC4391673
PMID: 25889870  [PubMed - in process]


46. BMC Cancer. 2015 Feb 20;15:74. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1084-5.

Lung neuroendocrine tumors: correlation of ubiquitinylation and sumoylation with 
nucleo-cytosolic partitioning of PTEN.

Collaud S(1), Tischler V(2), Atanassoff A(3), Wiedl T(4), Komminoth P(5),
Oehlschlegel C(6), Weder W(7), Soltermann A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
stephane.collaud@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University
Hospital Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, CH-8091, Zurich, Switzerland.
verena.tischler@usz.ch. (3)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital
Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, CH-8091, Zurich, Switzerland.
andrej_atanassoff@hotmail.com. (4)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. thomas.wiedl@yahoo.com. (5)Institute of Pathology,
Triemli Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. paul.komminoth@triemli.zuerich.ch.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Cantonal Hospital, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
christian.oehlschlegel@kssg.ch. (7)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University
Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. walter.weder@usz.ch. (8)Institute of Surgical
Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 12, CH-8091, Zurich,
Switzerland. alex.soltermann@usz.ch.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) is a
pleiotropic enzyme, inhibiting phosphatidyl-inositol-3 kinase (PI3K) signaling in
the cytosol and stabilizing the genome in the nucleus. Nucleo-cytosolic
partitioning is dependent on the post-translational modifications
ubiquitinylation and sumoylation. This cellular compartmentalization of PTEN was 
investigated in lung neuroendocrine tumors (lung NET).
METHODS: Tumor tissues from 192 lung NET patients (surgical specimens<U+2009>=<U+2009>183,
autopsies<U+2009>=<U+2009>9) were investigated on tissue microarrays. PTEN was H-scored by two 
investigators in nucleus and cytosol using the monoclonal antibody 6H2.1. Results
were correlated with immunoreactivity for USP7 (herpes virus-associated
ubiquitin-specific protease 7) and SUMO2/3 (small ubiquitin-related modifier
protein 2/3) as well as PTEN and p53 FISH gene status. Clinico-pathologic data
including overall survival, proliferation rate and diagnostic markers
(synaptophysin, chromogranin A, Mib-1, TTF-1) were recorded.
RESULTS: The multicentre cohort included 58 typical carcinoids (TC), 42 atypical 
carcinoids (AC), 32 large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNEC) and 60 small
cell lung carcinomas (SCLC). Carcinoids were smaller in size and had higher
synaptophysin and chromogranin A, but lower TTF-1 expressions. Patients with
carcinoids were predominantly female and 10 years younger than patients with
LCNEC/SCLC. In comparison to the carcinoids, LCNEC/SCLC tumors presented a
stronger loss of nuclear and cytosolic PTEN associated with a loss of PTEN and
p53. Concomitantly, a loss of nuclear USP7 but increase of nuclear and cytosolic 
SUMO2/3 was found. Loss of nuclear and cytosolic PTEN, loss of nuclear USP7 and
increase of cytosolic SUMO2/3 thus correlated with poor survival. Among
carcinoids, loss of cytosolic PTEN was predominantly found in TTF1-negative
larger tumors of male patients. Among SCLC, loss of both cytosolic and nuclear
PTEN but not proliferation rate or tumor size delineated a subgroup with poorer
survival (all p-values <0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Cellular ubiquitinylation and sumoylation likely influence the
functional PTEN loss in high grade lung NET. Both nuclear and cytosolic PTEN
immunoreactivity should be considered for correlation with clinico-pathologic
parameters.

PMCID: PMC4350902
PMID: 25884169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 1;21(15):3480-91. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3286.
Epub 2015 Apr 15.

An Integrated Molecular Analysis of Lung Adenocarcinomas Identifies Potential
Therapeutic Targets among TTF1-Negative Tumors, Including DNA Repair Proteins and
Nrf2.

Cardnell RJ(1), Behrens C(1), Diao L(2), Fan Y(1), Tang X(3), Tong P(2), Minna
JD(4), Mills GB(5), Heymach JV(1), Wistuba II(3), Wang J(2), Byers LA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)Hamon Center
for Therapeutic Oncology Research and the Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center,
The University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas. (5)Systems Biology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. lbyers@mdanderson.org.

PURPOSE: Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) immunohistochemistry (IHC) is used
clinically to differentiate primary lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD) from squamous
lung cancers and metastatic adenocarcinomas from other primary sites. However, a 
subset of LUAD (15%-20%) does not express TTF1, and TTF1-negative patients have
worse clinical outcomes. As there are no established targeted agents with
activity in TTF1-negative LUAD, we performed an integrated molecular analysis to 
identify potential therapeutic targets.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using two clinical LUAD cohorts (274 tumors), one from our
institution (PROSPECT) and The Cancer Genome Atlas, we interrogated proteomic
profiles (by reverse phase protein array, RPPA), gene expression, and mutational 
data. Drug response data from 74 cell lines were used to validate potential
therapeutic agents.
RESULTS: Strong correlations were observed between TTF1 IHC and TTF1 measurements
by RPPA (Rho = 0.57, P < 0.001) and gene expression (NKX2-1, Rho = 0.61, P <
0.001). Established driver mutations (e.g., BRAF and EGFR) were associated with
high TTF1 expression. In contrast, TTF1-negative LUAD had a higher frequency of
inactivating KEAP1 mutations (P = 0.001). Proteomic profiling identified
increased expression of DNA repair proteins (e.g., Chk1 and the DNA repair score)
and suppressed PI3k/mTOR signaling among TTF1-negative tumors, with differences
in total proteins confirmed at the mRNA level. Cell line analysis showed drugs
targeting DNA repair to be more active in TTF1-low cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined genomic and proteomic analyses demonstrated infrequent
alteration of validated lung cancer targets (including the absence of BRAF
mutations in TTF1-negative LUAD), but identified novel potential targets for
TTF1-negative LUAD, including KEAP1/Nrf2 and DNA repair pathways.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4526428 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25878335  [PubMed - in process]


48. Neoplasma. 2015;62(3):470-7. doi: 10.4149/neo_2015_056.

Trefoil factor family (TFF) proteins as potential serum biomarkers in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer.

Vocka M, Langer D, Petrtyl J, Vockova P, Hanus T, Kalousova M, Zima T, Petruzelka
L.

Trefoil factor family (TFF) is composed of three secretory proteins (TFF1, TFF2
and TFF3) that play an important role in mucosal protection of gastrointestinal
tract. Their overexpression in colorectal tumors seems to be associated with more
aggressive disease. We collected serum samples from 79 healthy controls and 97
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer at the time of diagnosis or at
progression. Serum levels of TTF1-3, CEA and CA19-9 were measured by ELISA. Serum
TFF1 and TFF3 levels were significantly higher in patients with colorectal cancer
compared to healthy controls (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Moreover, serum levels of TFF3
correlated with extent of liver involvement in patient without pulmonary
metastases and patients with higher TFF3 levels had significantly worse outcome
(p < 0.0001). Compared to CEA and CA19-9, TFF3 had higher sensitivity and the
same specificity. Our results indicate that TFF3 is an effective biomarker in
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer with higher sensitivity than CEA
a CA19-9. TFF3 levels strongly correlate with extension of liver disease and seem
to have prognostic value.

PMID: 25866228  [PubMed - in process]


49. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(7):2987-91.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 expression in advanced non- small cell lung
cancer: impact on survival outcome.

Elsamany SA(1), Al-Fayea TM, Alzahrani AS, Abozeed WN, Darwish W, Farooq MU,
Almadani AS, Bukhari EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Oncology Centre, King Abdullah Medical City,
Makkah, Saudi Arabia E-mail : shereefmohamad@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)
expression in lung cancer has been assessed but with inconsistent results. The
present study aimed to evaluate the prognostic value of TTF1 expression in
advanced non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this retrospective study, patients with stage IIIB-IV
non-squamous NSCLC were enrolled. Progression free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) were assessed according to TTF1 expression status, age categories
(=60 vs >60 years), gender, performance status (PS) (0-2 vs 3-4), type of 1st
line chemotherapy (pemetrexed containing vs others) and EGFR status.
RESULTS: A total of 120 patients were included. In univariate analysis, PFS was
improved in patients with PS 0-2 (7.0 vs 2.0 months, p=0.002) and those who
received pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy (9.2 vs 5.8 months, p=0.004). OS was 
improved in female patients (23.0 vs 8.7 months, p<0.0001), PS 0-2 (14.4 vs 2.0
months, p<0.0001), those with pemetrexed-containing chemotherapy (17.0 vs 11.0
months, p=0.019), TTF1-positive (12.8 vs 5.8 months, p=0.011) and EGFR- mutant
patients (23.0 vs 11.7 months, p=0.006). In multivariate analysis, male gender
(HR=2.34, p=0.025) and non-pemetrexed containing therapy (HR=2.24, p=0.022) were 
independent predictors of worse PFS. Wild EGFR status (HR=2.49, p=0.015) and male
gender (HR=2.78, p=0.008) were predictors of worse OS.
CONCLUSIONS: Pemetrexed-containing therapy significantly improved PFS while OS
was improved in EGFR mutant patients. Female patients had better PFS and OS. TTF1
expression was not a prognostic marker in advanced non-squamous NSCLC.

PMID: 25854394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pathologica. 2014 Dec;106(4):342-4.

Unusual presentation of metastatic adenoid cystic carcinoma: a challenge in
aspiration cytology of the thyroid.

Rocca BJ, Barone A, Ginori A, Ambrosio MR, Disanto A.

INTRODUCTION: Adenoid cystic carcinoma is a malignant neoplasm most commonly
originating in the salivary glands. Its occurrence elsewhere is rare and its
metastasis to the thyroid gland has been described only once.
CASE REPORT: We describe the case of a 66-year-old man who presented for a
swelling in the midline neck of six months duration. A solitary palpable nodule
was identified in the isthmic region of the thyroid. Fine needle aspiration of
the nodule revealed high cellularity, a partial microfollicle-like pattern and
the presence of small hyaline globules. The neoplastic population was composed of
monomorphic cells with basaloid appearance. Thyroid primitivity was excluded on
the basis of the negativity for TTF1 and thyroglobulin. As the patient referred
an ulcerative lesion of the inferior lip, fine needle aspiration cytology of the 
lesion was performed, yielding a diagnosis of adenoid cystic carcinoma.
CONCLUSION: The present case highlights the need to be aware of possible
metastatic thyroid localisation of adenoid cystic carcinoma also originating in
minor salivary glands of the oral cavity. This is a very rare event, but it
should be taken into consideration and clinical and cytological findings must be 
carefully examined.

PMID: 25845052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(10):1871-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01521-14. Epub 2015 Mar 
16.

The Human RNA Polymerase I Transcription Terminator Complex Acts as a Replication
Fork Barrier That Coordinates the Progress of Replication with rRNA Transcription
Activity.

Akamatsu Y(1), Kobayashi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytogenetics, National Institute of Genetics, and Department of
Genetics, Sokendai, Mishima, Japan yakamatsu@iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp
tako2015@iam.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

In S phase, the replication and transcription of genomic DNA need to accommodate 
each other, otherwise their machineries collide, with chromosomal instability as 
a possible consequence. Here, we characterized the human replication fork barrier
(RFB) that is present downstream from the 47S pre-rRNA gene (ribosomal DNA
[rDNA]). We found that the most proximal transcription terminator, Sal box T1,
acts as a polar RFB, while the other, Sal box T4/T5, arrests replication forks
bidirectionally. The fork-arresting activity at these sites depends on polymerase
I (Pol I) transcription termination factor 1 (TTF-1) and a replisome component,
TIMELESS (TIM). We also found that the RFB activity was linked to rDNA copies
with hypomethylated CpG and coincided with the time that actively transcribed
rRNA genes are replicated. Failed fork arrest at RFB sites led to a slowdown of
fork progression moving in the opposite direction to rRNA transcription. Chemical
inhibition of transcription counteracted this deceleration of forks, indicating
that rRNA transcription impedes replication in the absence of RFB activity. Thus,
our results reveal a role of RFB for coordinating the progression of replication 
and transcription activity in highly transcribed rRNA genes.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4405639
PMID: 25776556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Endocr Pathol. 2015 May;26(2):140-4. doi: 10.1007/s12022-015-9364-9.

Combined papillary and mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the thyroid gland: a possible 
collision tumor diagnosed on fine-needle cytology. Report of a case with
immunocytochemical and molecular correlations.

Fulciniti F(1), Vuttariello E, Calise C, Monaco M, Pezzullo L, Chiofalo MG, Di
Gennaro F, Malzone MG, Campanile AC, Losito NS, Botti G, Chiappetta G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Cantonale di Patologia, Sevizio di Citologia Clinica, via Alberto
Franzoni 45, 6601, Locarno, Switzerland.

Fine-needle cytology (FNC) is frequently used to diagnose thyroid nodules
discovered by palpation or imaging studies. Molecular tests on FNC material may
increase its diagnostic accuracy. We report a case of a classic papillary thyroid
carcinoma combined with a mucoepidermoid carcinoma correctly identified on FNC.
The papillary component had a classic immunophenotype (CK19+, TTF1+), while the
mucoepidermoid one was only focally CK19+. Point mutations (BRAF and RAS) and
rearrangements (RET/PTC) of the papillary component have been also investigated
on FNC samples, with resulting concurrent rearrangements of RET/PTC1 and
RET/PTC3, but no point mutations. The histogenesis of combined papillary and
mucoepidermoid carcinoma of the thyroid still remains partly unsettled, and
further genomic studies are needed to shed some more light on this peculiar
neoplasm.

PMID: 25771987  [PubMed - in process]


53. Ann Anat. 2015 Jul;200:54-65. doi: 10.1016/j.aanat.2015.01.005. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Development and regression of the thyroglossal duct in mice.

Inoue K(1), Bando Y(2), Sakiyama K(2), Takizawa S(1), Sakashita H(3), Kondo H(4),
Amano O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomy, Meikai University School of Dentistry, Sakado, Japan;
Division of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Meikai University School of Dentistry, 
Sakado, Japan. (2)Division of Anatomy, Meikai University School of Dentistry,
Sakado, Japan. (3)Division of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Meikai University
School of Dentistry, Sakado, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of
Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen 40002, Thailand. (5)Division of
Anatomy, Meikai University School of Dentistry, Sakado, Japan. Electronic
address: oamano@dent.meikai.ac.jp.

The thyroid anlage develops in the foramen caecum area of the tongue, and
migrates through the anterior neck towards its final position in front of the
laryngeal cartilages. During migration, the thyroglossal duct, a temporary
structure connecting the thyroid anlage and the foramen caecum, is recognized. In
the present study, chronological changes and apoptosis in the thyroglossal duct
of mice were investigated histochemically using an antibody against Nkx2-1,
initially identified as a thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), and the TUNEL
reaction in consecutive serial sagittal sections. At embryonic day 10.00
(E10.00), the thyroid anlage was Nkx2-1-immunoreactive and located just below the
foramen caecum. As the thyroid anlage descended, the thyroglossal duct was formed
at E10.25, being less than 10µm in diameter. By E10.75, the Nkx2-1-positive
thyroglossal duct had progressively elongated up to 100µm. At E11.00 the
thyroglossal duct began to disappear, beginning in its mid-portion, and finally
became invisible at E11.50. At E11.00-12.00, apoptotic cells were found in an
area where the thyroglossal duct was partially discontinuous. After E12.00,
cartilaginous tissue of the hyoid bone anlage developed in the mid-portion of the
area where the thyroglossal duct had regressed. Immunoreactivity for
thyroglobulin, a marker of differentiated thyroid endocrine cells, was detected
at E13.00. These results strongly suggest that the mouse thyroglossal duct
disappears as a result of apoptosis before differentiation of the endocrine
thyroid.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25771082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2015 Aug;13(4):309-18. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2014.12.019.
Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Sequencing of Cabazitaxel and Abiraterone Acetate After Docetaxel in Metastatic
Castration-Resistant Prostate Cancer: Treatment Patterns and Clinical Outcomes in
Multicenter Community-Based US Oncology Practices.

Sonpavde G(1), Bhor M(2), Hennessy D(3), Bhowmik D(2), Shen L(3), Nicacio L(3),
Rembert D(2), Yap M(2), Schnadig I(4).

Author information: 
(1)UAB Comprehensive Cancer Center, Birmingham, AL. (2)McKesson Specialty Health 
and the US Oncology Network, The Woodlands, TX. (3)Sanofi US, Bridgewater, NJ.
(4)Compass Oncology, Portland, OR. Electronic address:
ian.schnadig@usoncology.com.

BACKGROUND: Optimal sequencing of cabazitaxel (C) and abiraterone acetate (A)
after docetaxel (D) for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC)
is unclear. We assessed treatment patterns and outcomes in patients with mCRPC
receiving different sequences of A or C, or both, after administration of D.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis was conducted of US Oncology Network iKnowMed
(iKM) electronic health record (EHR) data to assess patients with mCRPC who
received treatment with D and were subsequently treated with C or A, or both,
between April 2011 and May 2012. Patients received 2 or 3 drugs: DA, DC, DAC, or 
DCA. Overall survival (OS) and time to treatment failure (TTF) were analyzed by
the Kaplan-Meier method from the start to the end of second-line therapy after
administration of D (TTF1) and to the end of combined second- and third-line
therapy (TTF2) for 3-drug sequences. Multivariable Cox proportional hazard models
evaluated the impact of baseline clinical prognostic factors and treatment
sequence on OS and TTF.
RESULTS: Of 350 patients who were treated with D and subsequent therapies, 183
(52.3%) received DA, 54 (15.4%) received DC, 77 (22.0%) received DCA, and 36
(10.3%) received DAC. In a multivariable analysis, adjusted comparisons suggested
that 3-drug sequences were associated with improved OS versus 2-drug sequences
(hazard ratio [HR], 0.21; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.092-0.476; P = .0002). 
There were no statistically significant differences in OS and TTF for DC versus
DA, and OS was significantly greater for DCA versus DAC (HR, 0.13; 95% CI,
0.022-0.733; P = .0210). More cycles of C were administered in DCA than in DAC
(median 6 vs. 4; t test P < .0001), whereas the duration of A treatment was
similar.
CONCLUSION: Administration of 3 agents in the DCA sequence was more optimal for
treating mCRPC in this hypothesis-generating study.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25743206  [PubMed - in process]


55. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 3;5:8649. doi: 10.1038/srep08649.

Diagnostic and prognostic significances of MUC5B and TTF-1 expressions in
resected non-small cell lung cancer.

Nagashio R(1), Ueda J(2), Ryuge S(3), Nakashima H(4), Jiang SX(5), Kobayashi
M(2), Yanagita K(2), Katono K(3), Satoh Y(4), Masuda N(3), Murakumo Y(5),
Hachimura K(6), Sato Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Applied Tumor Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan [2] Department of Molecular Diagnostics,
School of Allied Health Sciences, Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Department of Applied Tumor Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
School of Medicine, Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan. (4)Department of
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kitasato
University, Kanagawa, Japan. (6)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, School of
Allied Health Sciences, Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan.

To investigate the relationships between the expression of MUC5B and
clinicopathological parameters, the expression of MUC5B was immunohistochemically
studied. MUC5B expression was observed in 129 of 198 (65.2%) adenocarcinomas and 
in 4 of 49 (8.2%) squamous cell carcinomas (P < 0.00001). MUC5B expression was
significantly associated with poorer differentiation (P = 0.0303), higher
pathological TNM stage (p = 0.0153) and poorer prognosis of adenocarcinoma
patients (P = 0.0017). Multivariable analysis with Cox proportional hazards
models confirmed that MUC5B expression increased the hazard of death after
adjusting for other clinicopathological factors (HR = 2.66; 95%CI, 1.26-5.61). We
also immunohistochemically evaluated TTF-1 expression and found that the
combination of MUC5B with TTF-1 is a useful marker for adenocarcinomas. The
diagnostic accuracies of TTF-1 and MUC5B for adenocarcinoma were 83.8% and 70.4%,
respectively. The accuracy increased to 94.3% when the two factors were combined.
In survival analysis, the MUC5B(High)/TTF-1(-) group was significantly associated
with a poorer outcome compared with the MUC5B(Low)/TTF-1(+) group (p < 0.0001).
The present study suggested that the combination of MUC5B and TTF-1 expression is
useful for discriminating adenocarcinomas from squamous cell carcinomas, yielding
prognostic significance in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4346793
PMID: 25733373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Pathol Int. 2015 May;65(5):220-30. doi: 10.1111/pin.12272. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Lymphatic endothelial cancerization in papillary thyroid carcinoma: hidden
evidence of lymphatic invasion.

Mai KT(1), Truong LD, Ball CG, Olberg B, Lai CK, Purgina B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, The Ottawa Hospital and University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We hypothesize that cystic structures in metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC) develop along the framework of lymphatic channels. To investigate this
phenomenon, different categories of PTC were immunostained for D2-40 and TTF1. In
this study, reactivity for D2-40 was considered as positive when there is
membranous staining as often seen in lymphatic endothelial cells. Thirty cases of
PTC with lymph node metastasis or with potential for lymphatic invasion and 20
cases metastatic PTC in lymph nodes were reviewed and found to show double/mosaic
immunoreactivity for TTF1/D2-40 in 40-100% of cases. PTC metastasis in lymph
nodes with cysts and some branching lymphatic-like channels lined by follicular
cells with or without nuclear features of PTC were diffusely reactive to TTF1,
and focally to D2-40. For primary and metastatic PTC, focal membranous D2-40
reactivity was also demonstrated in cysts or cleft linings. For25 thyroid
neoplasms with no known potential for lymphatic invasion, there was no such
immunoreactivity. The mosaic or double immunoreactivity for TTF1/D2-40 suggests
lymphatic cancerization and possible endothelial mimicry of follicular cells.
Mosaic/double immunoreactivity is helpful to detect the hidden pattern of
lymphatic invasion masquerading as 'benign-appearing' follicles and supports our 
hypothesis of malignant cells developing along the lymphatic framework.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25722068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Acta Histochem. 2015 May-Jun;117(4-5):451-9. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2015.02.002.
Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Co-expression of TTF-1 and neuroendocrine markers in the human fetal lung and
pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.

Miskovic J(1), Brekalo Z(1), Vukojevic K(2), Miskovic HR(3), Kraljevic D(4),
Todorovic J(5), Soljic V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital in Mostar, KraljaTvrtka bb, 88000
Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. (2)Laboratory for Early Human Development,
Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, University
of Split, Soltanska 2, 21000 Split, Croatia. (3)Department of Neonatology,
University Hospital in Mostar, Kralja Tvrtka bb, 88000 Mostar, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. (4)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital in Mostar, Kralja
Tvrtka bb, 88000 Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. (5)Department of Pathology,
Cytology and Forensic Medicine, University Hospital in Mostar, Kralja Tvrtka bb, 
88000 Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina. (6)Department of Pathology, Cytology and
Forensic Medicine, University Hospital in Mostar, Kralja Tvrtka bb, 88000 Mostar,
Bosnia and Herzegovina; Department of Histology and Embryology, School of
Medicine, University of Mostar, Bijeli brijeg bb, 88000 Mostar, Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Electronic address: vsoljic@gmail.com.

The expression pattern of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and
neuroendocrine markers, neuron cell adhesion molecule (NCAM; CD56), chromogranin 
A (CgA) and synaptophysin (Syp), of different lung cell lineages was
histologically analyzed in 15 normal human fetal lungs and 12 neuroendocrine
tumors (NETs) using immunohistochemical methods. During pseudoglandular phase
strong nuclear TTF-1 staining was detected in the columnar nonciliated epithelial
cells, while NCAM, CgA and Syp had a moderate expression in the proximal airways 
and mild expression in the distal airways. Neuroendocrine cells (NECs) in
proximal lung airway were co-localizing TTF-1 and other neuroendocrine markers
while neuroendocrine bodies (NEBs) exhibit only staining with NCAM and Syp. In
the canalicular phase TTF-1 nuclear staining was expressed only in several
epithelial cells in proximal airways, while budding airways epithelium showed
strong TTF-1 expression. Expression of NCAM, CgA and Syp in this phase equals the
one in pseudoglandular phase. NEBs cells were co-localizing TTF-1 and NCAM in
proximal airways and few NECs in distal airway were co-localizing TTF-1 and Syp. 
TTF-1 staining in the saccular phase was limited to subsets of epithelial cells
in the proximal airways with stronger positivity in the distal airways. NCAM
expression is moderate only in proximal airways, while Syp and CgA show mild
expression in proximal and distal airways. NECs were co-localizing TTF-1 and NCAM
in proximal lung airway. With regard to NECs, all small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
cells had strong TTF-1, NCAM, Syp and CgA positivity and TTF-1 co-localized with 
other neuroendocrine markers. All pulmonary typical carcinoids were TTF-1
negative, while pulmonary atypical carcinoids were focal positive for TTF-1 and
some neoplastic cells co-localized TTF-1 with neuroendocrine markers. Our results
indicate that TTF-1 expression in NECs suggests a possible role in their normal
development and differentiation. Our results also indicate that possible cell of 
origin for poorly differentiated SCLC and some atypical carcinoid could be a
progenitor cell in neuroendocrine lineage while in typical carcinoids possible
cell of origin is localized in terminally differentiated NECs.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

PMID: 25722034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pathol Int. 2015 Jun;65(6):277-85. doi: 10.1111/pin.12267. Epub 2015 Feb 24.

Recent advances in histogenesis research of lung neuroendocrine cancers: Evidence
obtained from functional analyses of primitive neural/neuroendocrine
cell-specific transcription factors.

Yazawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Small cell carcinoma (SmCC) and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LENEC) are
categorized as neuroendocrine cancers (NECs) of the lung and have extremely poor 
prognoses. The lack of an effective therapeutic strategy against SmCC and LCNEC
is a serious issue. Because the regulation of the cellular phenotype is
complicated by the actions of various transcription factors, investigations into 
the function of neural/neuroendocrine cell-specific transcription factors are
important for elucidating the cellular characteristics and histogenesis of SmCC
and LCNEC and for establishing innovative therapeutic strategies against them. In
this review, the functions of ASCL1, NeuroD1, REST, TTF1, and class III/IV POU,
that are specifically and highly expressed in lung NECs, are introduced. These
transcription factors transactivate and/or transrepress various genes and are
involved in neural progenitor phenotyping, neuroendocrine and stem cell marker
expression, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Based on the evidence that 
certain carcinoids express ASCL1, NeuroD1, TTF1, and class III/IV POU and that
lung NECs can develop from non-NE cells/non-NEC cells, the relationships among
lung NECs, carcinoid tumors, and non-NECs are discussed. Finally, a model of the 
histogenesis of lung NECs in view of similarities in the expression of primitive 
neural/neuroendocrine cell-specific transcription factors is proposed.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25708144  [PubMed - in process]


59. Int J Endocrinol. 2015;2015:978371. doi: 10.1155/2015/978371. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Synergy between HDAC and PARP Inhibitors on Proliferation of a Human Anaplastic
Thyroid Cancer-Derived Cell Line.

Baldan F(1), Mio C(1), Allegri L(1), Puppin C(1), Russo D(2), Filetti S(3),
Damante G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Piazzale
Kolbe 4, 33100 Udine, Italy. (2)Department of Health Sciences, University "Magna 
Graecia" of Catanzaro, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy. (3)Department of Internal Medicine
and Medical Specialties, University of Roma "La Sapienza", 00198 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Piazzale
Kolbe 4, 33100 Udine, Italy ; Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital 
"S. Maria della Misericordia", 33100 Udine, Italy.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a very aggressive human malignancy, having 
a marked degree of invasiveness and no features of thyroid differentiation. It is
known that either HDAC inhibitors or PARP inhibitors have antiproliferative
effects on thyroid cancer cells. Therefore, in this study the possible synergy
between the two types of compounds has been investigated. The ATC-derived cell
line SW1736 has been treated with the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (SAHA) and the PARP inhibitor PJ34, alone or in combination. In terms of
cell viability, the combination index value was always lower than 1 at various
tested dosages, indicating, therefore, synergy in a wide range of doses for both 
compounds. Synergy was also observed in induction of apoptosis. In terms of
thyroid-specific gene expression, synergy was observed for TSHR mRNA levels but
not for NIS, TTF1, TTF2, and PAX8 mRNA levels. Altogether, these data suggest
that the combined use of HDAC and PARP inhibitors may be a useful strategy for
treatment of ATC.

PMCID: PMC4326215
PMID: 25705225  [PubMed]


60. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Jan-Mar;58(1):96-8. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.151200.

Bronchogenic cyst mimicking an adrenal mass in the retroperitoneal region: report
of a rare case.

Bulut G(1), Bulut MD, Bahadir I, Kotan Ç.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Yuzuncu Yil University, Van,
Turkey.

We report the surgical excision of a retroperitoneal bronchogenic cyst that
presented as a nonfunctioning left adrenal mass in a 25-year-old woman with
continuous pain in the left flank. Preoperative biochemical testing confirmed
that the mass was nonfunctional. Bronchogenic cysts are mostly benign congenital 
abnormalities that originate from the remnants of the primitive foregut and
typically occur in the lung. Subdiaphragmatic and especially, retroperitoneal
locations are rare. Despite the rarity of this pathologic entity, bronchogenic
cysts should be considered in the differential diagnosis of retroperitoneal
cystic lesions. Diagnosis must be definitively confirmed by histology.

PMID: 25673605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin Neuropathol. 2015 May-Jun;34(3):128-31. doi: 10.5414/NP300818.

Consistent nuclear expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 in subependymal
giant cell astrocytomas suggests lineage-restricted histogenesis.

Hewer E, Vajtai I.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is encoded by the NKX2-1 homeobox gene.
Besides specifying thyroid and pulmonary organogenesis, it is also temporarily
expressed during embryonic development of the ventral forebrain. We recently
observed widespread immunoreactivity for TTF-1 in a case of subependymal giant
cell astrocytoma (SEGA, WHO grade I)--a defining lesion of the tuberous sclerosis
complex (TSC). This prompted us to investigate additional SEGAs in this regard.
We found tumor cells in all 7 specimens analyzed to be TTF-1 positive. In
contrast, we did not find TTF-1 immunoreactivity in a cortical tuber or two renal
angiomyolipomas resected from TSC patients. We propose our finding of consistent 
TTF-1 expression in SEGAs to indicate lineage-committed derivation of these
tumors from a regionally specified cell of origin. The medial ganglionic
eminence, ventral septal region, and preoptic area of the developing brain may
represent candidates for the origin of SEGAs. Such lineage-restricted
histogenesis may also explain the stereotypic distribution of SEGAs along the
caudate nucleus in the lateral ventricles.

PMID: 25669749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Apr;22(2):191-204. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0558. Epub 2015 
Jan 16.

A registry-based study of thyroid paraganglioma: histological and genetic
characteristics.

von Dobschuetz E(1), Leijon H(1), Schalin-Jäntti C(1), Schiavi F(1), Brauckhoff
M(1), Peczkowska M(1), Spiazzi G(1), Demattè S(1), Cecchini ME(1), Sartorato
P(1), Krajewska J(1), Hasse-Lazar K(1), Roszkowska-Purska K(1), Taschin E(1),
Malinoc A(1), Akslen LA(1), Arola J(1), Lange D(1), Fassina A(1), Pennelli G(1), 
Barbareschi M(1), Luettges J(1), Prejbisz A(1), Januszewicz A(1), Strate T(1),
Bausch B(1), Castinetti F(1), Jarzab B(1), Opocher G(1), Eng C(1), Neumann HP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrine SurgeryDepartment of General, Visceral and Thoracic
Surgery, Krankenhaus Reinbek, St. Adolf Stift, Academic Teaching Hospital
University of Hamburg, Reinbek, GermanyDepartment of PathologyHelsinki University
Central Hospital and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandDivision of
EndocrinologyDepartment of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital and
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandFamilial Cancer Clinic and
Onco-EndocrinologyVeneto Institute of Oncology, IRCCS, Padova, ItalyDepartment of
Endocrine SurgeryUniversity of Bergen, Bergen, NorwayDepartment of
HypertensionInstitute of Cardiology, Warsaw, PolandEndocrinologyDiabetes and
Metabolism, University of Verona and Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata 
Verona, Verona, ItalyUnits of Internal MedicineSanta Chiara General Hospital,
Trento, ItalyDepartment of Internal MedicineGeneral Hospital, Montebelluna,
Treviso, ItalyDepartment of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine OncologyMaria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Gliwice, PolandDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory
DiagnosticsSklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, PolandSection
for Preventive MedicineDepartment of Nephrology and General Medicine,
Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Hugstetter Straße 55, 79106 Freiburg,
GermanySection for PathologyDepartment of Clinical Medicine, Centre for Cancer
Biomarkers CCBIO, University of Bergen, Bergen, NorwayDepartment of Tumor
PathologyM.Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, PolandSurgical Pathology and Cytopathology
UnitDepartment of Medicine, DIMED, University of Padova, Padova, ItalyDepartment 
of PathologySanta Chiara Regional Hospital, Trento, ItalyDepartment of
PathologyMarienkrankenhaus, Hamburg, GermanyDepartment of
GastroenterologyAlbert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
GermanyDepartment of EndocrinologyLa Timone Hospital, Hopitaux de Marseille

The precise diagnosis of thyroid neoplasias will guide surgical management.
Primary thyroid paraganglioma has been rarely reported. Data on prevalence,
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and molecular genetics in a systematic series of such
patients are pending. We performed a multinational population-based study on
thyroid paraganglioma and analyzed prevalence, IHC, and molecular genetics.
Patients with thyroid paraganglioma were recruited from the
European-American-Head-and-Neck-Paraganglioma-Registry. Demographic and clinical 
data were registered. Histopathology and IHC were re-investigated. All patients
with thyroid paraganglioma underwent molecular genetic analyses of the SDHA,
SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, VHL, RET, TMEM127, and MAX genes. Analyses included
Sanger sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for
detection of large rearrangements. Of 947 registrants, eight candidates were
initially identified. After immunohistochemical analyses of these eight subjects,
5 (0.5%) were confirmed to have thyroid paraganglioma. IHC was positive for
chromogranin, synaptophysin, and S-100 and negative for calcitonin in all five
thyroid paragangliomas, whereas the three excluded candidate tumors stained
positive for pan-cytokeratin, a marker excluding endocrine tumors. Germline
variants, probably representing mutations, were found in four of the five
confirmed thyroid paraganglioma cases, two each in SDHA and SDHB, whereas the
excluded cases had no mutations in the tested genes. Thyroid paraganglioma is a
finite entity, which must be differentiated from medullary thyroid carcinoma,
because medical, surgical, and genetic management for each is different. Notably,
approximately 80% of thyroid paragangliomas are associated with germline
variants, with implications for additional tumors and a potential risk for the
family. As opposed to sporadic tumors, surgical management and extent of
resection are different for heritable tumors, each guided by the precise gene
involved.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25595276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Oncoscience. 2014 Aug 7;1(8):522-8. eCollection 2014.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are exceptionally rare in
thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1)-negative adenocarcinomas of the lung.

Somaiah N(1), Fidler MJ(2), Garrett-Mayer E(3), Wahlquist A(3), Shirai K(3),
Buckingham L(2), Hensing T(4), Bonomi P(2), Simon GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston TX 77004. (2)Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL 60612. (3)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425. (4)North Shore University Health
Systems/University of Chicago, Evanston, IL 60201.

INTRODUCTION: Approximately 70% of lung adenocarcinomas express TTF-1. EGFR
mutations are present in 13-15% of Western adenocarcinoma patients. This paper
investigates TTF1 as a negative predictor of mutant EGFR in lung adenocarcinomas.
RESULTS: In the pilot cohort (N = 301) two of 224 specimens positive for EGFR
mutations had negative TTF-1 expression (sensitivity 99.1%, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 96.8-99.9%). Estimated negative predictive values (NPV) for EGFR
mutation prevalence rates of 13% and 15% are 99.5% (95% credible interval (CRI)
98.6%-99.9%) and 99.4% (CRI - 98.4%-99.9%). For EGFR mutation rates of 13% and
15%, using validation cohort data (211 patients), the estimated NPVs were 97%
(95% CRI 92%-99%) and 96% (95% CRI 91%-99%).
METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumors from lung adenocarcinoma
patients were analyzed for EGFR mutations by allele-specific PCR in the 'pilot
cohort'. TTF-1 status was documented as positive or negative. Negative predictive
value (NPV) for a range of true prevalence of EGFR mutation (1%-50%) was
estimated using Bayesian modeling. The hypothesis was validated in a separate
'validation' cohort using the same modeling.
CONCLUSION: An overwhelming majority of TTF-1 negative adenocarcinomas will be
negative for EGFR mutations. This finding allows for earlier initiation of
chemotherapy in newly diagnosed TTF-1 negative adenocarcinomas of the lung with
stage IV disease.

PMCID: PMC4278331
PMID: 25594059  [PubMed]


64. Curr Oncol. 2014 Dec;21(6):305-8. doi: 10.3747/co.21.2148.

Relationship of thyroid transcription factor 1 to EGFR status in non-small-cell
lung cancer.

Sheffield BS(1), Bosdet IE(1), Ali RH(2), Young SS(1), McNeil BK(1), Wong C(1),
Dastur K(1), Karsan A(1), Ionescu DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, BC Cancer Agency. Vancouver, 
BC. (2)Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Centre,
Kuwait University, Kuwait.

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
gene are known to drive a proportion of non-small-cell lung cancers.
Identification of lung cancers harbouring such mutations can lead to effective
treatment using one of the agents that targets and blocks egfr-mediated
signalling.
METHODS: All specimens received at the BC Cancer Agency (Vancouver) for EGFR
testing were prospectively identified and catalogued, together with clinical
information and EGFR status, over a 14-month period.
RESULTS: Specimens from 586 patients were received for EGFR testing, and EGFR
status was reported for 509 patients. No relationship between specimen type or
site of origin and EGFR test failure rate was identified. Concurrent
immunohistochemical (ihc) status for thyroid transcription factor 1 (ttf1) was
available for 309 patients. The negative predictive value of ttf1-negative status
by ihc was 94.2% for predicting negative EGFR status.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with limited tissue available for testing, a surrogate
for EGFR status would aid in timely management. Immunohistochemistry for ttf1 is 
readily available and correlates highly with EGFR status. In conjunction with
genetic assays, ttf1 could be used to optimize an EGFR testing strategy.

PMCID: PMC4257113
PMID: 25489257  [PubMed]


65. Histopathology. 2015 Jun;66(7):1010-21. doi: 10.1111/his.12610. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Expression of cadherin 17 in well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours.

Snow AN(1,)(2), Mangray S(1), Lu S(1), Clubwala R(1), Li J(1), Resnick MB(1),
Yakirevich E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School of
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of 
Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA.

AIMS: Cadherin 17 (CDH17) is expressed primarily in normal intestinal epithelium 
and digestive tract tumours, and has limited expression in other neoplasms. The
aims of this study were to examine CDH17 expression in well-differentiated
neuroendocrine tumours (WDNETs) from various primary sites, representing the
foregut, midgut, and hindgut, and tumours metastasizing to the liver, and to
correlate the differences between the expression of CDH17, CDX2, and thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF1).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated CDH17 immunohistochemical expression in 150 
primary WDNETs from eight anatomical sites, including 68 from the foregut, 70
from the midgut, and 12 from the hindgut, and 15 metastases. CDH17
immunoreactivity increased significantly from foregut to hindgut WDNETs (P <
0.0001). Pancreatic WDNETs expressed CDH17 at a significantly higher frequency
than other foregut tumours. Within the midgut, appendiceal and small-intestinal
WDNETs were more frequently positive for CDH17 than for CDX2. All hindgut WDNETs 
expressed CDH17, in contrast to CDX2 (positive in one rectal case). CDH17
expression in liver metastases was similar to that of the primary tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to comprehensively examine CDH17 expression 
in WDNETs from different sites. CDH17 is a sensitive marker for midgut WDNETs,
and the CDH17+/CDX2-/TTF1- phenotype was found to be sensitive (92%) and specific
(91%) for hindgut WDNETs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25388236  [PubMed - in process]


66. Cancer Biol Med. 2014 Sep;11(3):208-15. doi:
10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.03.007.

Breast metastasis from lung cancer: a report of two cases and literature review.

Wang L(1), Wang SL(1), Shen HH(1), Niu FT(1), Niu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Cancer Pathology and Research Laboratory; Key Laboratory 
of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University, Ministry of 
Education; Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin; Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research
Center of Cancer, Tianjin 30060, China.

Breast metastasis from extra-mammary malignancy is rare. An incidence of 0.4% to 
1.3% has been reported in literature. The primary malignancies that most commonly
metastasize to the breast are leukemia, lymphoma, and malignant melanoma. In this
report, two cases of pulmonary metastasis to the breast were presented. A
40-year-old female manifested a right breast mass of 2-month duration. After
physical examination was performed, a poorly defined mass was noted in the upper 
outer quadrant of the right breast. Another 49-year-old female manifested right
breast mass of 5-day duration. A poorly defined mass was noted in the lower inner
quadrant of the right breast. Mammography results also revealed breast cancer.
The patients underwent local excision. After histological and immunohistochemical
analyses were conducted, a primary lung carcinoma that metastasized to the breast
was diagnosed. An accurate differentiation of metastasis to the breast from
primary breast cancer is very important because the treatment and prognosis of
the two differ significantly.

PMCID: PMC4197421
PMID: 25364582  [PubMed]


67. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug 15;7(9):5810-8. eCollection 2014.

A fine decision tree consisted of CK5/6, IMP3 and TTF1 for cytological diagnosis 
among reactive mesothelial cells, metastatic adenocarcinoma of lung and non-lung 
origin in pleural effusion.

Yan J(1), Wei Q(2), Jian W(1), Liu J(2), Tang H(1), Ge J(1), Zhou J(1), Zhao
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Science, Southern Medical
University Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated
Hospital, Southern Medical University Guangzhou, China.

The utility of combination with CK5/6, IMP3 and TTF1 to differentiate among
reactive mesothelial cells (RMs), metastatic adenocarcinoma of lung (LAC) and
non-lung (NLAC) origin was investigated by using immunocytochemistry (ICC) and
conventional PCR (C-PCR) in pleural effusion. A total of 108 cell blocks (32 RMs,
51 LAC and 25 NLAC were evaluated by ICC for CK5/6, IMP3 and TTF1 protein
expression. In addition, we further performed C-PCR for amplification of CK5/6,
IMP3 and TTF1 DNA from 28 specimens (9 MAC and 7 RMs, 6 LAC and 6 NLAC) for
molecular diagnosis. CK5/6 staining was observed in the majority of reactive
specimens (78.1%) and was rare in adenocarcinoma cells (14.5%), whereas the
opposite was true for IMP3 and TTF1. We found a high frequency of TTF1 positivity
(76.5%) in LAC, but not in NLAC (4.0%); while there was no significant difference
of IMP3 expression in LAC (88.2%) and NLAC (88.0%). The 487 bp DNA fragments of
IMP3 was expected to be amplified in 6/9 of adenocarcinoma cases showed negative 
in ICC; and the 394 bp DNA fragments of CK5/6 was also expected to be amplified
in 4/7 of RMs cases showed negative in ICC. Consistent with ICC results, there
was significant difference of TTF1 expression in the LAC and NLAC compared with
IMP3 expression. The combination with CK5/6, IMP3 and TTF1 immunostaining appears
to be useful to improve the accuracy of cytological diagnoses between RMs,
metastatic adenocarcinoma of lung and non-lung origin in pleural effusion. In
addition, C-PCR may act as a useful supplemental approach for ICC, especially
negative cases in ICC for differential cytological diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4203193
PMID: 25337222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Front Oncol. 2014 Sep 29;4:251. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2014.00251. eCollection 2014.

Hidden treasures in "ancient" microarrays: gene-expression portrays biology and
potential resistance pathways of major lung cancer subtypes and normal tissue.

Kerkentzes K(1), Lagani V(2), Tsamardinos I(1), Vyberg M(3), Røe OD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Crete , Heraklion , Greece ;
Institute of Computer Science, Foundation of Research and Technology - Hellas ,
Heraklion , Greece. (2)Institute of Computer Science, Foundation of Research and 
Technology - Hellas , Heraklion , Greece. (3)Institute of Pathology, Aalborg
University Hospital , Aalborg , Denmark. (4)Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology , Trondheim , 
Norway ; Department of Oncology, Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg
University Hospital , Aalborg , Denmark ; Cancer Clinic, Levanger Hospital,
Nord-Trøndelag Health Trust , Levanger , Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Novel statistical methods and increasingly more accurate gene
annotations can transform "old" biological data into a renewed source of
knowledge with potential clinical relevance. Here, we provide an in silico
proof-of-concept by extracting novel information from a high-quality mRNA
expression dataset, originally published in 2001, using state-of-the-art
bioinformatics approaches.
METHODS: The dataset consists of histologically defined cases of lung
adenocarcinoma (AD), squamous (SQ) cell carcinoma, small-cell lung cancer,
carcinoid, metastasis (breast and colon AD), and normal lung specimens (203
samples in total). A battery of statistical tests was used for identifying
differential gene expressions, diagnostic and prognostic genes, enriched gene
ontologies, and signaling pathways.
RESULTS: Our results showed that gene expressions faithfully recapitulate
immunohistochemical subtype markers, as chromogranin A in carcinoids, cytokeratin
5, p63 in SQ, and TTF1 in non-squamous types. Moreover, biological information
with putative clinical relevance was revealed as potentially novel diagnostic
genes for each subtype with specificity 93-100% (AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.93-1.00). Cancer
subtypes were characterized by (a) differential expression of treatment target
genes as TYMS, HER2, and HER3 and (b) overrepresentation of treatment-related
pathways like cell cycle, DNA repair, and ERBB pathways. The vascular smooth
muscle contraction, leukocyte trans-endothelial migration, and actin cytoskeleton
pathways were overexpressed in normal tissue.
CONCLUSION: Reanalysis of this public dataset displayed the known biological
features of lung cancer subtypes and revealed novel pathways of potentially
clinical importance. The findings also support our hypothesis that even old omics
data of high quality can be a source of significant biological information when
appropriate bioinformatics methods are used.

PMCID: PMC4178426
PMID: 25325012  [PubMed]


69. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jul 8;94(26):2050-4.

[In vitro differentiation of rat amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stem cells
into type II alveolar epithelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu C(1), Yan J, Xu W, Li Y(2), Xia Y, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou
310053, China. (2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial
People's Hospital, Hangzhou 310014, China. Email: lidoctor03@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the in vitro differentiation of rat amniotic fluid-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (AF-MSCs) into type II alveolar epithelial cells (AECII).
METHODS: Flow cytometry was used to analyze the phenotypes of AF-MSCs from 10
pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats. And the Oct-4 mRNA expression level was detected by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Rat embryonic stem
cell was used as a positive control. According to different culturing methods,
AF-MSCs were randomly divided into 5 groups of A (control group), B, C, D and E. 
After in vitro differentiation, SPA, SPB, SPC, SPD and TTF1 mRNA expressions were
detected by qRT-PCR, SPA and SPC protein expressions measured by
immunofluorescence and lamellar bodies observed by transmission electron
microscopy.
RESULTS: AF-MSCs could grow spirally in L-DMEM medium containing 20% fetal bovine
serum and 4 µg/L basic fibroblast growth factor. The expressions of such surface 
antigens of AF-MSCs (third passage) as CD29 (99.1 ± 7.9)%, CD44 (99.2 ± 7.4)%,
CD73 (75.6 ± 5.2)%, CD90 (98.9 ± 8.1)%, CD105 (92.9 ± 7.3)% and CD166 (89.3 ±
6.7)% were positive while CD34 and CD45 were negative. And the expression of
Oct-4 mRNA (relative quantity: 0.690 ± 0.059) was significantly lower than rat
embryonic stem cells (relative quantity: 1.000 ± 0.002) positive control group (P
< 0.01). After in vitro differentiation, the expressions of SPA, SPB, SPC, SPD
and TTF1 mRNA and SPA and SPC protein were negative in group A and positive in
group B. The expressions of SPA, SPB, SPC, SPD and TTF1 mRNA (relative quantity: 
0.426 ± 0.043, 0.368 ± 0.028, 0.492 ± 0.058, 0.327 ± 0.024 and 0.183 ± 0.018) and
SPA and SPC protein in group B were significantly higher than other groups (all P
< 0.01). Lamellar bodies could be found in the differentiated cells of group B.
CONCLUSION: Rat AF-MSCs from amniotic fluid may differentiated into AECII like
cells in vitro.

PMID: 25312668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Neoplasia. 2014 Sep;16(9):757-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.08.003.

Synergistic signaling of KRAS and thyroid hormone receptor ß mutants promotes
undifferentiated thyroid cancer through MYC up-regulation.

Zhu X(1), Zhao L(1), Park JW(1), Willingham MC(1), Cheng SY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, US. (2)Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, US. Electronic address:
chengs@mail.nih.gov.

Undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers
with frequent RAS mutations. How mutations of the RAS gene contribute to
undifferentiated thyroid cancer remains largely unknown. Mice harboring a potent 
dominant negative mutant thyroid hormone receptor ß, TRßPV (Thrb(PV/PV)),
spontaneously develop well-differentiated follicular thyroid cancer similar to
human cancer. We genetically targeted the Kras(G12D) mutation to thyroid
epithelial cells of Thrb(PV/PV) mice to understand how Kras(G12D) mutation could 
induce undifferentiated thyroid cancer in Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice.
Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice exhibited poorer survival due to more aggressive
thyroid tumors with capsular invasion, vascular invasion, and distant metastases 
to the lung occurring at an earlier age and at a higher frequency than
Thrb(PV/PV) mice did. Importantly, Thrb(PV/PV)Kras(G12D) mice developed frequent 
anaplastic foci with complete loss of normal thyroid follicular morphology.
Within the anaplastic foci, the thyroid-specific transcription factor paired box 
gene 8 (PAX8) expression was virtually lost and the loss of PAX8 expression was
inversely correlated with elevated MYC expression. Consistently, co-expression of
KRAS(G12D) with TRßPV upregulated MYC levels in rat thyroid pccl3 cells, and MYC 
acted to enhance the TRßPV-mediated repression of the Pax8 promoter activity of a
distant upstream enhancer, critical for thyroid-specific Pax8 expression. Our
findings indicated that synergistic signaling of KRAS(G12D) and TRßPV led to
increased MYC expression. Upregulated MYC contributes to the initiation of
undifferentiated thyroid cancer, in part, through enhancing TRßPV-mediated
repression of the Pax8 expression. Thus, MYC might serve as a potential target
for therapeutic intervention.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4234871
PMID: 25246276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2441-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2533. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Learning curve for endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle
aspiration: experience of a community-based teaching hospital.

Wang H(1), D'Cruz C(1), Yam DC(1), Dilla LM(1), Tsang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Newark Beth Israel Medical
Center, Barnabas Health System, Newark, New Jersey 07112, USA.

Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) is a
minimally invasive procedure. This procedure is useful for nodal staging of lung 
cancer and evaluating mediastinal lymphoma and granuloma. The present study was a
retrospective analysis of our experience when EBUS-TBNA was initially
implemented. A total of 112 lymph nodes/masses (51 patients) were divided into
two groups: The first and second 8 months. In the first group, 33 lymph
nodes/masses (16 patients) were biopsied and tumor diagnoses were made in 9% of
the cases (three lymph nodes/masses). The material was adequate to produce a cell
block for microscopic analysis in 42% of cases. Subsequent tissue diagnoses were 
available in 50% of cases. Only one of the three malignant EBUS-TBNA diagnoses
(33%) was confirmed by histological examination. In the second 8 months, 79 lymph
nodes (35 patients) were sampled. Tumor/granuloma diagnoses were achieved in 27% 
of the cases (21 nodes) (P=0.045 versus the first 8 months) and the obtained
material was adequate for producing a cell block in 90% of cases (P<0.001 versus 
the first 8 months). Corresponding tissue diagnoses were available in 28% of
cases. Correlation of EBUS-TBNA and histological examination for tumor/granuloma 
diagnosis was 100% (12/12, P=0.029 versus the first 8 months). Immunostains in
the cell blocks indicated that all the metastatic adenocarcinomas were thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)+ and p63-, and that all squamous cell carcinomas
were TTF-1-, p63+ and cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6)+. Eight granulomata were
identified, of which five were positive for Acid-Fast Bacilli (AFB) stain and
confirmed by culture or tissue biopsy. The remaining three granulomata were
AFB-negative. EGFR/KRAS mutation analysis was conducted in cell blocks of five
adenocarcinomas, of which all provided sufficient diagnostic material. The
findings showed a steep learning curve when EBUS-TBNA was first adopted,
reflected by an increased rate of tumor/granuloma diagnoses as well as an
improved sample yield for cell block preparation in the second 8 months. TTF-1,
p63 and CK5/6 were useful biomarkers for distinguishing metastatic lung
carcinomas.

PMID: 25189939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Pathol Int. 2014 Aug;64(8):365-74. doi: 10.1111/pin.12183.

Expression of developing neural transcription factors in lung carcinoid tumors.

Endo T(1), Yazawa T, Shishido-Hara Y, Fujiwara M, Shimoyamada H, Ishii J, Sato H,
Tachibana K, Takei H, Kondo H, Goya T, Endo S, Kamma H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka, Japan; 
Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Japan.

In lung tumors, the association between carcinoids and high-grade neuroendocrine 
tumors (HGNETs) is controversial. To understand the phenotypic
similarities/differences between lung carcinoids and HGNETs, we comparatively
investigated the expression of three kinds of developing neural transcription
factors (DNTFs: BRN2, TTF1 and ASCL1) and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
(MEN1) as well as RB1 and P53 using 18 carcinoids and 16 HGNETs. The DNTFs were
expressed in 10 of the 18 carcinoids and in all the HGNETs, while normal
neuroendocrine cells, which are considered the major cell origin of lung
carcinoids and small cell carcinomas, did not express DNTFs. Both the DNTF(-) and
DNTF(+) carcinoids contained typical and atypical carcinoids. All the DNTF(-)
carcinoids examined were formed in the bronchial wall. All the MEN1(-) carcinoids
examined were classified into the DNTF(-) carcinoids, while all the HGNETs
expressed MEN1. This finding suggests that DNTF(-) MEN1(-) carcinoids are
unlikely to be precursors of HGNETs. Although the status of RB1 and P53 between
carcinoids and HGNETs were apparently different, the DNTF(+) carcinoids of two
male patients and one female patient revealed morphologies resembling HGNET cells
and relatively high Ki67 indices. Further investigation of DNTF expression in
carcinoids might provide important clues to understand the association between
carcinoids and HGNETs.

© 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25143124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Clin Pathol. 2014 Sep;142(3):320-4. doi: 10.1309/AJCPGA0IUA8BHQEZ.

Evaluation of napsin A, TTF-1, p63, p40, and CK5/6 immunohistochemical stains in 
pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors.

Zhang C(1), Schmidt LA(2), Hatanaka K(3), Thomas D(2), Lagstein A(2), Myers
JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis; (2)Department of Pathology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor; and. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: A panel of immunohistochemical (IHC) stains frequently used to
subclassify non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) includes napsin A, TTF-1, CK5/6,
p40, and p63. The expression profiles of these stains in neuroendocrine tumors
have not been systematically evaluated.
METHOD: Sixty-eight resected pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors, including 52
typical carcinoids (TCs), eight atypical carcinoids (ACs), seven small cell
carcinomas (SCLCs) and one large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC), were
stained for napsin A, TTF-1, p63, p40, and CK5/6. Tumors were scored as positive 
(>1% tumor cells reactive) or negative, and percentage of reactive tumor cells
was recorded.
RESULTS: Napsin A, p63, p40, and CK5/6 were consistently negative in
neuroendocrine tumors. TTF-1 was positive in 17 of 52 TCs, 4 of 8 ACs, 5 of 7
SCLCs, and 0 of 1 LCNECs.
CONCLUSION: Pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors have a distinct but nonspecific
profile on IHC panel commonly applied to subclassify NSCLCs. They are napsin
A-/p40-/p63-/CK5/6-/TTF-1±. Recognizing this profile may have value in separating
neuroendocrine tumors from NSCLCs.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25125621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun 15;7(7):4247-53. eCollection 2014.

<U+0394>Np63, CK5/6, TTF-1 and napsin A, a reliable panel to subtype non-small cell lung
cancer in biopsy specimens.

Zhao W(1), Wang H(1), Peng Y(1), Tian B(1), Peng L(1), Zhang DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First People's Hospital of Changzhou, The Third
Affiliated Hospital of Suzhou University Changzhou 213003, China.

Histopathological subtyping of nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is currently
important in selecting specific therapeutic agents. It can be challenging in
distinguishing poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma (AC) from squamous cell 
carcinoma (SCC) on small biopsy samples. This study was aimed to evaluate the
utility of a panel of immunohistochemical markers consisting of <U+0394>Np63 (p40),
cytokeratins (CK) 5/6, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and napsin A (novel
aspartic proteinase of the pepsin family) in subtyping poorly differentiated
NSCLC. Forty-eight cases of NSCLC that could not be further classified by
examination of hematoxylin-eosin (H&E)-stained slides on biopsy and had
subsequent resection specimens were selected. Subtyping of the tumor was based on
the resection specimen using the World Health Organization criteria. <U+0394>Np63 was
expressed in all 16 SCCs (100%), and was negative in all ACs and LCCs. CK5/6 was 
positive in 13 of 16 SCCs (81%), and was negative in all ACs and LCCs. TTF-1 was 
positive in 20 of 25 ACs (80%) and 3 of 7 LCCs (43%), but none of 16 SCCs. Napsin
A was positive in 16 of 25 ACs (64%) and was negative in all SCCs and LCCs. Our
study shows that a panel including <U+0394>Np63, CK5/6, TTF-1, and napsin A allows
correct subclassification of 39 of 48 cases of NSCLC on biopsy and may contribute
to refine lung cancer classification in biopsy specimens, remarkably reducing the
NSCLC-NOS (not otherwise specified) diagnostic category.

PMCID: PMC4129040
PMID: 25120805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Jan;141(1):61-8. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1789-x.
Epub 2014 Aug 3.

The efficacy of EGFR gene mutation testing in various samples from non-small cell
lung cancer patients: a multicenter retrospective study.

Krawczyk P(1), Ramlau R, Chorostowska-Wynimko J, Powrózek T, Lewandowska MA,
Limon J, Wasag B, Pankowski J, Kozielski J, Kalinka-Warzocha E, Szczesna A,
Wojas-Krawczyk K, Skronski M, Dziadziuszko R, Jagus P, Antoszewska E, Szumilo J, 
Jarosz B, Wozniak A, Józwicki W, Dyszkiewicz W, Pasieka-Lis M, Kowalski DM,
Krzakowski M, Jassem J, Milanowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Oncology and Allergology, Medical University of
Lublin, Jaczewskiego 8 St., 20-954, Lublin, Poland, krapa@poczta.onet.pl.

INTRODUCTION: Testing for the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene
mutations requires considerable multidisciplinary experience of clinicians (for
appropriate patient selection), pathologists (for selection of appropriate
cytological or histological material) and geneticists (for performing and
reporting reliable molecular tests). We present our experience on the efficacy of
routine EGFR testing in various types of tumor samples and the frequency of EGFR 
mutations in a large series of Polish non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients.
METHODS: Deletions in exon 19 and substitution L858R in exon 21 of EGFR gene were
assessed using real-time PCR techniques in 1,138 small biopsies or cytological
specimens and in 1,312 surgical samples.
RESULTS: Out of 2,450 diagnostic samples (containing >10% of tumor cells), the
occurrence of EGFR gene mutations was 9%; more frequently in women (13.9%) and
adenocarcinoma patients (10%), particularly with accompanying expression of TTF1 
(13.0%). The frequency of EGFR gene mutations was similar in cytological and
histological specimens, and in primary and metastatic lesions, and did not depend
on the percentage of tumor cells and quality of isolated DNA. Cytological or
small biopsy, compared to surgical specimens showed lower percentage of tumor
cells, with no impact on the quality of real-time PCR assay.
CONCLUSION: Cytological and small biopsy samples with low (10-20%) content of
tumor cells and specimens from metastatic lesions are a sufficient source for
EGFR mutation testing in NSCLC patients. The incidence of EGFR gene mutations in 
examined population was similar to those reported in other Caucasian populations.

PMCID: PMC4282872
PMID: 25086987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Respir Med. 2014 Sep;108(9):1377-86. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2014.06.008. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

Usual interstitial pneumonia and smoking-related interstitial fibrosis display
epithelial to mesenchymal transition in fibroblastic foci.

Fabro AT(1), Minatel IO(2), Rangel MP(3), Halbwedl I(4), Parra ER(3), Capelozzi
VL(3), Popper H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Botucatu Medical School, São Paulo State University, 
Botucatu, Brazil. Electronic address: alexandretodofabro@gmail.com. (2)Department
of Pathology, Botucatu Medical School, São Paulo State University, Botucatu,
Brazil. (3)Department of Pathology, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 
Graz, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Fibroblastic foci (FF) are a major histological feature of usual
interstitial pneumonia (UIP) in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and collagen 
vascular diseases (non-IPF). In addition, FF are occasionally associated with
smoking-related interstitial fibrosis (SRIF). Recent studies have suggested a
role for epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in pulmonary fibrogenesis.
METHODS: Here, we investigated whether EMT was present in patients with IPF
(n = 19), non-IPF (n = 17), and SRIF (n = 16) using morphometric
immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and confocal microscopy. All patients 
had received lung biopsies or lobectomies for lung cancer.
RESULTS: IPF and non-IPF patients displayed restrictive lung function patterns,
whereas those with SRIF presented mixed patterns. Cells within FF presented high 
number of alpha-smooth muscle actin (aSMA)-staining cells; however, the foci of
IPF patients showed comparatively lower number. Moreover, colocalization of
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) and aSMA within FF showed low number of
staining cells for IPF and SRIF in comparison to non-IPF (p < 0.01).
Nevertheless, all groups displayed colocalization of high rate of TTF1(+)-cells
and low rate of aSMA(+)-cells within hyperplastic epithelioid cells in FF. Also, 
we observed areas with low proportion of TTF1(+)cells and aSMA(+)cells, which
were present in SRIF and non-IPF more often than IPF (p < 0.001). Electron
microscopy revealed small breaks in the alveolar basal lamina, which allowed
epithelioid cells to directly contact the collagenous matrix and fibroblasts.
Three-dimensional reconstruction revealed intense aSMA staining within some
epithelioid cells, suggesting that they had gained a mesenchymal phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings constitute the first report of EMT in SRIF and
suggest that EMT occurs more prominently in SRIF and non-IPF than IPF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25066934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Pathol Res Pract. 2014 Oct;210(10):680-5. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2014.06.021. Epub
2014 Jul 1.

Analysis of clinical characteristics and differential diagnosis of the lung
biopsy specimens in 99 adenocarcinoma cases and 111 squamous cell carcinoma
cases: utility of an immunohistochemical panel containing CK5/6, CK34ßE12, p63,
CK7 and TTF-1.

Xu XY(1), Yang GY(2), Yang JH(3), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou Attached to Southern
Medical University, Zhengzhou, PR China. (2)Department of Pathology, People's
Hospital of Zhengzhou Attached to Southern Medical University, Zhengzhou, PR
China. Electronic address: yanggy54@sina.com. (3)Department of Pathology,
People's Hospital of Zhengzhou Attached to Southern Medical University,
Zhengzhou, PR China. Electronic address: jinhuay65@sina.com.

This study aimed at evaluating the utility of a panel of antibodies, consisting
of cytokeratins (CK) 5/6, CK34ßE12, p63, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), 
and CK7 for distinguishing between squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and
adenocarcinomas (Ad), as well as their expression with clinicopathological
parameters and prognosis in SCC and Ad. 111 SCC of small biopsy specimens and 99 
cases of Ad were stained by immunohistochemistry, among which 76 SCC and 64 Ad
had complete follow-up data. Most of SCC displayed CK5/6 (91/99, 91.92%),
CK34ßE12 (83/99, 83.84%), p63 (96/99, 96.97%), and most of Ad showed expression
of CK7 (89/111, 80.18%) and TTF-1 (105/111, 94.59%). The combination of
CK5/6/CK34ßE12/p63 seems to be useful for differentiating SCC from Ad with 100%
sensitivity and 97.30% specificity, and TTF-1 was a useful biomarker for Ad with 
94.59% sensitivity and 100% specificity. There were differences between CK5/6,
p63, and TTF-1 expression with tumor differentiation (p<0.05) in SCC or Ad.
Univariate analysis indicated that patients with high TTF-1 expression predicted 
better prognosis in Ad patients. Multivariate analysis showed that TTF-1
expression (HR=0.340, 95% CI 0.143-0.811, p=0.015) was a good independent
predictor of Ad patient survival.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Surg Today. 2015 Aug;45(8):1040-8. doi: 10.1007/s00595-014-0993-2. Epub 2014 Jul 
26.

In-vivo trachea regeneration: fabrication of a tissue-engineered trachea in nude 
mice using the body as a natural bioreactor.

Kajbafzadeh AM(1), Sabetkish S, Sabetkish N, Muhammadnejad S, Akbarzadeh A,
Tavangar SM, Mohseni MJ, Amanpour S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Tissue Engineering and Stem Cells Therapy, Pediatric Urology
Research Center, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Pediatric Center of
Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, No. 62, Dr. Qarib's St,
Keshavarz Blvd, Tehran, 14194 33151, Islamic Republic of Iran,
kajbafzd@sina.tums.ac.ir.

PURPOSE: To investigate the outcomes of implanting rat decellularized trachea
scaffold (DTS) between the paravertebral muscles of nude mice using the body as a
bioreactor for total graft recellularization.
METHODS: The tracheas of four rats were aseptically resected and decellularized. 
To assess the efficiency of the decellularization procedure, all decellularized
scaffolds and native control tissues were evaluated with scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), DAPI staining, DNA quantification, biomechanical analyses and
hydroxyproline measurement. They were then implanted between the paravertebral
muscles of four nude mice. The biopsies were precisely evaluated at 1, 3, 6 and
12 months postoperatively for tracheal cartilage and soft tissue
recellularization by staining for TTF1, CD34, S100 and leukocyte common antibody.
RESULTS: Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, SEM and the tensile test confirmed
the preservation of the tissue structure and the biophysical and biochemical
properties of the DTS. The present study clearly demonstrated that the
hydroxyproline content of the DTS was similar to that of the native tissue. On
the other hand, in biopsy samples obtained after 12 months, histological
evaluation showed superior organization and cell seeding in both the cartilage
and connective tissues.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the feasibility of using a natural bioreactor
for recellularizing DTS; this may have the potential to facilitate homologous
transplantation for repairing segmental trachea defects.

PMID: 25062798  [PubMed - in process]


79. Cell Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):994-1008. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.97. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

A Smad3 and TTF-1/NKX2-1 complex regulates Smad4-independent gene expression.

Isogaya K(1), Koinuma D(1), Tsutsumi S(2), Saito RA(3), Miyazawa K(4), Aburatani 
H(2), Miyazono K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (2)Genome Science Division, Research 
Center for Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), The University of Tokyo,
Meguro-ku 153-8904, Japan. (3)1] Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate
School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan [2]
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (4)1] Department of Molecular
Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan [2] Department of Biochemistry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School
of Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, 1110 Shimokato, Chuo,
Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1, also known as NKX2-1) is a tissue-specific
transcription factor in lung epithelial cells. Although TTF-1 inhibits the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition induced by transforming growth factor-ß
(TGF-ß) in lung adenocarcinoma cells, the mechanism through which TTF-1 inhibits 
the functions of TGF-ß is unknown. Here we show that TTF-1 disrupts the nuclear
Smad3-Smad4 complex without affecting the nuclear localization of phospho-Smad3. 
Genome-wide analysis by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing
revealed that TTF-1 colocalizes with Smad3 on chromatin and alters Smad3-binding 
patterns throughout the genome, while TTF-1 generally inhibits Smad4 binding to
chromatin. Moreover, Smad3 binds to chromatin together with TTF-1, but not with
Smad4, at some Smad3-binding regions when TGF-ß signaling is absent, and
knockdown of Smad4 expression does not attenuate Smad3 binding in these regions. 
Thus, TTF-1 may compete with Smad4 for interaction with Smad3, and in the
presence of TTF-1, Smad3 regulates the transcription of certain genes
independently of Smad4. These findings provide a new model of regulation of
TGF-ß-Smad signaling by TTF-1.

PMCID: PMC4123303
PMID: 25060702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Clin Neuropathol. 2014 Nov-Dec;33(6):380-7. doi: 10.5414/NP300766.

Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma: report of two cases with unconventional clinical
presentations.

Vizcaíno MA, Caccamo DV, Fox E, Rodriguez FJ.

AIMS: Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is a rare astrocytic neoplasm with a
relative circumscribed architecture that typically arises superficially in the
cerebral hemispheres of teenagers and young adults. Our aim is to highlight
unconventional clinical presentations of this distinct neoplasm.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report two cases of PXA with unconventional clinical
features, including clinical, pathologic, and immunohistochemical features.
RESULTS: The first case developed in the left frontal lobe of a 20-year-old
female with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Focal anaplastic features were
present. The neoplastic cells were immunoreactive for GFAP, S-100 protein and
focally for synaptophysin, with a MIB-1/Ki-67 proliferative labelling index of
16%. The second case developed in a 39-year-old female as a suprasellar neoplasm.
The neoplastic cells expressed GFAP, S-100 protein and focally CD34. The
adenohypophysis was positive for synaptophysin and pituicytes for TTF1. Molecular
studies were negative for BRAF (V600E) mutation in both cases.
CONCLUSION: PXA is a distinct circumscribed neoplasm that may present in
unexpected locations or clinical backgrounds. Neuropathologists must be aware of 
these unconventional presentations in order to provide a precise diagnosis
leading to appropriate treatment.

PMID: 25034704  [PubMed - in process]


81. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 May;43(5):336-7.

[Bronchial metastasis of thyroid follicular carcinoma: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu Y, Sun L, Ding L, Guan J, Lin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)E-mail: lindongliang2008@126.com.

PMID: 25030869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Lung Cancer. 2014 Aug;85(2):276-81. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.06.004. Epub 2014
Jun 16.

Blood vessel invasion is a major feature and a factor of poor prognosis in
sarcomatoid carcinoma of the lung.

Vieira T(1), Antoine M(2), Ruppert AM(1), Fallet V(3), Duruisseaux M(3), Giroux
Leprieur E(3), Poulot V(4), Rabbe N(3), Sclick L(3), Beau-Faller M(5), Lacave
R(6), Lavole A(3), Cadranel J(1), Wislez M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, GRC n°04, Theranoscan, F-75252
Paris, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Service de Pneumologie, F-75970 Paris,
France. (2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, GRC n°04, Theranoscan,
F-75252 Paris, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Service d'Anatomie pathologique,
F-75970 Paris, France. (3)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, GRC n°04,
Theranoscan, F-75252 Paris, France. (4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 
GRC n°04, Theranoscan, F-75252 Paris, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Plateforme de
Génomique des Tumeurs Solides, F-75970 Paris, France. (5)Hôpital de Hautepierre, 
Laboratoire de Biochimie et de biologie moléculaire, F-67098 Strasbourg, France. 
(6)AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Plateforme de Génomique des Tumeurs Solides, F-75970
Paris, France. (7)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, GRC n°04,
Theranoscan, F-75252 Paris, France; AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Service de Pneumologie,
F-75970 Paris, France. Electronic address: marie.wislez@tnn.aphp.fr.

OBJECTIVES: Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinomas (SC) are highly disseminated types
of non-small-cell lung carcinoma. Their prognosis is poor. New therapeutic
targets are needed to improve disease management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 1995 to 2013, clinical and survival data from all
consecutive patients with surgically treated SC were collected. Pathological and 
biomarker analyses were performed: TTF1, P63, c-MET and ALK expression
(immunohistochemistry), PAS staining, ALK rearrangement (FISH), and EGFR, KRAS,
HER2, BRAF, PIK3CA, and MET genes mutations (PCR).
RESULTS: Seventy-seven patients were included. Median age was 61 years (53-69).
Histological subtypes were pleomorphic carcinoma (78%), carcinosarcoma (12%), and
giant-cell and/or spindle-cell carcinoma (10%). Blood vessel invasion (BVI) was
present in 90% of cases. Morphology and immunohistochemistry were indicative of
an adenocarcinoma, squamous, and adenosquamous origin in 41.5%, 17% and 11.5%,
respectively, 30% remained not-otherwise-specified. KRAS, PIK3CA, EGFR, and MET
mutations were found in 31%, 8%, 3%, and 3%, respectively. No tumors had HER2 or 
BRAF mutations, or ALK rearrangement, whereas 34% had a c-MET positive score.
Five-year overall survival (OS) was 29% for the whole population. At multivariate
analysis, tumor size <50mm (HR=1.96 [1.04-3.73], p=0.011), no lymph-node
metastasis (HR=3.25 [1.68-6.31], p<0.0001), no parietal pleural invasion (HR=1.16
[1.06-1.28], p=0.002), no BVI (HR=1.22 [1.06-1.40], p=0.005), and no squamous
component (HR=3.17 [1.48-6.79], p=0.01) were associated with longer OS.
Biomarkers did not influence OS.
CONCLUSION: Dedifferentiation in NSCLC could lead to SC and an epithelial subtype
component could influence outcome. BVI was present in almost all SCs and was an
independent factor of poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24997135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;36(4):282-6.

[Clinicopathological characteristics and imaging features of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma with micropapillary pattern].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren J(1), Zhou J, Ding W, Zhong B, Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of College
of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China. (2)Email:
zjyhz@zju.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinicopathological characteristics and imaging
features of lung adenocarcinoma with a micropapillary pattern (MPP).
METHODS: Eighty cases of pulmonary adenocarcinoma with a micropapillary pattern
treated in our hospital from July 2011 to December 2012 were selected to
retrospectively analyze their clinicopathological characteristics and imaging
features.
RESULTS: Among the 80 cases of lung adenocarcinoma with MPP, there were 38 cases 
of stage I (47.5%), 12 cases of stage II (15.0%), 25 cases of stage III (31.3%)
and 5 cases of stage IV (6.2%). There were 14 cases of moderately differentiated 
(17.5%) and moderately/poorly differentiated (82.5%) tumors. Sixty-three cases
had pleural involvement, vascular invasion, involving the bronchial wall,
invasion of large vessels, nerve invasion, and lymph node metastasis (at least
one of them) (78.8%). Immunohistochemical staining revealed that both positive
rates of TTF-1 and CK7 were 100%, and that of pulmonary surfactant
apolipoprotein-A (SPA) was 84.0%. Imaging examination revealed hilar or
mediastinal lymph node enlargement in 15 cases (18.8%). but the pathology
confirmed hilar or mediastinal lymph node metastasis in 36 cases (45.0%). Lung CT
imaging showed that the majority of the cases were peripheral type, and only a
few of central type, and most cases were solid lesions, with lobulation,
spiculation, pleural indentation, and vascular convergence sign, while there were
few ground-glass opacity sign and vacuole sign.
CONCLUSIONS: Lung adenocarcinoma with MPP component often presents with early
invasions of pleura, blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and lymph nodes. Imaging
manifestation of this cancer mainly shows as peripheral and solid lesions, often 
with lobulation, spiculation, pleural indentation, vascular convergence sign, but
GGO and vacuole signs are unusual. Overexpression of TTF-1, CK7 and SPA, and
elevated CEA level are associated with clinical staging of the disease.

PMID: 24989915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Chemistry. 2014 Jul 28;20(31):9650-6. doi: 10.1002/chem.201402327. Epub 2014 Jun 
30.

Decorating tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) with fluorinated phenyls through sulfur
bridges: facile synthesis, properties, and aggregation through fluorine
interactions.

Lu X(1), Sun J, Liu Y, Shao J, Ma L, Zhang S, Zhao J, Shao Y, Zhang HL, Wang Z,
Shao X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry & School of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province (P.R.
China).

Tetrathiafulvalene derivatives (TTF1-TTF9) bearing fluorinated phenyl groups
attached through the sulfur bridges have been synthesized by employing a
copper-mediated C-S coupling reaction of C6 H5-x Fx I (x=1, 2, 5) and a
zinc-thiolate complex, (TBA)2 [Zn(DMIT)2 ] (TBA=tetrabutyl ammonium,
DMIT=1,3-dithiole-2-thione-4,5-dithiolate), as the key step. Particularly, the
selective synthesis of C6 F5 -substituted (TTF8) and C6 F4 -fused (TTF9) TTFs
from C6 F5 I is disclosed. The physicochemical properties and crystal structures 
of these TTFs are fully investigated by UV/Vis absorption spectra, cyclic
voltammetry, molecular orbital calculation, and single-crystal X-ray diffraction.
The exchange of hydrogen versus fluorine on the peripheral phenyl groups show a
notable influence on both the electronic and crystallographic natures of the
resulting TTFs: 1) lowering both the HOMO and the LUMO energy levels,
2) modulating the electrochemical properties by regioselective and/or the degree 
of fluorination, 3) enhancing the driving forces of stacking by multiple fluorine
interactions (F···S, C<U+F8FF>F···p/pF , C<U+F8FF>F···F<U+F8FF>C, and C<U+F8FF>F···H). This work indicates
that the decoration with fluorinated phenyls holds promise to produce functional 
TTFs with novel electronic and aggregation features.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24981731  [PubMed]


85. Respir Res. 2014 Jun 26;15:70. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-15-70.

Developmental lung expression and transcriptional regulation of claudin-6 by
TTF-1, Gata-6, and FoxA2.

Jimenez FR, Lewis JB, Belgique ST, Wood TT, Reynolds PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
3054 Life Sciences Building, Provo, UT 84602, USA. paul_reynolds@byu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Claudins are transmembrane proteins expressed in tight junctions that
prevent paracellular transport of extracellular fluid and a variety of other
substances. However, the expression profile of Claudin-6 (Cldn6) in the
developing lung has not been characterized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cldn6 expression was determined during important periods of 
lung organogenesis by microarray analysis, qPCR and immunofluorescence.
Expression patterns were confirmed to peak at E12.5 and diminish as lung
development progressed. Immunofluorescence revealed that Cldn6 was detected in
cells that also express TTF-1 and FoxA2, two critical transcriptional regulators 
of pulmonary branching morphogenesis. Cldn6 was also observed in cells that
express Sox2 and Sox9, factors that influence cell differentiation in the
proximal and distal lung, respectively. In order to assess transcriptional
control of Cldn6, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0-kb of the proximal murine Cldn6 promoter was 
ligated into a luciferase reporter and co-transfected with expression vectors for
TTF-1 or two of its important transcriptional co-regulators, FoxA2 and Gata-6. In
almost every instance, TTF-1, FoxA2, and Gata-6 activated gene transcription in
cell lines characteristic of proximal airway epithelium (Beas2B) and distal
alveolar epithelium (A-549).
CONCLUSIONS: These data revealed for the first time that Cldn6 might be an
important tight junctional component expressed by pulmonary epithelium during
lung organogenesis. Furthermore, Cldn6-mediated aspects of cell differentiation
may describe mechanisms of lung perturbation coincident with impaired cell
junctions and abnormal membrane permeability.

PMCID: PMC4082679
PMID: 24970044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;43(4):251-5.

[Correlation of caveolin-1 expression with clinicopathologic features and
prognosis in patients with lung adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1), Liu B(1), Xu Y(1), Zhang J(1), Xia Q(1), Yu B(1), Zhang R(1), Shi
S(1), Lu Z(1), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University Medical School; 
Department of Pathology, Nanjing General Hospital of Nanjing Military Command,
Nanjing 210002, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing
University Medical School; Department of Pathology, Nanjing General Hospital of
Nanjing Military Command, Nanjing 210002, China. E-mail: zhouxj3456@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression, clinicopathologic correlation and prognostic 
significance of caveolin-1 in lung adenocarcinomas(LAC).
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study (EnVision method) for caveolin-1 and TTF-1 was
carried out in 185 cases of LAC encountered during the period from 2005 to 2010. 
The correlation between caveolin-1 expression and various clinicopathologic
parameters was analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: The rate of caveolin-1 expression in the 185 cases of LAC was 26.5%
(49/185) and significantly lower than that in normal lung tissue (P<0.01). There 
was also higher rate of caveolin-1 expression in male patients (P=0.004), smokers
(P=0.006), tumors larger than 3.5 cm (P=0.048), predominantly solid tumor subtype
(P=0.025), high tumor grade (P=0.044), tumors with vascular invasion (P=0.019),
lymph node metastasis (P=0.030), recurrence (P=0.021) and high clinical stage
(P=0.027). The expression level of caveolin-1 in TTF1-negative cases was
significantly higher than that in TTF1-positive cases and caveolin-1 expression
also negatively correlated with TTF-1 expression in LAC (r=-0.154, P=0.037). The 
five-year overall survival rate of patients with caveolin-1 positive tumors was
lower than that in caveolin-1 negative group (P<0.01).Univariate analysis
indicated the expression level of caveolin-1 and TTF-1 (P<0.01), histologic
subtype (P=0.002), tumor grade (P=0.002), tumor size (P=0.009), vascular invasion
(P=0.019), lymph node metastasis (P=0.018), recurrence (P=0.032) and clinical
stage (P=0.024) correlated with the survival of patients with LAC. COX
multivariate analysis revealed that LAC with caveolin-1 positive expression,
TTF-1 negative expression and high tumor grade carried a significantly
unfavorable prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Caveolin-1 expression correlates with histologic subtype, tumor
grade, invasiveness and metastatic potential of LAC. The detection of caveolin-1 
in LAC is helpful in predicting prognosis.LAC with caveolin-1 expression carries 
a poor prognosis.

PMID: 24915816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Turk Patoloji Derg. 2014;30(3):201-5. doi: 10.5146/tjpath.2014.01261.

TTF-1 may not be a reliable marker for differentiating metastasis from brain
tumors.

Unal B(1), Yildirim S, Sezer C, Süren D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, ANTALYA,
TURKEY.

OBJECTIVE: TTF-1 is widely used as an immunohistochemical marker of lung and
thyroid tumors. However, TTF-1 expression has been described in tumors from other
sites. The presence of TTF-1 expression in primary brain tumors is largely
unclear and has not been clearly specified yet. We characterized expression of
two TTF-1 clones in primary brain tumors with relevance to tumor types and
grades.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: We studied immunohistochemistry with tissue micro-array,
using both clones (8G7G3/1 and SPT24) in 45 primary brain tumors of different
types and grades. Our cases consisted of 1 grade I, 7 grade II, 4 grade III, 20
grade IV astrocytic tumors; 9 meningiomas, 2 oligodendrogliomas, 1 schwannoma and
1 medulloblastoma.
RESULTS: We have found TTF-1 nuclear staining using the SPT24 clone in 4 cases (3
cases were grade IV and 1 was grade III). Focal and weak staining was seen in
three cases and moderate-strong and diffuse staining was seen in one case. All
the tumors were negative with clone 8G7G3/1. Clone SPT24 was more sensitive but
less specific.
CONCLUSION: TTF-1 can also be expressed in primary brain tumors, particularly
grade III to IV tumors. TTF-1 expression was a rare finding in previous studies, 
however strong and diffuse staining was not observed until today. We think that
TTF-1 nuclear expression in high-grade astrocytic tumors cannot rule out
primaries even when diffuse and strong staining. Clinical and pathological
parameters should be evaluated together.

PMID: 24913303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:389-98. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.05.031.
Epub 2014 May 29.

Overexpression of SMARCE1 is associated with CD8+ T-cell infiltration in early
stage ovarian cancer.

Giannakakis A(1), Karapetsas A(2), Dangaj D(3), Lanitis E(3), Tanyi J(4), Coukos 
G(5), Sandaltzopoulos R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Molecular Diagnosis and Modern Therapeutics,
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece; Division of Genome and 
Gene Expression Data Analysis, Bioinformatics Institute A*STAR (Agency for
Science, Technology and Research), Singapore 138671, Singapore. (2)Laboratory of 
Gene Expression, Molecular Diagnosis and Modern Therapeutics, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Democritus University
of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece. (3)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Molecular
Diagnosis and Modern Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis,
Greece; Department of Oncology, Ludwig Cancer Research Center, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. (5)Department of Oncology, University
Hospital of Lausanne (CHUV), Ludwig Cancer Research Center, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (6)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Molecular
Diagnosis and Modern Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis,
Greece. Electronic address: rmsandal@mbg.duth.gr.

T-lymphocyte infiltration in ovarian tumors has been linked to a favorable
prognosis, hence, exploring the mechanism of T-cell recruitment in the tumor is
warranted. We employed a differential expression analysis to identify genes
over-expressed in early stage ovarian cancer samples that contained CD8
infiltrating T-lymphocytes. Among other genes, we discovered that TTF1, a
regulator of ribosomal RNA gene expression, and SMARCE1, a factor associated with
chromatin remodeling were overexpressed in first stage CD8+ ovarian tumors. TTF1 
and SMARCE1 mRNA levels showed a strong correlation with the number of
intra-tumoral CD8+ cells in ovarian tumors. Interestingly, forced overexpression 
of SMARCE1 in SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells resulted in secretion of IL8, MIP1b and 
RANTES chemokines in the supernatant and triggered chemotaxis of CD8+ lymphocytes
in a cell culture assay. The potency of SMARCE1-mediated chemotaxis appeared
comparable to that caused by the transfection of the CXCL9 gene, coding for a
chemokine known to attract T-cells. Our analysis pinpoints TTF1 and SMARCE1 as
genes potentially involved in cancer immunology. Since both TTF1 and SMARCE1 are 
involved in chromatin remodeling, our results imply an epigenetic regulatory
mechanism for T-cell recruitment that invites deciphering.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24880093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Rev Mal Respir. 2014 May;31(5):439-41. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2013.10.647. Epub 2013 
Dec 30.

[Intrapericardial lung cancer metastases: Is a curative approach feasible?].

[Article in French]

Riquet M(1), Rivera C(2), Mordant P(2), Fabre É(3).

Author information: 
(1)Service de chirurgie thoracique, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou, université
Paris Descartes, 20-40, rue Leblanc, 75015 Paris, France. Electronic address:
marc.riquet@egp.aphp.fr. (2)Service de chirurgie thoracique, hôpital européen
Georges-Pompidou, université Paris Descartes, 20-40, rue Leblanc, 75015 Paris,
France. (3)Service d'oncologie médicale, hôpital européen Georges-Pompidou,
université Paris Descartes, 75015 Paris, France.

INTRODUCTION: Lung cancer metastases are classified M1a and M1b. Studies on
patients with pleural invasion graded M1a have demonstrated the possibility of
prolonged survival following multimodality treatment, but this has not been
reported for M1a pericardial involvement.
CASE REPORT: A 59-year-old man underwent lung surgery for a poorly differentiated
adenocarcinoma TTF1+ with K-ras mutation. He was staged as pT4N0 because of a
nodule in another ipsilateral lobe. A pericardial effusion with imminent
tamponade occurred during the postoperative course necessitating drainage leading
to the discovery of pericardial metastases and restaging as pT4N0M1a. Adjuvant
treatment was performed and the patient remains alive and disease free 3 years
later.
CONCLUSIONS: Management of pericardial M1a might be refined as has been the case 
in pleural M1a disease. Biological data might allow more precise classification
and treatment. N0-N1 and non-T3-T4 by invasion patients might in selected cases
benefit from surgery included as part of multimodal therapy.

Copyright © 2013 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24878161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Clin Oncol. 2014 Jun 20;32(18):1874-81. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.54.4270. Epub
2014 May 19.

Second-line therapy in non-small-cell lung cancer: the DELTA between different
genotypes widens.

Zer A(1), Leighl NB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada Natasha.Leighl@uhn.ca.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Feb 10;33(5):522-3.
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Feb 10;33(5):525-6.

PMID: 24841982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Pituitary. 2015 Feb;18(1):150-8. doi: 10.1007/s11102-014-0568-7.

Pituicytomas and spindle cell oncocytomas: modern case series from the University
of California, San Francisco.

Zygourakis CC(1), Rolston JD, Lee HS, Partow C, Kunwar S, Aghi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San Francisco,
505 Parnassus Avenue, Rm 779M, San Francisco, CA, 94143-0112, USA.

PURPOSE: Pituicytomas and spindle cell oncocytomas (SCOs) are extremely rare
neoplasms of the sellar and suprasellar region that can often mimic pituitary
adenomas. To date, there are relatively few cases of pituicytomas and SCOs
reported; and most of these are small case series.
METHODS: In this paper, we provide a retrospective review of the treatment,
imaging characteristics, post-operative course, and histopathology of five cases 
of pituicytomas and two SCOs treated at the University of California, San
Francisco (UCSF) over a 10-year period from 2003 to 2013.
RESULTS: We find that pituicytomas and SCOs present similarly to pituitary
adenomas, and look identical on CT or MR imaging. We histopathologically
confirmed all pituicytomas with a combination of hematoxylin and eosin morphology
and immunohistochemical positivity for vimentin and S100; SCOs stain for
anti-mitochondrial antigen and endothelial membrane antigen. We observe positive 
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) immunohistochemistry in both cases of SCO, 
as well as in both of the cases of pituicytoma in which TTF1 staining was
available.
CONCLUSIONS: This represents the largest single-institution case series of
pituicytomas and SCOs to date, and also includes the first description of the
management of a pregnant female with SCO. Our findings are consistent with the
idea of common histogenesis for pituicytomas and SCOs, and also raise the
possibility of more aggressive growth in SCOs as compared to pituicytomas.

PMID: 24823438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1459-68. eCollection 2014.

Lepidic and micropapillary growth pattern and expression of Napsin A can stratify
patients of stage I lung adenocarcinoma into different prognostic subgroup.

Yang X(1), Liu Y(2), Lian F(1), Guo L(1), Wen P(1), Liu XY(1), Lin DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute and Cancer Hospital, Peking Union
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Beijing, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Cancer Hospital, Peking
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Beijing, China.

Histologic categories and related growth pattern proposed by IASLC/ATS/ERS
classification has been reported to be prognostically important in lung
adenocarcinoma. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) and Napsin A have been
investigated as potential prognostic parameters with conflicting results. A total
of 211 cases with stage I lung adenocarcinoma were analyzed according to the
IASLC/ATS/ERS classification with slight modifications. Expression levels of TTF1
and Napsin A were evaluated by immunohistochemistry. In univariate analyses, we
found female sex (p=0.009), lepidic growth pattern (P=0.011) and lack of
micropapillary pattern (P=0.048) were favorable predictor significantly
associated with disease-free survival (DFS). Lack of mitosis (P=0.044) and Napsin
A expression (P=0.031) were favorable predictors for overall survival (OS).
Tumors with a maximum diameter=2 cm had both longer DFS (P=0.008) and OS
(P=0.020). Negative TTF1 expression indicated increased risk of death, but
failure in statistical significance (P=0.215). After multivariate analysis,
histologic subtype, tumor size and gender were identified as independent
predictor for DFS (RR: 0.343, 3.697, 0.494; P=0.006, 0.029, 0.019), no feature
was found as an independent predictor for overall survival (P>0.05). To conclude,
lepidic growth pattern, female sex and tumor size=2 cm are independent favorable 
predictors for tumor recurrence, tumors with more than 5% percentage of lepidic
growth pattern will have a better prognosis than absence, in early-stage lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4014225
PMID: 24817941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Pril (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki). 2014;35(1):199-207.

Antigenic phenotype of lung carcinomas: usual spectrum of distribution of thyroid
transcription factor-1, cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, and neuron specific
enolase--basic immunohistochemical study of 21 cases.

Kostovski M(1), Petrushevska G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, R. Macedonia.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, R.
Macedonia.

Immunohistochemistry (IHC), as such, can be used in routine pathology in order to
make correct diagnosis of lung carcinomas. Consequently, more detailed analyses
are needed in this field in order to make a wide spectrum of unique combinations 
for such pulmonary neoplasms. Our aim was to apply an antibody panel, and examine
and confirm its utility in the differential diagnosis of lung cancer. Twenty-one 
cases (both bioptic and surgical material) of diagnosed lung cancer were
investigated. An immunohistochemical analysis--(RTU FLEX Immunoperoxidase system)
was made using Dako monoclonal antibodies (Cytokeratin 7, CK7; Cytokeratin 20,
CK20; Neuron specific enolase, NSE, Thyroid transcription factor-1, TTF1 and
Leucocyte common antigen, LCA). LCA expression was not expressed in any of our
cases. Most adenocarcinoma were CK7(+)--83.3% and TTF1(±)--50%. The CK20(+)
expression showed a metastatic pulmonary deposit of adenocarcinoma in the lung.
TTF1(+)--100%, NSE(+)--100% and CK7(-)--66.66% expression was found in most cases
of SCLC. NSE(+)--100% had the highest expression in carcionoid tumour, while
TTF1(+) expression was highest in SCLC. For squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC),
immunostaining was negative for this antibody panel, except focal and weak
expression of NSE--60%, so we did some extra IHC using CKHMW antibody, which
showed the highest expression. The essential antibody panel that we have
confirmed and suggest for routine basic differential diagnosis of pulmonary
neoplasms is: TTF1, CK7, CK20 and NSE. Due to the high number of co-occurrunces
IHC should not be performed alone, but integrated in conjunction with
morphological diagnosis.

PMID: 24798606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Anticancer Res. 2014 May;34(5):2467-75.

Influence of thyroid transcription factor-1 on fluorodeoxyglucose uptake and
prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer.

Ooi H(1), Chen CY, Hsiao YC, Huang WS, Hsieh BT.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Research & Nuclear Medicine, Changhua Christian
Hospital, 135, Nan-Hsiao Street, Changhua 500-06 Taiwan, R.O.C. Tel: +886
47238595 ext. 3090, wshuang01@gmail.com.

AIM: To assess the correlation between thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1)
protein expression in primary tumors from patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, and to determine its effect
on survival outcomes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We categorized 112 patients with NSCLC according to TTF1
expression (TTF1(+): n=59, TTF1(-): n=53), and retrospectively determined whether
positron-emission topography measurements, including standardized uptake values
[mean (SUVm) and maximum (SUVmax)], metabolic tumor volume (MTV), total lesion
glycolysis (TLG), and other clinical factors could predict progression-free (PFS)
or overall (OS) survival of these patients.
RESULTS: The SUVm, SUVmax, MTV, and TLG values were lower in the TTF1(+) group;
their survival outcomes were also better. The SUVm, SUVmax, and TLG values were
good prognostic indicators for OS and PFS in this group.
CONCLUSION: Primary NSCLC tumors expressing TTF1 had lower FDG uptake than those 
that did not and this was a good prognostic indicator.

PMID: 24778062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Histopathology. 2015 Jan;66(2):182-91. doi: 10.1111/his.12447. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

'Neuroendocrine' middle ear adenomas: consistent expression of the transcription 
factor ISL1 further supports their neuroendocrine derivation.

Agaimy A(1), Lell M, Schaller T, Märkl B, Hornung J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany.

AIMS: Neuroendocrine middle ear adenoma (MEA) is a rare epithelial neoplasm of
uncertain histogenesis that frequently shows neuroendocrine features. To date,
<120 cases have been reported. The aims of the current study were to describe our
experience with neuroendocrine MEA, to assess the frequency of specific
neuroendocrine differentiation, and to test these lesions for transcription
factors known to be expressed in a variety of other neuroendocrine tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated six cases of neuroendocrine MEA, and stained
them, for the first time, for the transcription factors CDX2, TTF1, PAX8, and
ISL1 (islet-1). The patients were four men and two women (mean age, 39 years;
range, 27-53 years). Two of four patients with extended follow-up (4.5-22 years) 
experienced recurrence at 92 months, and at 9 and 22 years, respectively. One
case extending into the external ear coexisted with cholesteatoma. Histological
examination showed trabecular, solid, acinar, glandular, cribriform, organoid,
nested, diffuse non-cohesive plasmacytoid and pseudoalveolar patterns in varying 
combinations. Immunohistochemistry showed consistent expression of vimentin
(4/4), pancytokeratin (6/6), synaptophysin (6/6), CD56 (4/4), and ISL1 (6/6). A
CK7 antibody stained scattered cells in two of five cases. The myoepithelial
markers and transcription factors TTF1, CDX2 or PAX8 were not expressed in any of
the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Middle ear adenoma is an indolent, locally recurring, but generally 
non-metastasizing neoplasm with uniform expression of synaptophysin and ISL1,
indicating true neuroendocrine differentiation. Because of its highly varied
cellular and architectural appearance, MEA should be distinguished from tympanic 
paraganglioma and a variety of rare benign and malignant lesions at this site.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24766278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):926-34. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.01.005. Epub 2014 
Jan 25.

The utility of a novel triple marker (combination of TTF1, napsin A, and p40) in 
the subclassification of non-small cell lung cancer.

Ao MH(1), Zhang H(1), Sakowski L(1), Sharma R(1), Illei PB(1), Gabrielson E(1),
Askin F(1), Li QK(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pathology The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Johns
Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore MD 21224, USA. (2)The Department of
Pathology The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical
Center, Baltimore MD 21224, USA. Electronic address: qli23@jhmi.edu.

In lung cancer, targeted therapies depend on accurate histological
subclassification of the tumor. The majority of lung cancers can be subclassified
based on hematoxylin and eosin staining; however, classification may be difficult
in small biopsies. In this study, we investigated the utility of a newly
developed triple marker (combination of TTF1/Napsin A/p40) and compared the
sensitivity and specificity of this novel marker with individual markers in the
subclassification of non-small cell lung carcinomas. Lung cancer tissue
microarrays were constructed using surgical resection material from the Johns
Hopkins Hospital. They included 77 adenocarcinomas (ADCs), 77 squamous cell
carcinomas (SqCCs), and 46 cases of metastatic lung ADCs. Immunostaining patterns
of all markers were scored semi-quantitatively and compared. In ADCs, the
sensitivity and specificity of the triple marker were 93.5% and 77.5%,
respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of TTF1 and Napsin A were 85.7% and
75.0%, and 89.6% and 90.0%. In SqCCs, the sensitivity and specificity of the
triple marker were 88.3% and 92.5%, while the p40, p63 and CK5/6 showed 80.5% and
90.0%; 93.5% and 80.0%; and 89.6% and 80.0%. In addition, the sensitivity and
specificity of the triple marker in metastatic ADCs showed 71.7% and 73.5%,
respectively. Our triple marker (combination of TTF1/Napsin A/p40) showed a
similar sensitivity and specificity for the subclassification of NSCLC when
compared to individual markers. Our study not only demonstrates a useful
combination of immunomarkers but also optimally conserves tissue for molecular
marker testing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178947
PMID: 24746197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 17;9(4):e95479. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095479. eCollection
2014.

The relationship between TTF-1 expression and EGFR mutations in lung
adenocarcinomas.

Shanzhi W(1), Yiping H(1), Ling H(2), Jianming Z(2), Qiang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Respiratory Department, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, SMMU, Shanghai, China.
(2)The pathology department, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, SMMU, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between TTF-1 and EGFR mutations in lung
adenocarcinoma tissues to guide clinical treatment timely and effectively.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: we collected 664 tissue samples from patients with
histologically confirmed lung adenocarcinoma from May 2010 to April 2013. All
tumor tissues were collected prior to administering therapy. TTF-1 was detected
by immunohistochemistry and EGFR mutations by DNA direct sequencing. Finally, the
correlation between TTF-1 expression and the presence of EGFR mutations was
analyzed using <U+03C7>2 test or Fisher's exact test with SPSS software version 18.0.
RESULTS: Of the 664 lung adenocarcinoma tissue samples, 18 were partially
positive for TTF-1 (+-), and 636 were positive for TTF-1 (+) resulting in a total
positive rate of 98.49% (+,+-)(including partial positive). In only 10 cases was 
the TTF-1 negative (-); the negative rate was 1.51%. There were 402 cases without
an EGFR mutation and 262 cases with EGFR mutations; the rate of mutations was
39.46%. The location of the EGFR mutation was exon 19 for 121 cases resulting in 
a mutation rate in exon 19 of 18.22%. The location of the EGFR mutation was exon 
21 for 141 cases resulting in a mutation rate in exon 21 of 21.23%. Exon 18 and
20 detected by DNA direct sequencing no mutations.A Fisher's exact test was used 
to determine the correlation between EGFR mutations and TTF-1 expression.for the 
whole, TTF-1 positive expression(including partial positive) has correlation with
EGFR mutations (p<0.001),especially for Exon 21 expression,the correlation is
significant (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008).
CONCLUSION: In lung adenocarcinomas, positive and partial positive TTF-1
expression has a significant positive correlation with EGFR mutations(exon 19 and
21). In clinical practice, TTF-1 expression combine with EGFR mutations,
especially exon 21 mutation can guide clinical treatment timely for lung
adenocarcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3990660
PMID: 24743427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;43(2):130-1.

[Hyalinizing trabecular carcinoma of thyroid: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Li X, Fu Y, Li B.

PMID: 24742580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Lung Cancer. 2014 Jun;84(3):281-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.03.013. Epub 2014 
Mar 27.

Non-terminal respiratory unit type lung adenocarcinoma has three distinct
subtypes and is associated with poor prognosis.

Sumiyoshi S(1), Yoshizawa A(2), Sonobe M(3), Kobayashi M(3), Sato M(4), Fujimoto 
M(1), Tsuruyama T(1), Date H(3), Haga H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan;
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.
Electronic address: akyoshi@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: The characteristics of non-terminal respiratory unit (TRU) type lung 
adenocarcinoma are still unclear. The aim of the present study was to
characterize non-TRU type lung adenocarcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed the expression of mucins MUC5B and MUC5AC, as 
well as thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), using a tissue microarray
comprising lung adenocarcinoma specimens from 244 consecutive patients. The
presence of mutations in EGFR and KRAS were also determined.
RESULTS: TTF-1, MUC5B, and MUC5AC were detected in 219 (89.8%), 75 (30.7%), and
33 cases (13.5%), respectively. Cluster analysis of protein expression profiles
and EGFR and KRAS mutations yielded five groups of tumors as follows: TRU1-type
[TTF-1(+), MUC5B(-), MUC5AC(-), EGFR mutations(-)]; TRU2-type [TTF-1(+),
MUC5B(-), MUC5AC(-), EGFR mutations(+)]; Combined-type [TTF-1(+), MUC5B(+),
and/or MUC5AC(+)]; Bronchiolar-type [TTF-1(-), MUC5B(+) and/or MUC5AC(+)]; and
Null-type [TTF-1(-), MUC5B(-), MUC5AC(-), EGFR mutations(-), KRAS mutations(-)]. 
TRU-type tumors, which include TRU1- and TRU2-type tumors, were significantly
associated with TRU morphology, whereas Bronchiolar-type tumors were associated
with non-TRU morphology. Combined-type cases exhibited intermediate morphologies 
between TRU-type and Bronchiolar-type cases. TRU-type was associated with
significantly better prognosis, followed by Combined-type, Bronchiolar-type, and 
Null-type (disease-free survival [DFS] P = 0.017; overall survival [OS], P =
0.002). Multivariate analyses indicated that non-TRU type tumors, which include
Bronchiolar-, Combined-, Null-type tumors, were significantly correlated with
poorer prognoses for DFS (hazard ratio = 1.785; 95% CI, 1.041-3.063; P = 0.035)
and OS (hazard ratio = 1.928; 95% CI, 1.084-3.421; P = 0.025).
CONCLUSION: This study revealed three distinct subtypes of non-TRU type
adenocarcinomas. Additionally, non-TRU type tumors were associated with worse
prognoses than TRU type tumors. The results presented here may be useful for
select patients should appropriate therapies become available.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24725383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jan;43(1):45-6.

[Report of epidermal growth factor receptor mutation in a patient with combined
small cell lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H, Tian Z, Zou Y, Han L, Duan X.

PMID: 24713252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;99(7):E1368-75. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1171. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

mTOR Inhibition promotes TTF1-dependent redifferentiation and restores iodine
uptake in thyroid carcinoma cell lines.

Plantinga TS(1), Heinhuis B, Gerrits D, Netea MG, Joosten LA, Hermus AR, Oyen WJ,
Schweppe RE, Haugen BR, Boerman OC, Smit JW, Netea-Maier RT.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine (T.S.P., B.H., M.G.N., L.A.B.J., A.R.M.M.H., 
J.W.A.S., R.T.N.-M.) and Nuclear Medicine (D.G., W.J.G.O., O.C.B.) and Division
of Endocrinology (T.S.P., A.R.M.M.H., J.W.A.S., R.T.N.-M.), Radboud University
Medical Center, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; and Division of Endocrinology,
Diabetes, and Metabolism (R.E.S., B.R.H.), University of Colorado Denver, Aurora,
Colorado 80045.

CONCEPT: Redifferentiation of thyroid carcinoma cells has the potential to
increase the efficacy of radioactive iodine therapy in treatment-refractory,
nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma (TC), leading to an improved disease outcome.
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a key regulator of cell fate affecting
survival and differentiation, with autophagy and inflammation as prominent
downstream pathways.
METHODS: The effects of mTOR inhibition were studied for its redifferentiation
potential of the human TC cell lines BC-PAP, FTC133, and TPC1 by assessment of
mRNA and protein expression of thyroid-specific genes and by performance of
iodine uptake assays.
RESULTS: In thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1)-expressing cell lines, mTOR
inhibition promoted redifferentiation of TC cells by the up-regulation of human
sodium-iodine symporter mRNA and protein expression. Furthermore, these cells
exhibited markedly elevated iodine uptake capacity. Surprisingly, this
redifferentiation process was not mediated by autophagy induced during mTOR
inhibition or by inflammatory mediators but through transcriptional effects at
the level of TTF1 expression. Accordingly, small interfering RNA inhibition of
TTF1 completely abrogated the induction of human sodium-iodine symporter by mTOR 
inhibition.
CONCLUSION: The present study has identified the TTF1-dependent molecular
mechanisms through which the inhibition of mTOR leads to the redifferentiation of
TC cells and subsequently to increased radioactive iodine uptake.

PMID: 24712572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2015;36(2):111-8. doi: 10.1080/15321819.2014.899258.

Evaluation of the microvessel density and the expression of metalloproteases 2
and 9 and ttf1 in the different subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma in Tunisia: a
retrospective study of 46 cases.

Mlika M(1), Makhlouf C, Boudaya MS, Haddouchi C, Tritar F, Mezni F.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology , Abderrahman Mami Hospital , Tunis , Tunisia.

Despite the new available histologic classification of lung cancers, it remains
difficult to assess the real prognostic relevance of the different subtypes of
lung adenocarcinomas. Facing the prognostic relevance of microvessel density
(MVD) and the expression of metalloproteases and thyroid tyrosine factor 1 (TTF1)
in different cancers, we tried to compare these parameters in the different
subtypes of lung adenocarcinomas. We conducted a retrospective study of 46
adenocarcinomas surgically resected. An immunohistochemical study using the
cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), TTF1, metalloproteases 2 (MMP2), and
metalloproteases 9 (MMP9) antibodies was performed on all samples while MVD was
evaluated using CD34 antibody. The analyzed cases included 19 acinar, 7
papillary, 1 lepidic, and 19 solid predominant American Thoracic Classification
of lung adenocarcinomas (ASK). The higher MVD levels were observed in papillary
and acinar subtypes types and a statically significant difference in the MVD was 
observed in the different subtypes (p< 0,001). This study didn't show significant
statistical results concerning MMP and TTF1 expression but it revealed a tendency
to an equal expression of these antibodies in the different subtypes. The
difference in the MVD between the different subtypes of adenocarcinoma puts
emphasis on their prognostic relevance.

PMID: 24689794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2014 Mar;17(3):243-53. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2014.03.11.

[Clinicopathological and prognostic significance of a panel of tumor biomarkers
in lung adenocarcinoma: a tissue microarray study].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yang X(1), Xue L(1), Guo L(1), Wen P(1), Lin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute (Hospital), Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma is one of the most common histological subtypes
of lung cancer. The incidence of this disease was continuously increased. This
study aims to detect the expressions of Napsin A, TTF-1, ERCC1, RRM1, EGFR, HER2,
ERa, ERß, PR, and Bcl-2 in lung adenocarcinoma and to explore their correlations 
with clinicopathological characteristics and prognosis.
METHODS: A total of 227 lung adenocarcinoma specimens were constructed in tissue 
microarrays. The expressions of the 10 tumor biomarkers were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded sections.
RESULTS: Among the 10 markers, Napsin A was gender-related (P=0.049). Napsin A,
PR, and EGFR were significantly associated with smoking. TTF-1 and ERCC1 were
closely associated with tumor size. Napsin A, TTF-1, ERa, and PR were remarkably 
associated with tumor differentiation. TTF-1, Bcl-2, and ERCC1 were closely
associated with tumor stage (P<0.05). No marker was related to age. No
correlations were observed between ERß, HER2, and RRM1 expressions and
clinicopathological parameters (P>0.05). Univariate analysis results showed that 
Napsin A, TTF-1, and ERCC1 were significantly associated with overall survival.
TTF-1 was remarkably associated with disease-free survival (P<0.05). Stage I
cases were further analyzed and revealed that only Napsin A expression was
associated with overall survival (P<0.05). No marker was correlated with
disease-free survival (P>0.05). Multivariate analysis results showed that
pathological staging was significantly associated with overall survival and
disease-free survival (P<0.05). No marker was identified as a predictor of
patient outcome (P>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Napsin A, TTF-1, and ERCC1 are the markers indicating good prognosis
of lung adenocarcinoma.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 24667263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Histopathology. 2014 Sep;65(3):434-5. doi: 10.1111/his.12411. Epub 2014 Apr 11.

Mediastinal adenofibroma: a case report.

Durra H(1), Khurana J, Flieder DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

PMID: 24612279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Genet Res (Camb). 2014;96:e002. doi: 10.1017/S0016672314000032. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Spectrum of somatic EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PTEN mutations and TTF-1 expression in
Brazilian lung cancer patients.

Carneiro JG(1), Couto PG(2), Bastos-Rodrigues L(2), Bicalho MA(3), Vidigal PV(4),
Vilhena A(5), Amaral NF(5), Bale AE(6), Friedman E(7), De Marco L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Centro de Ensino Superior e Desenvolvimento,
Campina Grande, 58411-020, Brasil. (2)Department of Surgery, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte 30130-100, Brasil. (3)Department of Medicine,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte 30130-100, Brasil.
(4)Department of Pathology, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte 
30130-100, Brasil. (5)Hospital Julia Kubitscheck, Belo Horizonte, 30620-470,
Brasil. (6)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520-8005, USA. (7)The Susanne Levy Gertner Oncogenetics Unit, Chaim Sheba
Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, 52621, Israel.

Lung cancer is the leading global cause of cancer-related mortality.
Inter-individual variability in treatment response and prognosis has been
associated with genetic polymorphisms in specific genes: EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PTEN
and TTF-1. Somatic mutations in EGFR and KRAS genes are reported at rates of
15-40% in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in ethnically diverse populations.
BRAF and PTEN are commonly mutated genes in various cancer types, including
NSCLC, with PTEN mutations exerting an effect on the therapeutic response of
EGFR/AKT/PI3K pathway inhibitors. TTF-1 is expressed in approximately 80% of lung
adenocarcinomas and its positivity correlates with higher prevalence of EGFR
mutation in this cancer type. To determine molecular markers for lung cancer in
Brazilian patients, the rate of the predominant EGFR, KRAS, BRAF and PTEN
mutations, as well as TTF-1 expression, was assessed in 88 Brazilian NSCLC
patients. EGFR exon 19 deletions (del746-750) were detected in 3/88 (3·4%)
patients. Activating KRAS mutations in codons 12 and 61 were noted in five (5·7%)
and two (2·3%) patients, respectively. None of the common somatic mutations were 
detected in either the BRAF or PTEN genes. TTF-1 was overexpressed in 40·7% of
squamous-cell carcinoma (SCC). Our findings add to a growing body of data that
highlights the genetic heterogeneity of the abnormal EGFR pathway in lung cancer 
among ethnically diverse populations.

PMID: 24594201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Histopathology. 2014 Oct;65(4):501-7. doi: 10.1111/his.12408. Epub 2014 May 12.

Laryngotracheal presentation of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma with squamous
differentiation: seven cases demonstrating an under-recognized diagnostic
pitfall.

Toner M(1), Banville N, Timon CI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, St James Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; Department
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Medicine and Pathology, Dublin Dental
University Hospital, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.

AIMS: To describe a series of anaplastic thyroid carcinomas that mimicked primary
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) by virtue of both morphology and
clinical presentation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Seven cases were identified in a 15-year period where a
biopsy of an airway lesion that appeared to be squamous cell carcinoma was, in
fact, anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. The tumours had squamous and/or spindle cell 
morphology, with only the squamous component being apparent in the airway biopsy.
Some tumours arose within metaplastic (n = 3) or atypical (n = 3) epithelium,
supporting the diagnosis of a primary mucosal tumour. Positive PAX8 (n = 5) and
TTF-1 (n = 4) staining was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: An endotracheal presentation of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma with
squamous morphology may be misdiagnosed as a primary head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma. PAX8 and TTF-1 expression are helpful in making the distinction, but
the problem lies in suspecting a thyroid carcinoma in what appears to be a
straightforward diagnosis of HNSCC.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24593037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell J. 2014 Feb 3;16(1):79-90. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Role of Somatic Testicular Cells during Mouse Spermatogenesis in
Three-Dimensional Collagen Gel Culture System.

Khajavi N(1), Akbari M(1), Abdolsamadi HR(2), Abolhassani F(1), Dehpour AR(3),
Koruji M(4), Habibi Roudkenar M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Oral Medicine, Faculty of
Dentistry, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (3)Department
of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Research Center, Iranian Blood
Transfusion Organization, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are the only cell type that can
restore fertility to an infertile recipient following transplantation. Much
effort has been made to develop a protocol for differentiating isolated SSCs in
vitro. Recently, three-dimensional (3D) culture system has been introduced as an 
appropriate microenvironment for clonal expansion and differentiation of SSCs.
This system provides structural support and multiple options for several
manipulation such as addition of different cells. Somatic cells have a critical
role in stimulating spermatogenesis. They provide complex cell to cell
interaction, transport proteins and produce enzymes and regulatory factors. This 
study aimed to optimize the culture condition by adding somatic testicular cells 
to the collagen gel culture system in order to induce spermatogenesis
progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, the disassociation of SSCs was
performed by using a two-step enzymatic digestion of type I collagenase,
hyaluronidase and DNase. Somatic testicular cells including Sertoli cells and
peritubular cells were obtained after the second digestion. SSCs were isolated by
Magnetic Activated Cell Sorting (MACS) using GDNF family receptor alpha-1
(Gfra-1) antibody. Two experimental designs were investigated. 1. Gfra-1 positive
SSCs were cultured in a collagen solution. 2. Somatic testicular cells were added
to the Gfra-1 positive SSCs in a collagen solution. Spermatogenesis progression
was determined after three weeks by staining of synaptonemal complex protein 3
(SCP3)-positive cells. Semi-quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR was undertaken
for SCP3 as a meiotic marker and, Crem and Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) 
as post meiotic markers. For statistical analysis student t test was performed.
RESULTS: Testicular supporter cells increased the expression of meiotic and post 
meiotic markers and had a positive effect on extensive colony formation.
CONCLUSION: Collagen gel culture system supported by somatic testicular cells
provides a microenvironment that mimics seminiferous epithelium and induces
spermatogenesis in vitro.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Royan Institute (ACECR). The full text is avalible
in: www.celljournal.org.

PMCID: PMC3933442
PMID: 24518977  [PubMed]


108. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 29;34(5):578-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.592. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Opposing role of Notch1 and Notch2 in a Kras(G12D)-driven murine non-small cell
lung cancer model.

Baumgart A(1), Mazur PK(2), Anton M(3), Rudelius M(4), Schwamborn K(4),
Feuchtinger A(5), Behnke K(1), Walch A(5), Braren R(6), Peschel C(1), Duyster
J(7), Siveke JT(8), Dechow T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany. (2)Departments of Genetics and Pediatrics, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA. (3)Department of Experimental Oncology, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Pathology, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. (5)Research Unit Analytical Pathology, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg,
Germany. (6)Institute for Diagnostic Imaging, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. (7)Department of Internal Medicine I, Universitätsklinikum
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (8)Department of Internal Medicine II, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany. (9)1] Department of Internal Medicine III, 
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany [2] Onkologie Ravensburg,
Ravensburg, Germany.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Recently, we
have shown that Notch1 inhibition resulted in substantial cell death of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells in vitro. New compounds targeting Notch signal
transduction have been developed and are now being tested in clinical trials.
However, the tumorigenic role of individual Notch receptors in vivo remains
largely unclear. Using a Kras(G12D)-driven endogenous NSCLC mouse model, we
analyzed the effect of conditional Notch1 and Notch2 receptor deletion on NSCLC
tumorigenesis. Notch1 deficiency led to a reduced early tumor formation and lower
activity of MAPK compared with the controls. Unexpectedly, Notch2 deletion
resulted in a dramatically increased carcinogenesis and increased MAPK activity. 
These mice died significantly earlier due to rapidly growing tumor burden. We
found that Notch1 regulates Ras/MAPK pathway via HES1-induced repression of the
DUSP1 promoter encoding a phosphatase specifically suppressing pERK1/2.
Interestingly, Notch1 but not Notch2 ablation leads to decreased HES1 and DUSP1
expression. However, Notch2-depleted tumors showed an appreciable increase in
ß-catenin expression, a known activator of HES1 and important lung cancer
oncogene. Characteristically for ß-catenin upregulation, we found that the
majority of Notch2-deficient tumors revealed an undifferentiated phenotype as
determined by their morphology, E-Cadherin and TTF1 expression levels. In
addition, these carcinomas showed aggressive growth patterns with bronchus
invasion and obstruction. Together, we show that Notch2 mediates differentiation 
and has tumor suppressor functions during lung carcinogenesis, whereas Notch1
promotes tumor initiation and progression. These data are further supported by
immunohistochemical analysis of human NSCLC samples showing loss or
downregulation of Notch2 compared with normal lung tissue. In conclusion, this is
the first study characterizing the in vivo functions of Notch1 and Notch2 in
Kras(G12D)-driven NSCLC tumorigenesis. These data highlight the clinical
importance of a thorough understanding of Notch signaling especially with regard 
to Notch-targeted therapies.

PMID: 24509876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Lung Cancer. 2014 Mar;83(3):416-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.01.005. Epub 2014 
Jan 17.

Epithelial-myoepthelial carcinoma of the tracheobronchial tree: the prognostic
role of myoepithelial cells.

Song DH(1), Choi IH(1), Ha SY(1), Han KM(1), Han J(2), Kim TS(3), Kim J(4), Kim
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
Electronic address: hanjho@skku.edu. (3)Radiology, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (4)Thoracic
Surgery and Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea. (5)Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Epithelial myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC) of the lung is a very rare
tumor that is characterized by biphasic differentiation of epithelial and
myoepithelial cells. Current discussion about this entity focuses on the
malignant potential of the tumor and the role of myoepithelial cells in diagnosis
and patient prognosis. This study reports five EMC cases in the lung and
discusses issues related to EMC prognosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The five EMC cases were diagnosed and collected at the
Samsung Medical Center (Seoul, Korea) from 1998 to 2012. Four patients with EMC
were received a lobectomy and one patient was given a bronchoscopy to excise the 
tumor. All cases were evaluated with hematoxylin and eosin and
immunohistochemical staining, which included S-100 protein, smooth muscle actin, 
TTF-1, cytokeratin, vimentin, and p27 analysis.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: All cases revealed biphasic differentiation of epithelial
and myoepithelial tumor cells with various stromal patterns. One of the cases
contained predominantly myoepithelial and focal epithelial differentiation, and
the tumor showed recurrence and metastasized to the chest wall. This was the
first case of metastatic pulmonary EMC. Therefore, we suggest that EMC of the
lung has a malignant potential, and that myoepithelial tumor cells may be
associated with a pulmonary EMC prognosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24485468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):195-206. doi: 10.1111/his.12383. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Napsin A is a useful marker for metastatic adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin.

Kim MY(1), Go H, Koh J, Lee K, Min HS, Kim MA, Jeon YK, Lee HS, Moon KC, Park SY,
Kim WH, Chung DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.

AIMS: To address whether napsin A is useful for identifying metastatic
adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty-four cases of adenocarcinoma that metastasized from
the lungs to various sites and 1762 cases of carcinoma from various organs were
immunostained for napsin A, TTF-1, CK7, CK20 and CDX2 using tissue microarray.
The expression patterns of napsin A and TTF-1 in metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas were compared with matched primary lung tumours. Napsin A and
TTF-1 were expressed in 87.0% and 81.5% of the metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, respectively. Although there was no significant difference in
the positivity of napsin A and TTF-1 as a single marker in metastatic pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, the expression scores for napsin A were much higher than those
for TTF-1 (P < 0.001). Moreover, the positivity and expression scores of napsin A
in primary pulmonary adenocarcinomas were maintained in metastatic
adenocarcinomas better than TTF-1. Most non-pulmonary adenocarcinomas were
negative for napsin A, except for renal cell carcinomas (13.4%), ovarian
adenocarcinomas (7.1%) and uterine endometrial adenocarcinomas (14.5%). In
particular, clear cell adenocarcinomas of ovary (68.8%) and uterus (66.7%)
frequently expressed napsin A.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that napsin A may be a useful marker for
identifying metastatic adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin in combination with
TTF-1.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24479710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Pathol Int. 2014 Jan;64(1):28-33. doi: 10.1111/pin.12127.

Combined high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma of the lung: clinicopathological and
immunohistochemical study of 34 surgically resected cases.

Yamada K(1), Maeshima AM, Tsuta K, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

To understand the pathogenesis of high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma (HGNEC), we
examined the histopathology and immunoreactivity against adenocarcinoma (AD),
squamous cell carcinoma (SQ), and neuroendocrine markers in 34 cases with
combined HGNEC. The 5 year overall survival rates of patients with combined small
cell carcinoma (SCC) (n = 9) and combined large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
(LCNEC) (n = 25) were 33% and 75%, respectively (P = 0.011). Most of the patients
were male (94%), smokers (94%), and had tumors located in the peripheral (94%)
and upper lobe (65%) of the lung. Histopathologically, non-HGNEC components were 
predominantly ADs (65%) followed by SQs (26%). In combined HGNEC and AD, a
lepidic AD component was found in 12 cases (48%). For the HGNEC components of
combined HGNEC and AD, the incidence of positivity of thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1) (8G7G3/1) and TTF1 (SPT24) were 64% and 91%, respectively. For
HGNEC components of combined HGNEC and SQ, the incidence of positivity of 34ßE12 
and p63 were 22% and 11%, respectively. In conclusion, 48% of combined HGNEC and 
AD cases had a lepidic AD component, suggesting that HGNEC can develop in
association with pre-existing AD. AD markers, but not SQ markers, were frequently
retained through development of the HGNEC component.

© 2014 The Authors. Pathology International © 2014 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24471967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Oct;8(10):1255-64. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182a406a3.

Associations between TS, TTF-1, FR-a, FPGS, and overall survival in patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer receiving pemetrexed plus carboplatin or
gemcitabine plus carboplatin as first-line chemotherapy.

Grønberg BH(1), Lund-Iversen M, Strøm EH, Brustugun OT, Scott H.

Author information: 
(1)*The Cancer Clinic, St. Olavs Hospital-Trondheim University Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway; †European Palliative Care Research Centre, Department of
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim, Norway; Departments of ‡Pathology, <U+2016>Oncology, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway; and §Institute of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Pemetrexed is effective in the treatment of non-small-cell lung
cancer, mainly in nonsquamous cell carcinomas. Inhibition of thymidylate synthase
(TS) is considered the key mechanism of action. Folate receptor-a facilitates
uptake of pemetrexed. Polyglutamation by folylpolyglutamate synthetase enhances
activity and prolongs cellular retention of pemetrexed. Thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1) is mainly positive in nonsquamous cell carcinoma and has been
proposed as a marker for sensitivity to pemetrexed. The aim was to investigate
associations between these biomarkers and survival in patients who participated
in a phase III trial comparing pemetrexed plus carboplatin with gemcitabine plus 
carboplatin as first-line chemotherapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (n 
= 436). In this study, there was no difference in overall survival between the
two regimens.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded biopsies were collected. Percentages
of tumor cells positive and highly positive for the biomarkers were assessed
using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and an IHC score was calculated (range, 0-200).
RESULTS: Two hundred thirty-six biopsies were analyzed (pemetrexed plus
carboplatin: n = 114, gemcitabine plus carboplatin: n = 122). There was a
significant difference in overall survival between those with TTF-1-positive and 
-negative tumors (10.4 versus 6.0 months; p < 0.001) and those with a low and a
high TS IHC score (9.7 versus 6.2 months; p < 0.001). Folate receptor-a and
folylpolyglutamate synthetase were not significant prognostic factors. In
multivariate analyses adjusting for established prognostic characteristics, TS (p
= 0.002) and TTF-1 (p = 0.003) remained significant. There were no differences in
survival between the treatment arms depending on biomarker scores.
CONCLUSIONS: TTF-1 positivity and low TS level were associated with prolonged
survival. The associations between the biomarkers and overall survival were
similar for both chemotherapy regimens.

PMID: 24457236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2014 Apr;18(2):82-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2013.12.003.
Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Distinctive renal cell tumor simulating atrophic kidney with 2 types of
microcalcifications. Report of 3 cases.

Hes O(1), de Souza TG(2), Pivovarcikova K(3), Grossmann P(3), Martinek P(3),
Kuroda N(4), Kacerovska D(3), Svajdler M(5), Straka L(6), Petersson F(7), Hora
M(8), Michal M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles University in
Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic; Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, 
Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (2)Department of Pathology,
Hospital Aliança, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. (3)Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine in Plzen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Pathology, Red Cross Hospital Kochi, Kochi, Japan. (5)Department
of Pathology, Pasteur University Hospital Kosice, Kosice, Slovak Republic.
(6)Klinicka Patologia Presov, Presov, Slovak Republic. (7)Department of
Pathology, National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore. (8)Biomedical
Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech
Republic; Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles University
in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (9)Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine in Plzen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: michal@medima.cz.

We report 3 cases of primary renal cell tumor simulating atrophic kidney with
distinct gross, morphologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular genetic features.
The tumors were retrieved out of more than 17 000 renal tumors from the Plzen
Tumor Registry. Tissues for light microscopy had been fixed, embedded, and
stained with hematoxylin and eosin using routine procedures. The tumors were
further analyzed using immunohistochemistry, array comparative genomic
hybridization, and human androgen receptor. Analyses of VHL gene and loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) 3p were also performed. The patients were 2 women and 1 man,
with ages ranging from 29 to 35 years (mean, 31.3 years). Grossly, the neoplasms 
were encapsulated and round with largest diameter of 3.5 cm (mean, 3.2 cm).
Follow-up available for all patients ranged from 2 to 14 years (mean, 8 years).
No aggressive behavior was noted. Histologically, akin to atrophic
(postpyelonephritic) kidney parenchyma, the tumors were composed of follicles of 
varying sizes that were filled by eosinophilic secretion. Rare areas contained
collapsed follicles. Each follicle was endowed with a small capillary. The stroma
was loose, inconspicuous, and focally fibrotic. Two types of calcifications were 
noted: typical psammoma bodies and amorphous dark-blue stained calcified
deposits. Immunohistochemically, tumors were strongly positive for cytokeratins
(OSCAR), CD10, and vimentin, with weak immunopositivity for CAM5.2 and AE1-AE3.
WT1 and cathepsin K were weakly to moderately focally to diffusely positive.
Tumors were negative for cytokeratin 20, carbonic anhydrase IX, parvalbumin,
HMB45, TTF1, TFE3, chromogranin A, thyroglobulin, PAX8, and ALK. Only 1 case was 
suitable for molecular genetic analyses. No mutations were found in the VHL gene;
no methylation of VHL promoter was noted. No numerical aberrations were found by 
array comparative genomic hybridization analysis. LOH for chromosome 3p was not
detected. Analysis of clonality (human androgen receptor) revealed the monoclonal
nature of the tumor. We describe an unknown tumor of the kidney that (1)
resembles renal atrophic kidney or nodular goiter of thyroidal gland; (2)
contains a leiomyomatous capsule and 2 types of calcifications; (3) lacks
mitoses, atypias, necroses, and hemorrhages and nearly lack Ki-67 positivity; and
(4) so far showed benign biological behavior.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24456861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Histopathology. 2014 Aug;65(2):187-94. doi: 10.1111/his.12379. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

ROS1 expression and translocations in non-small-cell lung cancer:
clinicopathological analysis of 1478 cases.

Warth A(1), Muley T, Dienemann H, Goeppert B, Stenzinger A, Schnabel PA,
Schirmacher P, Penzel R, Weichert W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

AIMS: Molecular characterization of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has
revealed multiple druggable mutations for targeted therapies. Recently,
chromosomal rearrangements involving c-ros oncogene 1, receptor tyrosine kinase
(ROS1) were identified, and patients seem to benefit from crizotinib treatment.
The aim of this study was to identify the clinicopathological characteristics of 
NSCLC with ROS1 expression and translocation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened 1478 NSCLCs with a ROS1-specific antibody, and
tested positive cases with FISH. All positive cases were analysed for associated 
clinicopathological characteristics, including survival and molecular tumour
composition. Sixty-eight cases (4.6%) showed ROS1 immunoreactivity, and ROS1
translocations were confirmed in nine cases (0.6%). ROS1 expression was
predominantly found in female adenocarcinoma patients, in patients with low T
stages, and in association with TTF1 and napsin expression, and certain
histomorphological adenocarcinoma patterns (lepidic, acinar, and solid). ROS1
translocations occurred in conjunction with other driver mutations (EGFR, KRAS,
and BRAF). ROS1 expression was found to be a stage-independent predictor of
favourable survival.
CONCLUSIONS: ROS1 translocations are rare events in resected NSCLCs from
Caucasian patients. Immunohistochemical screening for ROS1 expression and
clinicopathological parameters, including female sex, early tumour stages,
adenocarcinomas with TTF1 and/or napsin expression, and a distinct
histomorphological growth pattern, strongly facilitate case enrichment.
Molecularly driven multistep concepts might not be optimal for case selection.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24456475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2013 Oct-Dec;56(4):411-2. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.125355.

Perianal bronchogenic cyst: a report of two cases.

Liu L, Zhang Y, Zhang Z(1), Si L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China.

Cutaneous presentations of bronchogenic cysts are rare in all age groups,
particularly in adults. Previous reports showed that cutaneous manifestations of 
bronchogenic cysts were frequently presented above abdominal region. Here we
present two cases of a perianal bronchogenic cyst. To the best to our knowledge, 
this is the first report of a bronchogenic cyst in this area.

PMID: 24441234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S497-504. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3459-7.
Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Hesperetin activates the Notch1 signaling cascade, causes apoptosis, and induces 
cellular differentiation in anaplastic thyroid cancer.

Patel PN(1), Yu XM, Jaskula-Sztul R, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Surgery Research Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of 
Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is characterized by very aggressive
growth with undifferentiated features. Recently, it has been reported that the
Notch1 signaling pathway, which affects thyrocyte proliferation and
differentiation, is inactivated in ATC. However, it remains largely unknown
whether using Notch1 activating compounds can be an effective therapeutic
strategy in ATC. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to evaluate the drug effects 
of a potential Notch activator hesperetin on ATC cell.
METHODS: A unique ATC cell line HTh7 was used to evaluate the drug effects of
hesperetin. The Notch1 activating function and cell proliferation were evaluated.
The mechanism of growth regulation was investigated by the detection of apoptotic
markers. The expression levels of thyrocyte-specific genes were quantified for
ATC redifferentiation.
RESULTS: Upregulated expression of Notch1 and its downstream effectors hairy and 
enhancer of split 1 (Hes1) and Hes1 related with YRPW motif was observed in
hesperetin-treated ATC cells. The enhanced luciferase signal also confirmed the
functional activity of hesperetin-induced Notch1 signaling. Hesperetin led to a
time- and dose-dependent decrease in ATC cell proliferation. The cell-growth
inhibition was mainly caused by apoptosis as evidenced by increased levels of
cleaved poly ADP ribose polymerase and cleaved caspase-3 as well as decreased
survivin. Additionally, hesperetin induced the expression levels of
thyrocyte-specific genes including thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), TTF2,
paired box gene 8, thyroid stimulating hormone receptor, and sodium/iodide
symporter.
CONCLUSIONS: Hesperetin activates the Notch1 signaling cascade and suppresses ATC
cell proliferation mainly via apoptosis. Hesperetin also induces cell
redifferentiation of ATC, which could be useful clinically.

PMCID: PMC4097979
PMID: 24419754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2013;54(4):1169-71.

Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor and osteoporosis: incidental findings?

Poiana C(1), Carsote M, Neamtu MC, Avramescu ET, Vasilescu F, Terzea D, Paun D,
Trifanescu R, Danciulescu Miulescu R.

Author information: 
(1)"Constantin I. Parhon" National Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest,
Romania; carsote_m@hotmail.com.

The neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) have an increased incidence related to the age. 
Secondary osteoporosis might be found in patients with bone metastases and in
those with NETs associated Cushing's disease or primary hyperparathyroidism.
Primary osteoporosis might be found in postmenopausal women, but in case with
non-metastatic NET as G1 NET it is difficult to establish the NET contribution to
the bone loss. We present the case of a 53-year-old female accidentally diagnosed
with G1 lung NET after surgery of the tumor. The immunohistochemistry pointed
positive reaction for CHROMO, SYN and negative for CK7 and TTF1, and a Ki67 of
1-2% (well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor). The central Dual X-Ray
Absorptiometry (DXA) showed osteoporosis based on a T-score of -3. The patient
had normal neuroendocrine markers and she was asymptomatic. She remained so for
one year and the only therapy provided was weekly alendronate with adequate
vitamin D and calcium supplements. Based on the pathological and
immunohistochemistry profile, the low risk NET was diagnosed. We encourage the
skeletal status assessment as central DXA in postmenopausal women with NETs,
regardless clinical evidence of bone loss. The future will provide more
epidemiological and pathogenic connections between the two dynamic fields of
medicine as neuroendocrine tumors and osteoporosis.

PMID: 24399019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mod Pathol. 2014 Aug;27(8):1063-72. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.227. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

Cribriform adenocarcinoma of the lung: clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical,
and molecular analysis of 15 cases of a distinctive morphologic subtype of lung
adenocarcinoma.

Mackinnon AC Jr(1), Luevano A(1), de Araujo LC(1), Rao N(1), Le M(1), Suster
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Lung adenocarcinoma is characterized by marked heterogeneity and may be composed 
of an admixture of histologic growth patterns, including acinar, papillary,
solid, and lepidic (bronchioloalveolar). Tumors displaying a prominent or
predominant cribriform architecture are rare and most often confused for
metastases from other organs. We report the clinical, histologic,
immunohistochemical, and molecular features in 15 primary lung adenocarcinomas
with a predominant cribriform histology. All patients were adults between 30 and 
80 years of age (median: 64), and all but one reported a history of heavy
cigarette smoking. All cases showed a predominant (>70%) cribriform architecture 
that resembled a variety of tumors arising in other organs, including breast,
prostate, ovary, pancreas, uterus, colon, and thyroid. Immunohistochemical stains
showed a phenotype consistent with a primary lung tumor (ie, TTF1+/CK7+), with
negative results for other markers. Molecular analysis in six cases showed that
none harbored an EGFR-activating mutation. KRAS mutation was detected in one
case, and an ALK1 and ROS1 gene rearrangement were each detected in an additional
two cases. Cribriform adenocarcinomas of the lung represent a distinctive
histologic subtype of lung cancer that may be morphologically difficult to
differentiate from metastases with a predominant cribriform architecture.

PMID: 24390215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 1;198:22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.12.009. Epub
2013 Dec 28.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of two forms of Pax8 in the
rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.

Katagiri N(1), Uemae Y(1), Sakamoto J(1), Hidaka Y(1), Susa T(2), Kato Y(2),
Kimura S(3), Suzuki M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka
University, Ohya 836, Shizuoka City, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan. (2)Department of
Life Science, School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashi-mita,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Department 
of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Shizuoka University, Ohya 836,
Shizuoka City, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan. Electronic address:
sbmsuzu@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp.

We have identified two distinct Pax8 (a and b) mRNAs from the thyroid gland of
the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), which seemed to be generated by
alternative splicing. Both Pax8a and Pax8b proteins were predicted to possess the
paired domain, octapeptide, and partial homeodomain, while Pax8b lacked the
carboxy-terminal portion due to an insertion in the coding region of the mRNA.
RT-PCR analysis showed each of Pax8a and Pax8b mRNAs to be abundantly expressed
in the thyroid and kidney. In situ hybridization histochemistry further detected 
the expression of Pax8 mRNA in the epithelial cells of the thyroid follicles of
the adult trout and in the thyroid primordial cells of the embryo. The functional
properties of Pax8a and Pax8b were investigated by dual luciferase assay. The
transcriptional regulation by the rat thyroid peroxidase (TPO) promoter was found
to be increased by Pax8a, but not by Pax8b. Pax8a further showed synergistic
transcriptional activity with rat Nkx2-1 for the human TPO upstream region
including the enhancer and promoter. On the other hand, Pax8b decreased the
synergistic activity of Pax8a and Nkx2-1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
additionally indicated that not only Pax8a but also Pax8b can bind to the TPO
promoter and enhancer, implying that the inhibitory effect of Pax8b might result 
from the lack of the functional carboxy-terminal portion. Collectively, the
results suggest that for the trout thyroid gland, Pax8a may directly increase TPO
gene expression in cooperation with Nkx2-1 while Pax8b may work as a
non-activating competitor for the TPO transcription.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3991817
PMID: 24380675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014 Feb 15;306(4):L316-25. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00062.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

The p66Shc adapter protein regulates the morphogenesis and epithelial maturation 
of fetal mouse lungs.

Lee MK(1), Smith SM, Banerjee MM, Li C, Minoo P, Volpe MV, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)General Laboratories Bldg., 1201 E. Marengo St., Los Angeles, CA 90033.
mattlee@usc.edu.

Many signaling pathways are mediated by Shc adapter proteins that, in turn, are
expressed as three isoforms with distinct functions. The p66(Shc) isoform
antagonizes proliferation, regulates oxidative stress, and mediates apoptosis. It
is highly expressed in the canalicular but not the later stages of mouse lung
development, and its expression persists in bronchopulmonary dysplasia, a chronic
disease associated with premature birth. These observations suggest that p66(Shc)
has a developmental function. However, constitutive p66(Shc) deletion yields no
morphological phenotype, and the structure of the Shc gene precludes its
inducible deletion. To elucidate its function in lung development, we transfected
p66(Shc) or nonsilencing small-interfering RNA (siRNA) into the epithelia of
embryonic day 11 mouse lungs that were then cultured for 3 days and analyzed
morphometrically. To assess cellular proliferation and epithelial
differentiation, lung explants were immunostained and immunoblotted for p66(Shc),
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), the proximal airway differentiation
antigens Clara cell 10-kDa protein (CC10) and thyroid transcription factor
(TTF)-1, and the alveolar surfactant proteins (SP)-A, -B, and -C. Explants
transfected with nonsilencing siRNA demonstrated specific epithelial uptake and
normal morphological development relative to uninjected controls. In contrast,
transfection with p66(Shc) siRNA significantly increased lumenal cross-sectional 
areas, decreased branching, and increased epithelial proliferation (P < 0.05 for 
all). Relative to controls, the expression of SP-B, SP-C, CC10, and TTF-1 was
decreased by p66(Shc) knockdown. SP-A was not expressed in either control or
treated lungs. These data suggest that p66(Shc) attenuates epithelial
proliferation while promoting both distal and proximal epithelial maturation.

PMCID: PMC3920229
PMID: 24375794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Respir Med Case Rep. 2014 Mar 15;12:4-6. doi: 10.1016/j.rmcr.2013.12.008.
eCollection 2014.

Rare coexistence of sarcoidosis and lung adenocarcinoma.

Kachalia AG(1), Ochieng P(1), Kachalia K(1), Rahman H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Queens, Jamaica, NY 11432, USA.

CASE: An eighty year old African-American female was evaluated for cough, chest
pain, asymptomatic anemia and 21 pound weight loss over a six month period.
Computerized tomography (CT) revealed a spiculated 2.8 cm right upper lobe lung
nodule, other smaller nodules and lymphadenopathy. Gallium scan revealed abnormal
uptake of radiotracer in lacrimal, hilar and mediastinal glands. Broncho-alveolar
lavage showed CD4/CD8 ratio of 2:1 with 15% lymphocytes. Biopsy of right upper
lobe lesion and mediastinoscopic lymph node biopsy showed numerous matured
uniform non-caseating granulomatous inflammation, however stains and culture for 
Acid fast bacilli (AFB)/fungal organisms were negative. Patient improved on oral 
steroids. Six months later she returned with worsening dyspnea and chest X-ray
showed bilateral pleural effusions. Thoracocentesis revealed Thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF1) positive adenocarcinoma cells and Video assisted
thoracic surgery (VATS) procedure revealed numerous pleural, pericardial,
diaphragmatic metastasis. Biopsy also was positive for TTF1 adenocarcinoma and
positive for Epidermal Growth Factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, however negative
for Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK). Talc pleurodesis was performed. She was
treated with erlotinib while steroid was kept on hold. Initial tumor burden
decreased but follow-up PET scan six months later showed progression of tumor
with lymphadenopathy. After discussion with patient and family, patient opted for
hospice care.
DISCUSSION: Oncocentric theory postulates sarcoidosis as an immunological
reaction to dispersal of tumor antigen. Sarcocentric theory postulates that
cell-mediated immune abnormalities induced by sarcoidosis in CD4 and CD8 cells is
involved in the onset of lung cancer. Thus considerable controversy exists
regarding sarcoidosis and malignancy. In our case, TTF1 adenocarcinoma cells from
thoracocentesis suggest peripheral nodules in right upper lobe and lingula were
likely metastatic, presenting as malignant pleural effusions. However if
noncaseating granulomatous inflammation is expected as an immunological reaction 
to tumor antigen, it is very interesting to observe that initial tissue biopsy of
primary right upper lobe mass and mediastinal lymph nodes showed matured uniform 
non-caseating granulomatous inflammation and no evidence of adenocarcinoma. This 
being said, it would be highly unlikely for sarcoidosis to progress to lung
adenocarcinoma within six months. This adds further controversy to whether
granulomatous inflammation is a precursor to future malignancy or whether this
elderly African-American female was predisposed to develop granulomatous
inflammation in presence of a tumor antigen. One can also speculate whether
repeat tissue sampling from right upper lobe mass would have shown granulomatous 
inflammation or TTF1 adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: While evidence is still lacking regarding association between
sarcoidosis and lung adenocarcinoma, it is important for clinicians to exclude
metastatic malignancy in patients exhibiting clinical and radiographic findings
consistent with sarcoidosis.

PMCID: PMC4061445
PMID: 26029525  [PubMed]


122. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Apr;22(2):136-48. doi: 10.1177/1066896913511527. Epub
2013 Dec 9.

Does immunohistochemistry affect response to therapy and survival of inoperable
non-small cell lung carcinoma patients? A survey of 145 stage III-IV consecutive 
cases.

Pelosi G(1), Haspinger ER, Bimbatti M, Leone G, Paolini B, Fabbri A, Tamborini E,
Perrone F, Testi A, Garassino M, Maisonneuve P, de Braud F, Pilotti S, Pastorino 
U.

Author information: 
(1)1Fondazione IRCCS "Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori", Milan, Italy.

Whether non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) unveiled by immunohistochemistry
(IHC) has the same clinical outcome as those typed by morphology is still matter 
of debate. A total of 145 stage III-IV, consecutive inoperable NSCLC patients
treated by chemotherapy (133 cases) or EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (12 cases) 
and including 100 biopsies, 11 surgical specimens, and 34 cytological samples had
originally accounted for 120 adenocarcinomas (ADs), 19 squamous cell carcinomas
(SQCs), and 6 adenosquamous carcinomas (ADSQCs) by integrating morphology and
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1)/p40 IHC. Thirty-two NSCLC-not otherwise
specified (NSCLC-NOS) cases were identified by morphology revision of the
original diagnoses, which showed solid growth pattern (P < .001), 22 ADs, 5 SQCs,
and 5 ADSQCs by IHC profiling (P < .001), and 10 gene-altered tumors (3 EGFR, 5
KRAS, and 2 ALK). While no significant relationships were observed between
response to therapy and original, morphology or IHC diagnoses, driver mutations
and tumor differentiation by TTF1 expression, AD run better progression-free
survival (PFS) or overall survival (OS) than other tumor types by morphology (P =
.010 and P = .047) and IHC (P = .033 and P = .046), respectively. Furthermore,
patients with NSCLC-NOS confirmed as AD by IHC tended to have poorer OS (P =
.179) and PFS (P = .193) similar to that of ADSQC and SQC (P = .702 and P = .540,
respectively). A category of less differentiated AD with poorer prognosis on
therapy could be identified by IHC, while there were no differences for SQC or
ADSQC. The terminology of "NSCLC-NOS, favor by IHC" is appropriate to alert
clinicians toward more aggressive tumors.

PMID: 24326823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Virchows Arch. 2014 Jan;464(1):69-78. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1506-1. Epub 2013
Nov 26.

Integrins and their ligands are expressed in non-small cell lung cancer but not
correlated with parameters of disease progression.

Böger C(1), Kalthoff H, Goodman SL, Behrens HM, Röcken C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Arnold-Heller-Str. 3,
Haus 14, 24105, Kiel, Germany.

The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of integrins, their
ligands, and integrin signaling-related molecules in a cohort of human primary
non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC). Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue 
samples from 215 NSCLC were immunohistochemically stained using antibodies
directed against avß3, avß5, avß6, avß8, av, osteopontin, fibronectin,
vitronectin, epidermal growth factor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor (VEGFR), and Ki67. Immunostaining of tumor, stroma, and endothelial
cells was evaluated separately by quantity and intensity (tumor cells) or
intensity (stroma and endothelial cells) expressed in an immunoreactivity score. 
We studied correlations between the staining patterns of the different markers
and of marker expression with clinicopathological data and patient survival. In
the majority of NSCLC, each marker was expressed in at least one tumor component.
As expected, av and av integrin heterodimers were significantly co-expressed, as 
were integrins and EGFR. Vitronectin was expressed significantly more often in
smaller (T-category) and in well-differentiated tumors; Ki67 index was higher in 
larger (T-category) and in poorly differentiated tumors. No significant
correlation was found between any marker expression and gender, venous invasion, 
lymph vessel invasion, lymph node metastasis, or survival. Although integrin
expression does not seem to be associated with indicators of progression of
NSCLC, the expression of avß3 in 89 % and avß5 in 100 % of NSCLC is novel and
merits to be further investigated.

PMID: 24276405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Apr;44:73-84. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Nov 6.

Endocrine disrupting chemicals affect the gonadotropin releasing hormone neuronal
network.

Mueller JK(1), Heger S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; Children's Hospital "Auf der Bult", Hannover, Germany.
Electronic address: Heger@hka.de.

Endocrine disrupting chemicals have been shown to alter the pubertal process. The
controlling levels of the Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) network involve
GnRH itself, KiSS1, and the transcriptional regulators enhanced at puberty 1
(EAP1), Thyroid Transcription Factor 1 (TTF1), and Yin Yang 1 (YY1). While
Genistein and Bisphenol A (BPA) have been shown to advance the advent of puberty,
exposure to Dioxin delayed pubertal onset. Utilizing in vitro approaches, we
observed that Genistein and BPA suppress inhibitory and activate stimulatory
components of the GnRH network, while Dioxin exhibit an inhibitory effect at all 
regulatory hierarchical levels of the GnRH network. It repressed KiSS1, Gnrh,
Ttf1 and Yy1 transcription via the xenobiotic response element (XRE), while EAP1 
was not affected. Therefore, EDCs alter the neuroendocrine GnRH regulatory
network at all hierarchical levels.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;27(3-4):373-8. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0109.

NKX2-1 mutations in brain-lung-thyroid syndrome: a case series of four patients.

Shetty VB, Kiraly-Borri C, Lamont P, Bikker H, Choong CS.

Brain-lung-thyroid syndrome (BLTS) characterized by congenital hypothyroidism,
respiratory distress syndrome, and benign hereditary chorea is caused by thyroid 
transcription factor 1 (NKX2-1/TTF1) mutations. We report the clinical and
molecular characteristics of four cases presenting with primary hypothyroidism,
respiratory distress, and neurological disorder. Two of the four patients
presenting with the triad of BLTS had NKX2-1 mutations, and one of these NKX2-1
[c.890_896del (p.Ala327Glyfs*52)] is a novel variant. The third patient without
any identified NKX2-1 mutations was a carrier of mitochondrial mutation; this
raises the possibility of mitochondrial mutations contributing to thyroid
dysgenesis. Although rare, the triad of congenital hypothyroidism, neurological, 
and respiratory signs is highly suggestive of NKX2-1 anomalies. Screening for
NKX2-1 mutations in patients with thyroid, lung, and neurological abnormalities
will enable a unifying diagnosis and genetic counseling for the affected
families. In addition, identification of an NKX2-1 defect would be helpful in
allaying the concerns about inadequate thyroxine supplementation as the cause of 
neurological defects observed in some children with congenital hypothyroidism.

PMID: 24129101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Virchows Arch. 2013 Dec;463(6):749-54. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1488-z. Epub 2013 
Oct 15.

A panel of four immunohistochemical markers (CK7, CK20, TTF-1, and p63) allows
accurate diagnosis of primary and metastatic lung carcinoma on biopsy specimens.

Montezuma D(1), Azevedo R, Lopes P, Vieira R, Cunha AL, Henrique R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Rua Dr. António 
Bernardino Almeida, 4200-072, Porto, Portugal.

Accurate classification of lung cancer, as well as the differentiation between
primary and metastatic carcinoma to the lung, mostly performed on biopsy or fine 
needle aspiration specimens, is critical for decisions on therapy and for
determining prognosis. The limited amount of biopsy material available for
morphological assessment has stimulated attempts to improve diagnostic accuracy
through the use of immunohistochemistry (IHC), but an optimal IHC diagnostic
algorithm has not been firmly established. We evaluated, on a retrospective
series of biopsy specimens, the performance of a four-antibody IHC panel for
accurate subclassification of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and for
identification of metastatic carcinoma. Tumor morphology was assessed and IHC for
CK7, CK20, TTF-1, and p63 was performed according to a two-step algorithm.
Matched resection specimens served as gold standard and were compared with the
corresponding biopsy. Of 443 biopsy specimens studied, 325 were diagnosed as
primary carcinoma of the lung, 198 (44.7 %) as adenocarcinoma, 9 (2 %) as
possibly adenosquamous carcinoma, 127 (28.7 %) as squamous cell carcinoma, and 40
(9 %) as NSCLC not further classifiable. Ten cases (2.3 %) were classified as
adenocarcinoma of unknown origin and 58 (13 %) as metastasis. Importantly, of the
primary lung adenocarcinomas, 35 (17.7 %) had been considered on clinical grounds
as a metastasis from a previously diagnosed primary tumor. Of the 55 cases
submitted to surgical resection in 47 (85.5 %) the biopsy diagnosis was
confirmed, revealing substantial agreement (<U+03BA> value = 0.757). Our two-step
approach allows for accurate subclassification of NSCLC and also to distinguish
between primary lung adenocarcinoma and metastasis, notably of colorectal
adenocarcinoma, with crucial implications for appropriate patient management.

PMID: 24126803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 1;19(23):6556-65. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3946.
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

EZH2 protein expression associates with the early pathogenesis, tumor
progression, and prognosis of non-small cell lung carcinoma.

Behrens C(1), Solis LM, Lin H, Yuan P, Tang X, Kadara H, Riquelme E, Galindo H,
Moran CA, Kalhor N, Swisher SG, Simon GR, Stewart DJ, Lee JJ, Wistuba II.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology,
Pathology, Biostatistics, Thoracic Surgery, and Translational Molecular
Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; and
The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

PURPOSE: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes carcinogenesis by
epigenetically silencing tumor suppressor genes. We studied EZH2 expression by
immunohistochemistry in a large series of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) 
in association with tumor characteristics and patient outcomes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EZH2 immunohistochemistry expression was analyzed in 265
normal and premalignant bronchial epithelia, 541 primary NSCLCs [221 squamous
cell carcinomas (SCC) and 320 adenocarcinomas] and 36 NSCLCs with paired brain
metastases. An independent set of 91 adenocarcinomas was also examined. EZH2
expression was statistically correlated with clinico-pathological information,
and EGFR/KRAS mutation status.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression was significantly (P < 0.0001) higher in SCCs compared
with adenocarcinomas and in brain metastasis relative to matched primary tumors
(P = 0.0013). EZH2 expression was significantly (P < 0.0001) elevated in
bronchial preneoplastic lesions with increasing severity. In adenocarcinomas,
higher EZH2 expression significantly correlated with younger age, cigarette
smoking, and higher TNM stage (P = 0.02 to P < 0.0001). Higher EZH2 expression in
adenocarcinoma was associated with worse recurrence-free survival (RFS; P =
0.025; HR = 1.54) and overall survival (OS; P = 0.0002; HR = 1.96). Furthermore, 
lung adenocarcinomas with low EZH2 levels and high expression of the
lineage-specific transcription factor, TTF-1, exhibited significantly improved
RFS (P = 0.009; HR = 0.51) and OS (P = 0.0011; HR = 0.45), which was confirmed in
the independent set of 91 adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSION: In lung, EZH2 expression is involved in early pathogenesis of SCC and
correlates with a more aggressive tumor behavior of adenocarcinoma. When EZH2 and
TTF-1 expressions are considered together, they serve as a prognostic marker in
patients with surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3890101
PMID: 24097870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003786. Epub 2013 Sep 
12.

Chromatin-specific regulation of mammalian rDNA transcription by clustered TTF-I 
binding sites.

Diermeier SD(1), Németh A, Rehli M, Grummt I, Längst G.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Centre Regensburg (BCR), University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.

Enhancers and promoters often contain multiple binding sites for the same
transcription factor, suggesting that homotypic clustering of binding sites may
serve a role in transcription regulation. Here we show that clustering of binding
sites for the transcription termination factor TTF-I downstream of the pre-rRNA
coding region specifies transcription termination, increases the efficiency of
transcription initiation and affects the three-dimensional structure of rRNA
genes. On chromatin templates, but not on free rDNA, clustered binding sites
promote cooperative binding of TTF-I, loading TTF-I to the downstream terminators
before it binds to the rDNA promoter. Interaction of TTF-I with target sites
upstream and downstream of the rDNA transcription unit connects these distal DNA 
elements by forming a chromatin loop between the rDNA promoter and the
terminators. The results imply that clustered binding sites increase the binding 
affinity of transcription factors in chromatin, thus influencing the timing and
strength of DNA-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC3772059
PMID: 24068958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;80(4):257-66. doi: 10.1159/000354643. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Molecular and gene network analysis of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and 
enhanced at puberty (EAP1) genes in patients with GnRH-dependent pubertal
disorders.

Cukier P(1), Wright H, Rulfs T, Silveira LF, Teles MG, Mendonca BB, Arnhold IJ,
Heger S, Latronico AC, Ojeda SR, Brito VN.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Disciplina de Endocrinologia da 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo e Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular LIM/42, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND/AIM: TTF1 and EAP1 are transcription factors that modulate
gonadotropin-releasing hormone expression. We investigated the contribution of
TTF1 and EAP1 genes to central pubertal disorders.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 133 patients with central pubertal disorders were studied: 
86 with central precocious puberty and 47 with normosmic isolated
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The coding region of TTF1 and EAP1 were sequenced.
Variations of polyglutamine and polyalanine repeats in EAP1 were analyzed by
GeneScan software. Association of TTF1 and EAP1 to genes implicated in timing of 
puberty was investigated by meta-network framework GeneMANIA and Cytoscape
software.
RESULTS: Direct sequencing of the TTF1 did not reveal any mutation or
polymorphisms. Four EAP1 synonymous variants were identified with similar
frequencies among groups. The most common EAP1 5'-distal polyalanine genotype was
the homozygous 12/12, but the genotype 12/9 was identified in 2 central
precocious puberty sisters without functional alteration in EAP1 transcriptional 
activity. TTF1 and EAP1 were connected, via genetic networks, to genes implicated
in the control of menarche.
CONCLUSION: No TTF1 or EAP1 germline mutations were associated with central
pubertal disorders. TTF1 and EAP1 may affect puberty by changing expression in
response to other members of puberty-associated gene networks, or by
differentially affecting the expression of gene components of these networks.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24051510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hum Pathol. 2013 Nov;44(11):2467-74. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.06.005. Epub
2013 Sep 9.

Immunohistochemical and molecular characterization of clear cell carcinoma of the
lung.

Yousem SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)UPMC-Presbyterian-A610, Department of Pathology, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2582.
Electronic address: yousemsa@upmc.edu.

The diagnostic entity of clear cell carcinoma of the lung (CCCL) is
controversial, with many investigators arguing against its inclusion in the World
Health Organization classification of lung carcinoma. Because of its rarity and
questions regarding its histogenesis, I studied 3 groups of carcinomas with
immunohistochemical and molecular assays, including 6 cases of CCCL, 7 cases of
adenocarcinoma with clear cell change, and 11 cases of squamous carcinomas with
prominent clear cell change. CCCL tended to be present in older individuals with 
an adenocarcinoma immunophenotype (cytokeratin 7 and TTF1 positivity). Molecular 
analysis by Sanger sequencing revealed KRAS mutations in 5 of 6 cases of CCCL, 2 
of 7 adenocarcinomas with clear cell change, and 2 of 11 squamous carcinomas with
clear cell change. Although perhaps not a distinct pathologic entity, in this
pilot study, CCCL has an immunophenotype similar to solid-type adenocarcinoma
with clear cell change and displays more frequent and unusual KRAS mutations than
expected in most adenocarcinomas of the lung.

© 2013.

PMID: 24029707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Oct 14;20(6):767-76. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0310. Print
2013 Dec.

Concurrent overexpression of RET/PTC1 and TTF1 confers tumorigenicity to
thyrocytes.

Endo T(1), Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo City, Yamanashi 409-3898,
Japan.

A variant located on 14q13.3 nearest to thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1)
predisposes individuals to thyroid cancer, but whether this variant is related to
the RET/PTC rearrangement associated with human papillary thyroid carcinomas
(PTCs) is unknown. The aims of this study were to investigate the effects of
RET/PTC1 on the expression of thyroid-specific genes in thyrocytes and their
relationship with malignant transformation of the thyrocytes. In the absence or
presence of TSH, an extracellular signal-regulated kinase was phosphorylated in
FRTL5 cells that stably expressed RET/PTC1, and these cells grew independently of
TSH. FRTL (RET/PTC1) cells produced 566% more thyroglobulin mRNA and 474% more
Na+/I- symporter mRNA than did the control FRTL (pcDNA) cells. FRTL (RET/PTC1)
cells expressed 468% more Ttf1 mRNA than did FRTL (pcDNA) cells, but these two
cell types did not differ significantly with respect to Pax8 or Ttf2 mRNA levels.
When FRTL (RET/PTC1) cells and FRTL (pcDNA), cells were injected into each of
nine nude mice, each mouse developed a single tumor at the site of FRTL
(RET/PTC1) cell injection; in contrast, tumor formation never occurred at sites
of FRTL (cDNA) cells injection. Tumors resulting from FRTL (RET/PTC1) cells
retained (125)I-uptake activity; moreover, the cells invaded into surrounding
skeletal muscle. When overexpression of Ttf1 in FRTL (RET/PTC1) cells was
silenced, the cells completely lost their tumorigenic potential. Exogenous TTF1
cDNA enhanced the tumorigenicity of BHP18-21v cells, human PTC cells that express
RET/PTC1, in nude mice. These results indicated that concurrent overexpression of
RET/PTC1 and TTF1 confers tumorigenicity to FRTL5 and BHP18-21v cells in nude
mice.

PMCID: PMC3796879
PMID: 24014739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2014 Mar;49(3):E42-4. doi: 10.1002/ppul.22788. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Respiratory insufficiency in a newborn with congenital hypothyroidism due to a
new mutation of TTF-1/NKX2.1 gene.

Salerno T(1), Peca D, Menchini L, Schiavino A, Petreschi F, Occasi F, Cogo P,
Danhaive O, Cutrera R.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology Unit, Department of Paediatric Medicine, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

NK2 homeobox-1 (NKX2.1) gene encoding the thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) 
plays a critical role in lung, thyroid, and central nervous system morphogenesis 
and function; mutations cause a rare form of progressive respiratory failure
associated with alterations of surfactant synthesis, composition, and
homeostasis. Molecular mechanisms are heterogeneous and poorly explored. A 28
days old male, soon after birth, presented respiratory failure requiring oxygen
treatment at FiO2 27%, prolonged for 2 weeks. Routine neonatal screenings
detected a high thyroid stimulating hormone concentration. On day 27 congenital
hypothyroidism was confirmed and substitutive treatment was begun. Since the
persistence of respiratory symptoms sweat test, CFTR mutation, lymphocyte
subpopulations, and sputum cultures were tested, resulting negative. Brain and
cardiac defects were also ruled out. Bronchoscopy and BAL analysis were normal.
Computed tomography showed bilateral multiple ground glass attenuation,
consolidative areas and diffuse bronchial wall thickening. Based on the severity 
of symptoms, the exclusion of other causes of respiratory disease and the CT
findings of interstitial lung disease, we investigated genes affecting the
surfactant homeostasis. Sequencing analysis of the three exons of the TTF1
revealed a heterozygous mutation c.334G > T that results in the replacement of
glycine in position 112 with a stop codon, generating a nonsense protein that
lacks the correct transactivation domain in the C-terminal region. Genetic
analysis of the family showed that the father, who was asymptomatic, carried the 
mutation. Screening for TTF-1 deletions or mutations should always be considered 
in children with congenital hypothyroidism and an unexplained neonatal
respiratory distress or neurodevelopmental deficits.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23997037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Eur Respir J. 2014 Mar;43(3):872-83. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00018013. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

EGFR, KRAS, BRAF and ALK gene alterations in lung adenocarcinomas: patient
outcome, interplay with morphology and immunophenotype.

Warth A(1), Penzel R, Lindenmaier H, Brandt R, Stenzinger A, Herpel E, Goeppert
B, Thomas M, Herth FJ, Dienemann H, Schnabel PA, Schirmacher P, Hoffmann H, Muley
T, Weichert W.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg.

Numerous studies have been published on single aspects of pulmonary
adenocarcinoma (ADC). To comprehensively link clinically relevant ADC
characteristics, we evaluated established morphological, diagnostic and
predictive biomarkers in 425 resected ADCs. Morphology was reclassified.
Cytokeratin-7, thyroid transcription factor (TTF)1, napsin A, thymidylate
synthase and excision repair cross-complementing rodent repair deficiency
complementation group-1 expression, anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangements as 
well as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma
viral oncogene homologue (KRAS) and v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homologue
B1 (BRAF) mutations were analysed. All characteristics were correlated with
clinical and survival parameters. Morphological ADC subtypes were significantly
associated with smoking history and distinct patterns of diagnostic biomarkers.
KRAS mutations were prevalent in male smokers, while EGFR mutations were
associated with female sex, nonsmoking and lepidic as well as micropapillary
growth patterns. TTF1 expression (hazard ratio (HR) for overall survival 0.61,
p=0.021) and BRAF mutations (HR for disease-free survival 2.0, p=0.046) were
found to be morphology- and stage-independent predictors of survival in
multivariate analysis. Adjuvant radio-/chemotherapy, in some instances, strongly 
impacted on the prognostic effect of both diagnostic and predictive biomarkers.
Our data draw a comprehensive picture of the prevalence and interplay of
established histological and molecular ADC characteristics. These data will help 
to develop time- and cost-effective diagnostic and treatment algorithms for ADC.

PMID: 23988776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Thyroid. 2013 Dec;23(12):1578-82. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0279. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Ultrasound-guided percutaneous laser ablation of papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma: a feasibility study on three cases with pathological and
immunohistochemical evaluation.

Valcavi R(1), Piana S, Bortolan GS, Lai R, Barbieri V, Negro R.

Author information: 
(1)1 Endocrinology Unit, Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova and Clinical Cancer
Research Institute (IRCCS) , Reggio Emilia, Italy .

BACKGROUND: Ultrasound-guided thermal laser ablation (LA) is a nonsurgical
technique that has been proposed, but not fully assessed, for papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma (PTMC) treatment. The objectives of this study were to evaluate
the clinical feasibility of LA on PTMC as a primary treatment and to prove
histologically the absence of residual viable tumor after LA procedure.
METHODS: Three patients with a Thy 6 diagnosis at fine-needle aspiration cytology
with a single PTMC smaller than 10<U+2009>mm volunteered after full explanation of the
protocol. At ultrasound examination, patients had no extrathyroid extension and
no evidence of lymph node metastasis. Patients underwent percutaneous
ultrasound-assisted LA of the PTMC in the operating room under general
anesthesia. One 300<U+2009>µm plane-cut optic fiber was inserted through the sheath of
21G Chiba needle, exposing 5<U+2009>mm of the nude fiber in direct contact with tumor
tissue, and connected with a laser source operating at 1.064<U+2009>µm with 3 W output
power. Total energy delivery was 1800<U+2009>J. The surgeon directly started a standard 
total thyroidectomy. During surgical inspection, no remarkable laser sign was
observed in the muscles, the perithyroidal tissues, or the recurrent laryngeal
nerves.
RESULTS: Conventional histology showed destructured and carbonized tissue. Lack
of vitality was demonstrated by complete loss of TTF1 and antimitochondria
antibody expression in the whole ablated area and in the rim of normal tissue
surrounding the tumor. BRAF V600E mutation was detected in cases 1 and 2.
Furthermore, in cases 2 and 3, incidental papillary microfoci were found. A lymph
node micrometastasis (200<U+2009>µm) was observed in case 2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that percutaneous LA is technically feasible
for complete PTMC destruction. Now, LA may be useful in selected patients with
PTMC, either when the surgeon or a patient refuses surgery, or when the patient
is at high risk for an operation. LA may become a primary choice of treatment for
PTMC only if future new knowledge would permit preoperative recognition of
multifocality and lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 23978269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2014 Apr;22(4):266-74. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318297cc0b.

In search of the ideal immunopanel to distinguish metastatic mammary carcinoma
from primary lung carcinoma: a tissue microarray study of 207 cases.

Kawaguchi KR(1), Lu FI, Kaplan R, Liu YF, Chadwick P, Chen Z, Brogi E, Shin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Laboratory Medicine ‡Public Health, Division of 
Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Weill Cornell Medical College †Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

BACKGROUND: Distinguishing metastatic carcinoma of breast origin (MCBO) to lung
from primary lung carcinomas (PLC) is a diagnostic quandary with clinical
ramifications. Immunostains CK7, CK20, ER, PR, and Mammaglobin as well as
pertinent negative stains are utilized but prove insufficient. We set out to
identify stains either alone or as a group that would better discern between
these 2 entities.
DESIGN: Tissue microarrays of 109 MCBO to lung and 102 PLC were stained with CK7,
CK20, ER, PR, AR, Mammaglobin, Napsin A, GATA-3, and TTF-1. An H-score was
calculated for each case and stain.
RESULTS: The highest area under the receiver-operating characteristic curves for 
each stain was seen with GATA-3 (0.817), Napsin A (0.817), and TTF-1 (0.854).
When all possible combinations were analyzed, GATA-3 and TTF-1 proved to
correctly classify with the highest accuracy (0.934). Combinations of GATA-3 and 
Napsin A (0.920) and GATA-3, Napsin A, and TTF-1 (0.933) were not significantly
different from GATA-3 and TTF-1. The odds ratios for each stain and combination
of stains showed that those for GATA-3 and TTF-1 were divergent, signifying that 
cases with higher H-scores for GATA-3 and TTF-1 were more likely to be classified
as MCBO and PLC, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA-3 and TTF-1 can correctly classify a case as either MCBO or PLC
in 93.4% of cases. Although highly specific and sensitive for PLC, Napsin A in
lieu of TTF-1 or as an additional stain did not improve classification accuracy.

PMID: 23958551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Pathologica. 2013 Apr;105(2):69-72.

Lung metastasis from TTF-1 positive sigmoid adenocarcinoma. pitfalls and
management.

Remo A(1), Zanella C, Pancione M, Astati L, Piacentini P, Cingarlini S, Bonetti
A, Micheletto C, Talamini A, Chilosi M, Vendraminelli R, Manfrin E.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Salutis Hospital, ULSS21 Legnago, Verona, Italy.
andrea.remo@aulsslegnago.it

The lung is a frequent site of metastatic involvement, and in many cases the
differential diagnosis between a metastasis and a primary carcinoma is a
substantial question. TTF-1 is considered as a reliable marker for differential
diagnosis in distinguishing primary lung carcinoma and metastasis, especially
when dealing with an adenocarcinoma or a large-cell carcinoma. It was generally
thought that adenocarcinomas arising in the gastrointestinal tract do not express
TTF-1. Recently, it has been reported that a small percentage (1.8%-5.8%) of
intestinal adenocarcinoma TTF-1 positive show differences in
sensitivity/specificity depending on the antibody clones. We report a case of
lung localization of a TTF-1 positive adenocarcinoma in a patient with a history 
of colon adenocarcinoma. Based on the current results and previous reports, we
propose the following criteria for diagnosing lung metastasis from TTF-1 positive
intestinal adenocarcinoma. 1) Clinical features and anamnestic history are
diagnostic milestones, and provide very important information as a prognostic
parameter of primary carcinoma and the time interval between the two
localizations (primary and metastasis). 2) The histologic features are compatible
with an enteric differentiation. 3) TTF-1 must be tested in the primary
carcinoma. 4) In lung lesions, in association with TTF-1, it could be useful to
test other immunohistochemical markers such as CDX-2 and NapsinA. 5) Testing
other immunohistochemical or molecular markers in either lesion is not very
useful. Heterogeneity between primary and metastatic lesions has been reported in
the literature. Application of the above-mentioned criteria would simplify
diagnosis of lung metastases from TTF-1 positive intestinal adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 23946985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Oncol. 2013 Oct;43(4):1045-51. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2056. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Detection of EGFR gene mutations in non-small cell lung cancer: lessons from a
single-institution routine analysis of 1,403 tumor samples.

Vallee A(1), Sagan C, Le Loupp AG, Bach K, Dejoie T, Denis MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.

Activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in lung
tumors are associated with a dramatic response to tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Therefore, routine analysis of pathological specimens is mandatory in clinical
practice. We have prospectively tested tumors from Caucasian lung tumor patients 
between January 2010 and June 2012. DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues following macrodissection. The p.L858R substitution was
assessed by allele-specific PCR and exon 19 deletions by PCR and DNA fragment
analysis. Using a robust process from patient sampling to screening methods, we
analyzed samples from 1,403 patients. The EGFR status could be successfully
determined for 1,322 patients. EGFR mutations were detected in 179 (13.5%)
patients, with female and adenocarcinoma histology predominance. Mutated patients
were significantly older than non-mutated patients. Similar mutation rates were
obtained with primary tumors and metastases, and with surgical resection,
bronchial biopsies, CT-guided needle biopsies and transbronchial needle
aspiration. The sensitivity of our assays allowed us to detect EGFR mutations in 
samples poor (<10%) in tumor cells. Finally, the mutation rate was much higher in
tumors expressing the TTF-1 antigen (145/820; 17.7%) than in TTF-1 negative
tumors (3/218; 1.4%). The results obtained through routine analysis of more than 
1,300 samples indicated that all types of specimen can be analyzed without any
significant bias. TTF-1 immunostaining may be used to predict negative EGFR
mutation status.

PMCID: PMC3829780
PMID: 23934203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Lung Cancer. 2013 Oct;82(1):69-75. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.07.010. Epub 2013 
Aug 5.

Adequacy of CT-guided biopsies with histomolecular subtyping of pulmonary
adenocarcinomas: influence of ATS/ERS/IASLC guidelines.

Ferretti GR(1), Busser B, de Fraipont F, Reymond E, McLeer-Florin A,
Mescam-Mancini L, Moro-Sibilot D, Brambilla E, Lantuejoul S.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique Universitaire de Radiologie et Imagerie Médicale, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire A Michallon, INSERM U 823-Institut A Bonniot-Université J Fourier, 
Grenoble, France. Electronic address: GFerretti@chu-grenoble.fr.

INTRODUCTION: As metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinomas are routinely investigated 
for EGFR, KRAS, and ALK mutations/rearrangement, adequacy of CT-guided
trans-thoracic needle biopsies (TTNB) needs to be evaluated in respect with the
2011 ATS/ERS/IASLC guidelines.
METHODS: Two series of consecutive TTNB with 18-gauge needles performed before
and after the publication of the ATS/ERS/IASLC guidelines, were retrospectively
compared regarding their adequacy for histological sub-typing and EGFR/KRAS
mutations and ALK rearrangement testing; the first series included 43 TTNB
collected from January 2010 to February 2011, and the second one 48 TTNB
collected from March 2011 to December 2012.
RESULTS: 28 women and 63 men were included; the 2 groups were comparable in age, 
in mean size of lesions (32.5 mm), and distance of the lesion from the pleura. By
comparing the first to the second series, the number of biopsies increased from
1.6 to 1.85, their mean length increased from 10.9 to 12.5mm, and the mean number
of stainings (TTF1, P63, CK5-6, mucins) per biopsy decreased from 2.6 to 1. Mean 
tumor cell percentage was 42%, mean total DNA extracted increased from 2.7 to 3.8
µg. In the first series, 85% of TTNB allowed EGFR exons 19 and 21 and KRAS
mutations pyrosequencing and 72% additional EGFR exons 18 and 20 mutation
analyses, versus 98% and 92% in the second.
CONCLUSIONS: With respect to ATS/ERS/IASLC guidelines, radiologists, biologists
and pathologists have improved their practice; accordingly, CT-guided TTNB enable
a precise histological sub-typing and provide sufficient DNA amount for genetic
analyses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23927885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Lung Cancer. 2013 Oct;82(1):143-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.06.010. Epub 2013 
Jul 31.

The clinicopathological significance of Lgr5 expression in lung adenocarcinoma.

Ryuge S(1), Sato Y, Jiang SX, Wang G, Kobayashi M, Nagashio R, Katono K, Iyoda A,
Satoh Y, Masuda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, School of Medicine, Kitasato University,
Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5
(Lgr5), also known as Gpr49, has been identified as a marker of crypt basal
columnar stem cells along the gastrointestinal tract and of bulge stem cells in
the hair follicle. The aims of this study were to immunohistochemically examine
Lgr5 expression in surgically resected non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC),
and evaluate the relationships between Lgr5 expression and the
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of patients.
METHODS: Lgr5 expression was immunohistochemically studied in 266 consecutive
resected NSCLCs, and its associations with clinicopathological parameters
including TTF-1 and CDX-2 expressions were evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the effect of 
Lgr5 expression on survival.
RESULTS: Lgr5 was detected only in tumors with adenocarcinoma histology, and 16
cases were judged as positive. Among lung adenocarcinomas, Lgr5 expression was
significantly associated with a larger tumor size (> 5 cm) (P = 0.033), higher
pathological TNM stage of the disease (stage II and III) (P = 0.025),
TTF-1-negative adenocarocinoma (P = 0.042), and poorer prognosis (P = 0.026).
However, Lgr5 expression was not an independent predictor of poorer survival
after controlling for clinicopathological factors.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study reveals that Lgr5 is expressed in a subset of lung
adenocarcinoma, and its expression is related to some clinicopathological
parameters and a poorer prognosis, although further studies are required to
clarify the biological function of Lgr5 in lung adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23915911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Pathologe. 2013 Sep;34(5):419-28. doi: 10.1007/s00292-013-1787-9.

[Novel morphological and molecular aspects of lung cancer].

[Article in German]

Warth A(1), Stenzinger A, Weichert W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
224, Heidelberg, Germany.

In recent years the classification of pulmonary cancer has seen a paradigm shift 
with respect to both morphological as well as molecular aspects. On the
morphological side this includes novel criteria for tumor classification from
biopsy material based on morphological and immunohistochemical aspects as well as
a novel classification based on morphological patterns for pulmonary
adenocarcinomas. In addition, this new classification now includes adenocarcinoma
in situ as well as minimally invasive adenocarcinoma as novel entities and a
variety of novel adenocarcinoma subtypes. This reclassification was accompanied
and complemented by tremendous developments in the field of lung cancer genomics 
which paved the way for now widely established predictive molecular markers, e.g.
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and EML4-ALK translocations and
will certainly lead to a variety of novel predictive markers not only for
pulmonary adenocarcinoma but also for other pulmonary neoplasms.

PMID: 23900599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):2690-702. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.06.030. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

ErbB4 is an upstream regulator of TTF-1 fetal mouse lung type II cell development
in vitro.

Zscheppang K(1), Giese U, Hoenzke S, Wiegel D, Dammann CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany;
Division of Newborn Medicine, Floating Hospital for Children at Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

TTF-1 is an important transcription factor in lung development and lung disease
and is essential for lung cell differentiation, specifically surfactant protein
(Sftp) expression. The molecular mechanisms that drive the expression and
transcriptional control of TTF-1 are not fully understood. In the fetal lung,
ErbB4 functions as a transcriptional co-factor and regulates the timely onset of 
fetal Sftp expression. We speculate that ErbB4 is an upstream regulator of TTF-1 
and regulates Sftpb expression via this pathway in alveolar type II cells.
Neuregulin-induced ErbB4 and TTF-1 signaling interactions were studied by
co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy. Overexpression of ErbB4 and TTF-1
was analyzed in its effect on cell viability, Sftpb expression, TTF-1 expression,
and Sftpb and TTF-1 promoter activity. The effect of ErbB4 deletion and ErbB4
nuclear translocation on TTF-1 expression was studied in primary fetal type II
epithelial cells, isolated from transgenic HER4(heart(-/-)) mice. ErbB4 ligand
neuregulin induces ErbB4 and TTF-1 co-precipitation and nuclear colocalization.
Combined ErbB4 and TTF-1 overexpression inhibits cell viability, while promoting 
Sftpb expression more than single overexpression of each protein. NRG stimulates 
TTF-1 expression in ErbB4-overexpressing epithelial cells, while this effect is
absent in ErbB4-depleted cells. In primary fetal type II cells, ErbB4 nuclear
translocation is critical for its regulation of TTF-1-induced Sftpb upregulation.
TTF-1 overexpression did not overcome this important requirement. We conclude
that ErbB4 is a critical upstream regulator of TTF-1 in type II epithelial cells 
and that this interaction is important for Sftpb regulation.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3835615
PMID: 23845988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Thyroid. 2014 Mar;24(3):593-8. doi: 10.1089/thy.2013.0214. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Radiation-associated small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the thyroid: a case
report with molecular analyses.

Mussazhanova Z(1), Miura S, Stanojevic B, Rougounovitch T, Saenko V, Shiraishi T,
Kurashige T, Shichijo K, Kaneko K, Takahashi H, Ito M, Nakashima M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Tumor and Diagnostic Pathology, Nagasaki University ,
Nagasaki, Japan .

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine tumor (NET) of the thyroid other than medullary
carcinoma is extremely rare. We describe here a case of calcitonin-negative small
cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (SCNEC), which occurred in a thyroid gland that had
previously been irradiated at high dose (60 Gy) for pharyngeal cancer, with
molecular analyses for follicular cell origin.
PATIENT FINDINGS: The tumor cells were small with fine chromatin, inconspicuous
nucleoli, and inapparent cytoplasm, and showed neuroendocrine architectures such 
as palisading, rosettes, and trabeculae. Mitotic figures were numerous exceeding 
10 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. The tumor cells invaded into several vessels
and metastasized to regional lymph nodes. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells 
were strongly positive for neuroendocrine markers and thyroglobulin (Tg), a
marker of thyroid follicular cells but negative for calcitonin and
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). Expression of Tg and thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) 
were confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Ki-67 labeling index was more than 70% in the tumor cells. Taken together, the
tumor was diagnosed as SCNEC of the thyroid. Genetic analyses also revealed
microsatellite abnormalities of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) gene,
suggesting that functional loss of PTEN contributes to carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report describing a SCNEC of the thyroid with
molecular analyses that provide evidence for a follicular epithelial origin.

PMID: 23844610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Endocr Pathol. 2013 Sep;24(3):149-55. doi: 10.1007/s12022-013-9254-y.

Pituicytoma with gelsolin amyloid deposition.

Ida CM(1), Yan X, Jentoft ME, Kip NS, Scheithauer BW, Morris JM, Dogan A, Parisi 
JE, Kovacs K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Pituicytoma is a rare low-grade (WHO grade I) sellar region glioma. Among sellar 
tumors, pituitary adenomas, mainly prolactinomas, may show amyloid deposits.
Gelsolin is a ubiquitous calcium-dependent protein that regulates actin filament 
dynamics. Two known gene point mutations result in gelsolin amyloid deposition, a
characteristic feature of a rare type of familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP),
the Finnish-type FAP, or hereditary gelsolin amyloidosis (HGA). HGA is an
autosomal-dominant systemic amyloidosis, characterized by slowly progressive
neurological deterioration with corneal lattice dystrophy, cranial neuropathy,
and cutis laxa. A unique case of pituicytoma with marked gelsolin amyloid
deposition in a 67-year-old Chinese woman is described. MRI revealed a 2.6-cm
well-circumscribed, uniformly contrast-enhancing solid sellar mass with
suprasellar extension. Histologically, the lesion was characterized by solid
sheets and fascicles of spindle cells with slightly fibrillary cytoplasm and oval
nuclei with pinpoint nucleoli. Surrounding brain parenchyma showed marked
reactive piloid gliosis. Remarkably, conspicuous amyloid deposits were identified
as pink homogeneous spherules on light microscopy that showed apple-green
birefringence on Congo red with polarization. Mass spectrometric-based proteomic 
analysis identified the amyloid as gelsolin type. Immunohistochemically, diffuse 
reactivity to S100 protein and TTF1, focal reactivity for GFAP, and no reactivity
to EMA, synaptophysin, and chromogranin were observed. HGA-related mutations were
not identified in the tumor. No recurrence was noted 14 months after surgery. To 
the knowledge of the authors, amyloid deposition in pituicytoma or
tumor-associated gelsolin amyloidosis has not been previously described. This
novel finding expands the spectrum of sellar tumors that may be associated with
amyloid deposition.

PMID: 23817895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Chest. 2013 Oct;144(4):1199-206. doi: 10.1378/chest.13-0811.

A mutation in TTF1/NKX2.1 is associated with familial neuroendocrine cell
hyperplasia of infancy.

Young LR, Deutsch GH, Bokulic RE, Brody AS, Nogee LM.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy (NEHI) is a childhood
diffuse lung disease of unknown etiology. We investigated the mechanism for lung 
disease in a subject whose clinical, imaging, and lung biopsy specimen findings
were consistent with NEHI; the subject's extended family and eight other
unrelated patients with NEHI were also investigated.
METHODS: The proband's lung biopsy specimen (at age 7 months) and serial CT scans
were diagnostic of NEHI. Her mother, an aunt, an uncle, and two first cousins had
failure to thrive in infancy and chronic respiratory symptoms that improved with 
age. Genes associated with autosomal-dominant forms of childhood interstitial
lung disease were sequenced.
RESULTS: A heterozygous NKX2.1 mutation was identified in the proband and the
four other adult family members with histories of childhood lung disease. The
mutation results in a nonconservative amino acid substitution in the homeodomain 
in a codon extensively conserved through evolution. None of these individuals
have thyroid disease or movement disorders. NKX2.1 mutations were not identified 
by sequence analysis in eight other unrelated subjects with NEHI.
CONCLUSIONS: The nature of the mutation and its segregation with disease support 
that it is disease-causing. Previously reported NKX2.1 mutations have been
associated with "brain-thyroid-lung" syndrome and a spectrum of more severe
pulmonary phenotypes. We conclude that genetic mechanisms may cause NEHI and that
NKX2.1 mutations may result in, but are not the predominant cause of, this
phenotype. We speculate that altered expression of NKX2.1 target genes other than
those in the surfactant system may be responsible for the pulmonary
pathophysiology of NEHI.

PMCID: PMC3787915
PMID: 23787483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mod Pathol. 2013 Dec;26(12):1554-60. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.111. Epub 2013
Jun 21.

Comparative immunohistochemical analysis of pulmonary and thymic neuroendocrine
carcinomas using PAX8 and TTF-1.

Weissferdt A(1), Tang X, Wistuba II, Moran CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

PAX8 is expressed in thymic epithelial neoplasms and a subset of neuroendocrine
carcinomas of gastrointestinal origin but not pulmonary neuroendocrine
carcinomas. Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is known to be positive in
pulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas, but studies investigating its expression in 
thymic neuroendocrine carcinomas are lacking. To date, there are no comprehensive
studies focusing on the comparative expression of PAX8 or TTF-1 in pulmonary and 
thymic neuroendocrine carcinoma. Twenty-five cases of low and intermediate grade 
neuroendocrine carcinomas of pulmonary and thymic origin, respectively, were
selected for immunohistochemical studies using antibodies directed against PAX8
and TTF-1. The percentage of positive tumor cells as well as the intensity of
staining were evaluated and scored. Twenty-one of the pulmonary neuroendocrine
carcinomas were classified as low grade (typical carcinoid) and 4 as intermediate
grade (atypical carcinoid) tumors; the thymic tumors consisted of 8 low grade and
17 intermediate grade neuroendocrine carcinomas. Only 2 (8%) of the pulmonary
tumors showed nuclear expression of PAX8 while 19 (76%) expressed TTF-1. Of the
thymic tumors, 8 (32%) were positive for PAX8 and 2 (8%) showed TTF-1 positivity.
Primary neuroendocrine carcinomas of the thymus are rare neoplasms that display a
more aggressive clinical course than pulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas,
highlighting the importance of the separation of these tumors. To date, there are
no specific immunomarkers to distinguish between neuroendocrine carcinomas of
pulmonary and thymic origin. The differential expression of PAX8 and TTF-1 may
prove useful in this context as a PAX8+/TTF-1- immunophenotype appears to be more
common in thymic neuroendocrine carcinomas, whereas the reverse (PAX8-/TTF-1+) is
true for most pulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas.

PMID: 23787439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jul;140(1):37-46. doi: 10.1309/AJCP50RDXSCSBTBO.

Immunohistochemistry in the differential diagnostics of primary lung cancer: an
investigation within the Southern Swedish Lung Cancer Study.

Brunnström H(1), Johansson L, Jirström K, Jönsson M, Jönsson P, Planck M.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pathology, Regional Laboratories Region Skåne, SE-22185 Lund, Sweden. 
hans.brunnstrom@med.lu.se

OBJECTIVES: To assess immunohistochemical (IHC) stains differentially expressed
between different types of lung cancer.
METHODS: We evaluated 16 different IHC stains in 209 prospectively included,
surgically treated primary lung cancers, including 121 adenocarcinomas, 65
squamous cell carcinomas, 15 large-cell carcinomas, 5 adenosquamous carcinomas, 2
sarcomatoid carcinomas, and 1 small-cell carcinoma, using the tissue microarray
technique.
RESULTS: Cytokeratin 5 (CK5) and P63 were both positive in 10% or more of the
cells in 97% of the squamous cell carcinomas, with the former being positive
(<10% of the cells) in only 2 non-squamous cell carcinomas. Thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF1) and napsin A were positive in 10% or more of the cells in 88% and
87% of the adenocarcinomas, respectively, with 94% of the adenocarcinomas being
positive in at least 1 marker. Fifteen percent of the adenocarcinomas were
positive for estrogen receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: CK5, TTF1, and napsin A are sensitive markers for squamous cell
carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the lung.

PMID: 23765532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 May;138(5):626-35. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0179-OA. Epub
2013 Jun 5.

Pulmonary large cell carcinoma lacking squamous differentiation is
clinicopathologically indistinguishable from solid-subtype adenocarcinoma.

Hwang DH(1), Szeto DP, Perry AS, Bruce JL, Sholl LM.

Author information: 
(1)Published as an Early Online Release June 5, 2013. From the Department of
Pathology (Drs Hwang, Bruce, and Sholl, and Mr Szeto) and Center for Advanced
Molecular Diagnostics (Mr Szeto and Drs Bruce and Sholl), Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(Drs Hwang and Sholl); and the Department of Pathology, Banner MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Gilbert, Arizona (Dr Perry).

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 May;138(5):592.
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Sep;138(9):1132.

CONTEXT: Pulmonary large cell carcinoma (LCC) includes tumors not readily
diagnosed as adenocarcinoma (ADC) or squamous cell carcinoma on morphologic
grounds, without regard to immunophenotype, according to the World Health
Organization (WHO). This ambiguous designation may cause confusion over selection
of mutation testing and directed therapies. Several groups have proposed the use 
of immunohistochemistry (IHC) to recategorize LCC as ADC or squamous cell
carcinoma; however, it remains unclear if strictly defined LCCs are a
clinicopathologically distinct lung tumor subset.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the pathologic, molecular, and clinical features of 2
morphologically similar tumors: solid-subtype ADC and LCC.
DESIGN: Tumors were included on the basis of solid growth pattern; tumors with
squamous or neuroendocrine differentiation were excluded. Solid ADC (n = 42) and 
LCC (n = 57) were diagnosed by using WHO criteria (5 intracellular mucin droplets
in =2 high-power fields for solid ADC) and tested for KRAS, EGFR, and ALK
alterations.
RESULTS: Both solid ADC and LCC groups were dominated by tumors with
"undifferentiated"-type morphology and both had a high frequency of thyroid
transcription factor 1 expression. KRAS was mutated in 38% of solid ADCs versus
43% of LCCs (P = .62). One ALK-rearranged and 1 EGFR-mutated tumor were detected 
in the solid ADC and LCC groups, respectively. There were no significant
differences in clinical features or outcomes; the prevalence of smoking in both
groups was greater than 95%.
CONCLUSIONS: Other than a paucity of intracellular mucin, LCC lacking squamous or
neuroendocrine differentiation is indistinguishable from solid-subtype ADC. We
propose the reclassification of these tumors as mucin-poor solid adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 23738762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Pathologe. 2014 Feb;35(1):83-7. doi: 10.1007/s00292-013-1772-3.

[Thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of the kidney: a separate tumor entity?].

[Article in German]

Berens S(1), Vogt P, Alkadhi H, Berger N, Moch H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Pathologie, UniversitätsSpital Zürich, Zürich, Schweiz,
sandra.berens@irm.uzh.ch.

Thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of the kidney is postulated as a potentially
new entity of renal tumor based on nine previously published case reports. This
tumor entity is not yet integrated into the classification of tumors of the World
Health Organization (WHO). In this article a new case of thyroid-like follicular 
carcinoma of kidney is described which was incidentally detected at autopsy. The 
58-year-old patient died of complications of acute myeloid leukemia after
chemotherapy and also had prostatic adenocarcinoma. The renal tumor in the left
kidney had a diameter of 3 cm and showed a grey-brown cut surface.
Histologically, the tumor presented with a typical thyroid-like microfollicular
and macrofollicular structure filled with eosinophilic, colloid-like material
with calcification. Immunohistologically the renal tumor was CD 10 positive and
negative for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and thyroglobulin. A synopsis 
of the published case reports indicates that thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of
the kidney has a low risk of metastasis. More experience with further cases of
thyroid-like follicular renal carcinoma is necessary before a recommendation of a
separate tumor entity in the next WHO classification is justified.

PMID: 23732632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Endocrinol Invest. 2013 Sep;36(8):654-64. doi: 10.3275/8973. Epub 2013 May 22.

The molecular causes of thyroid dysgenesis: a systematic review.

Nettore IC(1), Cacace V, De Fusco C, Colao A, Macchia PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples "Federico
II", Via S. Pansini, 5 - 80131 Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is a frequent disease occurring with
an incidence of about 1/2500 newborns/year. In 80-85% of the cases CH is caused
by alterations in thyroid morphogenesis, generally indicated by the term "thyroid
dysgenesis" (TD). TD is generally a sporadic disease, but in about 5% of the
cases a genetic origin has been demonstrated. In these cases, mutations in genes 
playing a role during thyroid morphogenesis (NKX2-1, PAX8, FOXE1, NKX2-5, TSHR)
have been reported.
AIM: This work reviews the main steps of thyroid morphogenesis and all the
genetic alterations associated with TD and published in the literature.

PMID: 23698639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Astrobiology. 2013 Jun;13(6):536-42. doi: 10.1089/ast.2013.0972. Epub 2013 May
22.

Effects of ultraviolet radiation on FRTL-5 cell growth and thyroid-specific gene 
expression.

Baldini E(1), D'Armiento M, Sorrenti S, Del Sordo M, Mocini R, Morrone S, Gnessi 
L, Curcio F, Ulisse S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

During space missions, radiation represents a major hazard for human health and
involves all body organs and tissues. Regarding thyroid function, it has been
shown that ultraviolet radiation (UVC) has dose-dependent apoptotic effects on
FRTL-5 cells, a normal strain of rat thyrocytes. We examined the effects of a
sublethal dose of UVC on FRTL-5 cell growth and gene expression. Cells exposed to
10<U+2009>J/m(2) UVC showed no differences in viability compared to control cells after 
24<U+2009>h, but the BrdU incorporation was reduced, indicating a cytostatic effect.
Quantitative RT-PCR carried out at 24 and 48<U+2009>h after irradiation demonstrated
that the mRNA levels of thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroperoxidase (Tpo), and
sodium/iodide symporter (Nis) were transiently decreased at 24<U+2009>h in treated
cells, while the mRNAs of the thyroid transcription factors TTF1, Foxe1, and Pax8
were not affected. In cells cultured with TSH-free medium, the basal
transcription of Tg, Tpo, and Nis genes was equally impaired by radiation and no 
longer stimulated by TSH. Overall, the results demonstrate that a sub-apoptotic
dose of UVC compromises not only thyrocyte proliferation but also the expression 
of genes involved in thyroid hormone production. These findings might contribute 
to explaining the histological, biochemical, and clinical features of
hypothyroidism observed in both animals and humans during spaceflight, and
suggest that free thyroxine levels of astronauts during prolonged space missions 
should be monitored.

PMID: 23697699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Aug;37(8):1215-22. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318283b7b2.

Napsin A expression in anaplastic, poorly differentiated, and micropapillary
pattern thyroid carcinomas.

Chernock RD(1), El-Mofty SK, Becker N, Lewis JS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. rchernock@path.wustl.edu

Napsin A is a sensitive and specific marker for pulmonary adenocarcinoma versus
squamous cell carcinoma. However, studies have shown that napsin A is also
positive in approximately 5% of papillary thyroid carcinomas. The prevalence of
napsin A in more aggressive types of thyroid carcinoma is unknown. Napsin A
positivity in metastatic thyroid carcinoma, especially in conjunction with
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), could be misdiagnosed as lung
adenocarcinoma. We investigated napsin A, TTF-1, and PAX8 expression in 26
anaplastic, 16 poorly differentiated, and 2 micropapillary pattern thyroid
carcinomas. A focal micropapillary component was also present in 3 poorly
differentiated and 3 anaplastic thyroid carcinomas. Four of 26 (15%) anaplastic, 
2/16 (13%) poorly differentiated, and 2/2 (100%) micropapillary pattern thyroid
carcinomas were napsin A positive. Three of the 6 cases (50%) with a focal
micropapillary component were napsin A positive (1 of these 3 cases was positive 
only in the micropapillary component). All napsin A-positive cases were also
positive for TTF-1, and all but 1 micropapillary pattern carcinoma were also PAX8
positive. In 1 case, napsin A was positive in the micropapillary component, but
PAX8 was only positive in the adjacent poorly differentiated carcinoma. In
summary, a minority of anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas
are napsin A positive. More importantly, napsin A expression is more common in
carcinomas with a micropapillary component, a pattern shared in common with some 
lung adenocarcinomas. PAX8 may be diagnostically useful to distinguish these
napsin A-positive thyroid carcinomas from lung adenocarcinomas, which are PAX8
negative.

PMID: 23681073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zh Vopr Neirokhir Im N N Burdenko. 2013;77(1):24-8; discussion 29.

[Lung cancer metastases to the brain: clinical and morphological prognostic
factors].

[Article in Russian]

Rotin DL, Paklina OV, Kobiakov GL, Shishkina LV, Kravchenko ÉV, Stepanian MA.

Brain metastases (BM) are the most frequent intracranial SOL and extremely
heterogeneous group of tumours from morphological point of view. Nevertheless,
studies devoted to BM up to now paid little attention to the histogenesis of the 
primary tumour. Lung carcinoma is the most common source of BM; morpologically
this is a very heterogeneous group of tumors, and they demostrate different
clinical pathway and outcome. The aim of present study was to evaluate clinical
and morphological prognostic factors in 126 patients with lung carcinoma
metastases to the brain, operated in 2004-2010 at Burdenko Neurosurgical
Institute. Statistical analysis demonstrated that age, gender, amount and
location of BM, primary operation and even histological tumour type were not
significant prognostic factors, meanwhile absence of extracranial metastases and 
Karnofsky index above 70 were significant factors of the favorable prognosis.

PMID: 23659117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. BMC Cancer. 2013 Apr 26;13:207. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-207.

Early pneumothorax as a feature of response to crizotinib therapy in a patient
with ALK rearranged lung adenocarcinoma.

Gennatas S, Stanway SJ, Thomas R, Min T, Shah R, O'Brien ME, Popat S.

BACKGROUND: Single arm phase 1 and 2 studies on Crizotinib in ALK-positive
patients so far have shown rapid and durable responses. Spontaneous
pneumothoraces as a result of response to anti-cancer therapy are rare in
oncology but have been documented in a number of tumour types including lung
cancer. This includes cytotoxic chemotherapy as well as molecular targeted agents
such as gefitinib and Bevacizumab. These often require chest drain insertion or
surgical intervention with associated morbidity and mortality. They have also
been associated with response to treatment. This is the first report we are aware
of documenting pneumothorax as response to crizotinib therapy.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 48-year-old Caucasian male presented with a Stage IV, TTF1
positive, EGFR wild-type adenocarcinoma of the lung. He received first line
chemotherapy with three cycles of cisplatin-pemetrexed chemotherapy with a
differential response, and then second-line erlotinib for two months before
further radiological evidence of disease progression. Further analysis of his
diagnostic specimen identified an ALK rearrangement by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). He was commenced on crizotinib therapy 250 mg orally twice 
daily. At his 4-week assessment he had a chest radiograph that identified a large
left-sided pneumothorax with disease response evident on the right. Chest CT
confirmed a 50% left-sided pneumothorax on a background of overall disease
response. A chest tube was inserted with complete resolution of the pneumothorax 
that did not recur following its removal.
CONCLUSION: Our case demonstrates this potential complication of crizotinib
therapy and we therefore recommend that pneumothorax be considered in patients on
crizotinib presenting with high lung metastatic burden and with worsening
dyspnoea.

PMCID: PMC3640977
PMID: 23617826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;42(1):53-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.01.015.

[Squamous cell nodules in the thyroid: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu YB, Li BZ, Wang P.

PMID: 23611278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;42(1):37-41. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.01.008.

[Clinicopathologic characteristics of primary thyroid-like follicular carcinoma
in kidney].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu HW(1), Chen WJ, You Y, Cui QC, Liu TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinicopathological characteristics of primary
thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of the kidney.
METHODS: A case of primary thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of the kidney was
studied with histology and immunohistochemical staining, and its clinical and
pathological findings were further analyzed with review of the literature.
RESULTS: The patient was a 26-year-old asymptomatic woman who had a kidney mass
during her annual physical examination. The tumor was well-circumscribed.
Pathologically, the tumor showed follicular structures with colloid-like material
in the lumina. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed intense staining for
CK7 and vimentin and negative for thyoid transcripation factor-1, thyroglobulin, 
thyoid peroxidase and RCC.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of primary thyroid-like follicular carcinoma of the
kidney is based on the characteristic follicular architecture with colloid-like
material, and the metastasis from a thyroid follicular carcinoma must be excluded
clinically and pathologically before making the final diagnosis.

PMID: 23611271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Jul;12(7):1276-87. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0841. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

Resveratrol induces differentiation markers expression in anaplastic thyroid
carcinoma via activation of Notch1 signaling and suppresses cell growth.

Yu XM(1), Jaskula-Sztul R, Ahmed K, Harrison AD, Kunnimalaiyaan M, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine, Carbone
Cancer Center, Madison, WI 53792-7375, USA.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is an extremely aggressive malignancy with
undifferentiated features, for which conventional treatments, including
radioactive iodine ablation, are usually not effective. Recent evidence suggests 
that the Notch1 pathway is important in the regulation of thyroid cancer cell
growth and expression of thyrocyte differentiation markers. However, drug
development targeting Notch1 signaling in ATC remains largely underexplored.
Previously, we have identified resveratrol out of over 7,000 compounds as the
most potent Notch pathway activator using a high-throughput screening method. In 
this study, we showed that resveratrol treatment (10-50 µmol/L) suppressed ATC
cell growth in a dose-dependent manner for both HTh7 and 8505C cell lines via
S-phase cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. Resveratrol induced functional Notch1
protein expression and activated the pathway by transcriptional regulation. In
addition, the expression of thyroid-specific genes including TTF1, TTF2, Pax8,
and sodium iodide symporter (NIS) was upregulated in both ATC cell lines with
resveratrol treatment. Notch1 siRNA interference totally abrogated the induction 
of TTF1 and Pax8 but not of TTF2. Moreover, Notch1 silencing by siRNA decreased
resveratrol-induced NIS expression. In summary, our data indicate that
resveratrol inhibits cell growth and enhances redifferentiation in ATC cells
dependent upon the activation of Notch1 signaling. These findings provide the
first documentation for the role of resveratrol in ATC redifferentiation,
suggesting that activation of Notch1 signaling could be a potential therapeutic
strategy for patients with ATC and thus warrants further clinical investigation.

PMCID: PMC3707971
PMID: 23594881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cancer Res Ther. 2013 Jan-Mar;9(1):145-7. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.110375.

Scalp metastases--an unusual presentation of non-small cell lung cancer prognosis
of cutaneous metastases in the current era.

Rachakonda KM(1), George MK, Peek RD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Tamworth Base Hospital, Dean Street, Tamworth, NSW 2340,
Australia. kmrachakonda@gmail.com

We report a case of metastatic lung cancer presenting as scalp metastases.
Immunohistochemistry and radiological investigations helped in making the
diagnosis. We also report better survival as seen in our present case using newer
chemotherapeutic agents. The report emphasizes the need to look carefully for
skin lesions as they provide easily accessible tissue for histopathology and also
aid in proper staging as they can be missed out on routine radiological
investigations. The case also reflects improvement in cancer care and outcomes in
recent times.

PMID: 23575099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013;6(4):630-8. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

An immunohistochemical study of primary signet-ring cell carcinoma of the stomach
and colorectum: III. Expressions of EMA, CEA, CA19-9, CDX-2, p53, Ki-67 antigen, 
TTF-1, vimentin, and p63 in normal mucosa and in 42 cases.

Terada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shizuoka City Shimizu Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
piyo0111jp@yahoo.co.jp

There have no comprehensive immunohistochemical studies of primary signet ring
cell carcinoma (SRCC) in the stomach and colorectum. The author examined the
expression of nine common antigens (EMA, CEA, CA19-9, CDX-2, p53, Ki-67 antigen, 
TTF-1, vimentin, and p63) in the non-tumorous normal epithelium of the stomach
and colorectum and in 42 cases of primary SRCC of the stomach (30 cases) and
colorectum (12 cases). The normal epithelium of the stomach and colon
consistently (100%) expressed EMA, CEA, CA19-9, CDX-2, and Ki-67 (labeling <15%).
Normal epithelium of these locations never expressed p53, TTF-1, vimentin, and
p63. In the primary gastric SRCC, the expression percentage of EMA was 57%
(17/30), CEA 100% (30/30), CA19-9 100% (30/30), CDX-2 43% (13/30), p53 83%
(25/30), Ki-67 100% (30/30) (labeling index= 36 ± 23 %), TTF-1 0% (0/30),
vimentin 0% (0/30), and p63 0% (0/30). In primary colorectal SRCC, the expression
percentage of EMA was 25% (3/12), CEA 100% (12/12), CA19-9 100% (12/12), CDX-2
93% (28/30), p53 75% (9/12), Ki-67 100% (30/30) (labeling index= 47% ± 26 %),
TTF-1 0% (0/12), vimentin 0% (0/12), and p63 0% (0/12). A comparative statistical
analysis showed significant difference in EMA (gastric SRCC 57% vs colorectal
SRCC 25%) and CDX-2 (43% vs 93%). There were no significant differences in the
other seven antigens' expression between primary gastric SRCC and primary
colorectal SRCC. These findings provide much knowledge of primary SRCC of the
stomach and colorectum. The data indicated primary gastric SRCC frequently
express EMA but not CDX-2 whereas primary colorectal SRCC frequently express
CDX-2 but not EMA. These findings also suggest that EMA and CDX-2 are
down-regulated during the gastric SRCC carcinogenesis. This down regulations may 
be associated with the malignant transformation of gastric SRCC. The data of
colorectal SRCC suggest EMA is markedly down-regulated and also suggest that this
EMA down-regulation may be associated with the carcinogenesis of colorectal SRCC.
The expression pattern of EMA and CDX-2 may be useful in differential diagnosis
between primary gastric SRCC and primary colorectal SRCC in the metastatic sites 
of SRCC.

PMCID: PMC3606852
PMID: 23573309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Lung. 2013 Jun;191(3):271-80. doi: 10.1007/s00408-013-9458-4. Epub 2013 Apr 7.

Histology as a potential clinical predictor of outcome in advanced non-small-cell
lung cancer treated with vinorelbine and mitomycin combination chemotherapy.

Wibmer T(1), Berghmans T, Kropf-Sanchen C, Lafitte JJ, Rüdiger S, Paesmans M,
Blanta I, Scherpereel A, Stoiber KM, Rottbauer W, Sculier JP, Schumann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 23, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The importance of clinical predictors in the treatment of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has increased during the last decade. This
retrospective study analyzed the combined patient-level data from two phase II
trials that investigated the efficacy and safety of combination chemotherapy with
vinorelbine and mitomycin in patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC. 
The aim of this analysis was to determine if patients' baseline and disease
characteristics, including histology, gender, smoking history, and expression of 
TTF-1, might be potential predictors of outcome.
METHODS: Response rates, unadjusted survival times, and Cox covariate-adjusted
hazard ratios (HRs) were calculated. Results were reported separately for each
subgroup in each individual trial and in the pooled data set.
RESULTS: A total of 175 patients were included in this analysis. Adjusted HRs for
both overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) favored the
nonadenocarcinoma histology subgroup, achieving a statistical significance for OS
in the pooled data (n = 175; HR 0.68; 95 % CI 0.49-0.94; p = 0.019).
TTF-1-negative immunohistochemistry was associated with a significantly higher
response rate (25 vs. 0 %; p = 0.04) and with a nonsignificant advantage in OS
(n = 33; HR 1.23; 95 % CI 0.56-2.73; p = 0.608). Gender and smoking history were 
not strongly related to outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this analysis indicate that patients with
nonadenocarcinoma histology might get superior benefit from combination
chemotherapy with vinorelbine and mitomycin. These results should be confirmed in
a prospective study.

PMID: 23564228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Sep;20(9):3015-22. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-2937-2. Epub 2013
Mar 23.

EGFR and TTF-1 gene amplification in surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas:
clinicopathologic significance and effect on response to EGFR-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in recurred cases.

Lee JS(1), Kim HR, Lee CY, Shin M, Shim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Gene amplifications are implicated in cancer development and
progression. In this study we investigated the clinicopathologic characteristics 
associated with EGFR or TTF-1 amplification in lung adenocarcinomas and its
prognostic significance.
METHODS: We analyzed 118 cases of surgically resected primary lung
adenocarcinomas. Amplification of the EGFR or TTF-1 gene was evaluated by
fluorescence in situ hybridization and correlated with patients'
clinicopathologic features, including disease-free survival (DFS) and overall
survival (OS), in all patients and a subset that were TTF-1 positive or had EGFR 
mutation. Progression-free survival (PFS) also was analyzed among patients with
EGFR mutation who had recurred cancer that was treated with EGFR tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors.
RESULTS: EGFR or TTF-1 gene amplification was an independent poor prognostic
factor for DFS in all patients (p=0.001), in patients with TTF-1 positivity
(p=0.010), and in patients with EGFR mutation (p<0.001) and for OS in patients
with TTF-1 positivity (p=0.021) and patients with EGFR mutation (p<0.001).
Patients with TTF-1 amplification had a shorter PFS following EGFR TKI treatment 
(p=0.040).
CONCLUSIONS: EGFR or TTF-1 gene amplification was a predictive factor for poor
prognosis in terms of DFS and OS, especially in patients with TTF-1 positivity or
EGFR mutation. Our results also suggested that TTF-1 amplification might be a
predictive marker of poor response to EGFR-TKI therapy in patients with recurrent
tumor after surgical resection.

PMID: 23525704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Case Rep Endocrinol. 2013;2013:719304. doi: 10.1155/2013/719304. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

A papillary thyroid microcarcinoma revealed by a single bone lesion with no poor 
prognostic factors.

Godbert Y(1), Henriques-Figueiredo B, Cazeau AL, Carrat X, Stegen M, Soubeyran I,
Bonichon F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Institut Bergonié, 229 Cours de L'Argonne,
33076 Bordeaux, France.

Objectives. Thyroid carcinomas incidence, in particular papillary variants, is
increasing. These cancers are generally considered to have excellent prognosis,
and papillary microcarcinomas are usually noninvasive. Many prognostic
histopathology factors have been described to guide therapeutic decisions. Most
patients are treated with total thyroidectomy without radioiodine treatment or
partial surgery. Case Summary. A 65-year-old man with no significant medical
history presented with pain in the left chest wall that had been present for
several months. A computed tomography (CT) found a large tissue mass of 4<U+2009>cm
responsible for lysis of the middle arch of the 4th rib on the left. It was a
single lesion, highly hypermetabolic on the 18-FDG PET/CT. The histology analysis
of the biopsy and surgical specimen favored an adenocarcinoma with immunostaining
positive for TTF1 and thyroglobulin (Tg). The total thyroidectomy carried out
subsequently revealed a 4<U+2009>mm papillary microcarcinoma with vesicular architecture
of the right lobe, well delimited and distant from the capsule without vascular
embolisms. After two radioiodine treatments, the patient is in complete clinical,
biological, and radiological remission. Conclusion. This extremely rare case of a
singular bone metastasis revealing a papillary thyroid microcarcinoma illustrates
the necessity of further research to better characterize the forms of papillary
thyroid microcarcinomas with potentially poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3590508
PMID: 23509641  [PubMed]


162. Int J Surg Pathol. 2013 Jun;21(3):229-39. doi: 10.1177/1066896913476750. Epub
2013 Mar 12.

<U+0394>Np63 (p40) distribution inside lung cancer: a driver biomarker approach to tumor
characterization.

Pelosi G(1), Rossi G, Cavazza A, Righi L, Maisonneuve P, Barbareschi M, Graziano 
P, Pastorino U, Garassino M, de Braud F, Papotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia Diagnostica e Laboratorio, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori e Università degli Studi, Via G. Venezian, 1, I-20133 Milan,
Italy. giuseppe.pelosi@unimi.it

<U+0394>Np63 (henceforth simply p40) is a squamous/basal-type biomarker corresponding to
nontransactivating (non-TA) isoforms of p63 gene. Its prospective relevance as
driver biomarker in lung cancer has not yet been thoroughly investigated. In all,
72 adenocarcinomas (ADs), 27 squamous cell carcinomas (SQCs), 13 pleomorphic
carcinomas (PLCs), 10 small-cell lung carcinomas (SCLCs), 5 large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNECs), 5 adenosquamous carcinomas (ADSQCs), 3
large-cell carcinomas with basaloid features (B-LCC), 2 carcinoids, 2
carcinosarcomas (CS), 2 salivary-gland type tumors (SGTTs) of the lung, and 5
pleural malignant epithelioid mesotheliomas (MEMs) were prospectively diagnosed
by morphology and verified by immunohistochemistry for p40, p63, and thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF1). Histological scores (HS) were devised by
multiplying the percentage of immunoreactive cells (0 to 100%) by immunostaining 
intensity (low = 1 vs strong = 2, according to internal controls). There was a
nonrandom distribution of p40 across the diverse tumor groups and cell
differentiation lineages, with p40-HS > 100 closely paralleling squamous or
myoepithelial carcinomas (SQC, B-LCC, SQC-containing PLC, ADSQC with predominant 
SQC, SGTT), and p40-HS = 10 pinpointing AD, AD-containing PLC, or CS and
neuroendocrine (NE) tumors. At variance, p63-HS was significantly higher than p40
in AD (P < .0001) and NE tumors (P = .0156), with positive predictive value being
83% and 95% and overall accuracy being 95% and 99%, respectively. Also, TTF1 was 
shared by gland-differentiated and NE tumors. MEM cases were always negative for 
all biomarkers. The HS-guided assessment of p40 allowed an effective orientation 
among thoracic malignancies at the level of individual tumor patients thereby
contributing to prospectively realize a driver, holistic approach to cancer
characterization.

PMID: 23486764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jun;66(6):471-7. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201109. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

Use of immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of problematic breast lesions.

Lee AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Nottingham University Hospitals, City Hospital
Campus, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK. andrew.lee@nuh.nhs.uk

Most diagnoses in breast pathology can be made with H&E sections. Nevertheless
immunohistochemistry plays a useful supplementary role. This article reviews the 
common uses of immunohistochemistry in diagnostic breast pathology. It is
important to be aware of the limitations of individual antibodies. Such problems 
can often be overcome by using panels of antibodies. Quality control is also
essential: internal and external controls should show appropriate staining.
Immunohistochemistry must be interpreted in combination with the morphology seen 
on H&E sections. Myoepithelial markers, such as smooth muscle actin, smooth
muscle myosin heavy chain and p63, are useful for distinguishing invasive
carcinoma from sclerosing lesions and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and in the
classification of papillary lesions. Basal cytokeratins can help distinguish
epithelial hyperplasia of usual type (UEH) and clonal proliferations such as DCIS
and lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). UEH usually shows patchy expression whereas
DCIS and other clonal proliferations are typically negative. E-cadherin can
usually separate DCIS and LCIS: DCIS typically shows membrane staining and most
LCIS is negative. Cytokeratins can be used to detect small nodal metastases or
subtle invasive carcinomas such as invasive lobular carcinomas.
Immunohistochemistry plays a useful role in diagnosing spindle cell lesions such 
as a panel of cytokeratins to identify spindle cell carcinomas.
Immunohistochemistry is helpful in recognising metastases to the breast.
Different antibodies are useful for different tumours: WT1 for ovarian carcinoma;
TTF1 for pulmonary adenocarcinoma; S100, melan-A and HMB45 for melanoma; and
lymphoid markers for lymphoma.

PMID: 23486609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056333. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Simultaneous multi-antibody staining in non-small cell lung cancer strengthens
diagnostic accuracy especially in small tissue samples.

Kayser G(1), Csanadi A, Otto C, Plönes T, Bittermann N, Rawluk J, Passlick B,
Werner M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
gian.kayser@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Histological subclassification of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has growing 
therapeutic impact. In advanced cancer stages tissue specimens are usually
bioptically collected. These small samples are of extraordinary value since
molecular analyses are gaining importance for targeted therapies. We therefore
studied the feasibility, diagnostic accuracy, economic and prognostic effects of 
a tissue sparing simultaneous multi-antibody assay for subclassification of
NSCLC. Of 265 NSCLC patients tissue multi arrays (TMA) were constructed to
simulate biopsy samples. TMAs were stained by a simultaneous bi-color
multi-antibody assay consisting of TTF1, Vimentin, p63 and neuroendocrine markers
(CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin). Classification was based mainly on the
current proposal of the IASLC with a hierarchical decision tree for
subclassification into adenocarcinoma (LAC), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), large
cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) and NSCLC not otherwise specified.
Investigation of tumor heterogeneity showed an explicit lower variation for
immunohistochemical analyses compared to conventional classification.
Furthermore, survival analysis of our combined immunohistochemical classification
revealed distinct separation of each entity's survival curve. This was
statistically significant for therapeutically important subgroups (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.045). As
morphological and molecular cancer testing is emerging, our multi-antibody assay 
in combination with standardized classification delivers accurate and reliable
separation of histomorphological diagnoses. Additionally, it permits clinically
relevant subtyping of NSCLC including LCNEC. Our multi-antibody assay may
therefore be of special value, especially in diagnosing small biopsies. It futher
delivers substantial prognostic information with therapeutic consequences.
Integration of immunohistochemical subtyping including investigation of
neuroendocrine differentiation into standard histopathological classification of 
NSCLC must, therefore, be considered.

PMCID: PMC3572034
PMID: 23418554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013;6(3):516-20. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Struma ovarii simulating ovarian sertoli cell tumor: a case report with
literature review.

Ning Y(1), Kong F, Cragun JM, Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics & Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai, China.
nyiping@yahoo.com.cn

Struma ovarii, as a monodermal variant of ovarian teratoma, constitutes about
less than 3% of ovarian teratomas. It is difficult to be macroscopically
recognized. Multiple appearances under microscope serve as another reason to
mislead the accurate pathologic evaluation. Here, we report an unusual case of
struma ovarii occurred in a 77 years old woman, which is currently known as the
oldest age for this disease. The frozen section morphologically showed sex cord
like elements and was suspicious for a sex-cord stromal tumor, probably a Sertoli
cell tumor. Final pathological diagnosis was confirmed as struma ovarii based on 
the typical morphologic thyroid follicles and immunohistochemical staining
results.

PMCID: PMC3563194
PMID: 23412916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Feb;137(2):155. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0123-LE.

Role of Napsin A and TTF1 as a diagnostic marker for lung adenocarcinoma.

Iqbal J.

Comment on
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Feb;136(2):163-71.
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Feb;136(2):155-62.

PMID: 23368855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Lab Invest. 2013 Apr;93(4):408-21. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan
28.

Neural lineage-specific homeoprotein BRN2 is directly involved in TTF1 expression
in small-cell lung cancer.

Sakaeda M(1), Sato H, Ishii J, Miyata C, Kamma H, Shishido-Hara Y, Shimoyamada H,
Fujiwara M, Endo T, Tanaka R, Kondo H, Goya T, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) plays crucial roles in thyroid, lung, and
developing brain morphogenesis. Because TTF1-expressing neoplasms are generated
from organs and tissues that normally express TTF1, such as the thyroid
follicular epithelium and peripheral lung airway epithelium, TTF1 is widely used 
as a cell lineage-specific and diagnostic marker for thyroid carcinomas and for
lung adenocarcinomas with terminal respiratory unit (TRU) differentiation.
However, among lung neuroendocrine tumors, small-cell carcinomas (small-cell lung
cancers (SCLCs)), most of which are generated from the central airway, also
frequently express TTF1 at high levels. To clarify how SCLCs express TTF1, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms of its expression using cultivated lung
cancer cells and focusing upon neural cell-specific transcription factors. Both
SCLC cells and lung adenocarcinoma cells predominantly expressed isoform 2 of
TTF1, and TTF1 promoter assays in SCLC cells revealed that the crucial region for
activation of the promoter, which is adjacent to the transcription start site of 
TTF1 isoform 2, has potent FOX-, LHX-, and BRN2-binding sites. Transfection
experiments using expression vectors for FOXA1, FOXA2, LHX2, LHX6, and BRN2
showed that BRN2 substantially upregulated TTF1 expression, whereas FOXA1/2
weakly upregulated TTF1 expression. BRN2 and FOXA1/2 binding to the TTF1 promoter
was confirmed through chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, and TTF1
expression in SCLC cells was considerably downregulated after BRN2 knockdown.
Furthermore, the TTF1 promoter in SCLC cells was scarcely methylated, and
immunohistochemical examinations using a series of primary lung tumors indicated 
that TTF1 and BRN2 were coexpressed only in SCLC cells. These findings suggest
that TTF1 expression in SCLC is a cell lineage-specific phenomenon that involves 
the developing neural cell-specific homeoprotein BRN2.

PMID: 23358112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb;139(2):160-6. doi: 10.1309/AJCP62WJUAMSZCOM.

Napsin A expression in primary mucin-producing adenocarcinomas of the lung: an
immunohistochemical study.

Wu J(1), Chu PG, Jiang Z, Lau SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA,
USA.

Immunohistochemical expression of napsin A in primary pulmonary mucinous tumors
is not well established. Napsin A immunoreactivity was evaluated in 43
mucin-producing adenocarcinomas of the lung consisting of 18 tumors formerly
classified as mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, 15 colloid adenocarcinomas, 
5 solid predominant adenocarcinomas with mucin production, and 5 adenocarcinomas 
with signet ring cell features, as well as in 25 extrapulmonary mucinous
adenocarcinomas of different anatomic sites. Immunohistochemical expression of
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) was also compared. Thirty-three percent of
mucinous lung tumors exhibited positive immunoreactivity for napsin A, whereas
42% expressed TTF-1. All 25 extrapulmonary mucinous adenocarcinomas lacked
expression of napsin A and TTF-1. Mucin-producing neoplasms of the lung
infrequently express napsin A, suggesting that immunohistochemical assessment of 
napsin A may have limited diagnostic usefulness for distinguishing primary and
metastatic mucinous adenocarcinomas involving the lung.

PMID: 23355200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Korean J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jan 25;61(1):50-3.

Metastatic common bile duct cancer from pulmonary adenocarcinoma presenting as
obstructive jaundice.

Cha IH(1), Kim JN, Kim YS, Ryu SH, Moon JS, Lee HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul Paik Hospital, Inje University College 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We report an extremely rare case of metastatic common bile duct cancer from
pulmonary adenocarcinoma presenting as obstructive jaundice. The patient was a
76-year-old male, who presented with generalized weakness and right upper
quadrant pain. Plain chest X-ray noted multiple small nodules in both lung
fields. Abdominal computed tomography scan showed a stricture of the mid common
bile duct along with ductal wall enhancement. Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiography revealed a concentric, abrupt narrowing of the mid-common bile
duct suggestive of primary bile duct cancer. However, pathology comfirmed
metastatic common bile duct cancer arising from pulmonary adenocarcinoma with
immunohistochemical study with thyroid transcriptional factor-1 (TTF-1).

PMID: 23354351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cutan Pathol. 2013 Apr;40(4):431-3. doi: 10.1111/cup.12079. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Expression of focal TTF-1 expression in a case of CK7/CK20-positive Merkel cell
carcinoma.

Reddi DM, Puri PK.

PMID: 23330966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2013 Jan 1;18:740-7.

Role of homeobox genes in the hypothalamic development and energy balance.

Kaji T(1), Nonogaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lifestyle Medicine, Translational Research Center, Tohoku
University Hospital, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8574, Japan.

Homeobox genes contribute to the regionalization, patterning and cell
differentiation during embryogenesis and organ development. During mammalian
embryonic development, homeobox genes, including orthopedia (Otp), a
brain-specific homeobox transcription factor (Bsx) and a thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1), are expressed in the hypothalamus. The genetic ablation of
these genes indicated that Otp and TTF-1 are essential for the normal
morphological development of the hypothalamus, including the arcuate nucleus
(ARC), whereas Bsx is not required. In the adult stage, Bsx and TTF-1 continue to
be expressed in the hypothalamus, including the ARC, and serve as transcription
factors of neuropeptide Y and agouti-related protein. The expression of
hypothalamic Bsx and TTF-1 can be altered by the feeding state and appetite
regulatory hormones such as ghrelin and leptin. Although Bsx and TTF-1 are
essential for normal feeding behavior in adult mice, they exert different effects
on the expression of hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and body weight
homeostasis. Thus, the hypothalamic homeobox genes may contribute to the
dissociation of food intake and body weight via AgRP-POMC neurons.

PMID: 23276958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Indian J Dent Res. 2012 Jul-Aug;23(4):558-9. doi: 10.4103/0970-9290.104978.

Multiple gingival metastasis of adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Ravi Prakash SM(1), Verma S, Gill N, Malik V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Radiology, Kothiwal Dental College and
Research Centre, Moradabad, India.

Metastasis to the gingival soft tissues is an extremely rare phenomenon, and
metastasis of multiple lesions (i.e. more than 2 lesions), is even more hard to
find. In this study, we have reported a rare case of lung adenocarcinoma, which
metastasized to the maxillary (2 lesions) and mandibular gingivae (1 lesion) in a
57 year old male patient. Metastasis was also seen to the vertebrae. The
differential diagnosis consisted of acute myelomonocytic leukemia, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, haemangioma, pyogenic granuloma, giant cell granuloma,
peripheral fibroma, primary gingival carcinoma and secondary metastasis. Contrast
enhanced computed tomography of the lung showed a well-defined mass situated
below the right hilum with lower lobe consolidation and pleural effusion on the
right side with dorsal spinal metastasis. Excisional biopsy of the lesions was
consistent with the diagnosis, and the immunohistochemical analysis was positive 
for cytokeratin 7, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), thyroid transforming factor 1 
(TTF1), and negative for vimentin and cytokeratin 20 (CK20).

PMID: 23257503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Histol Histopathol. 2013 May;28(5):543-56. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Intrathyroid epithelial thymoma (ITET) and carcinoma showing thymus-like
differentiation (CASTLE): CD5-positive neoplasms mimicking squamous cell
carcinoma of the thyroid.

Kakudo K(1), Bai Y, Ozaki T, Homma K, Ito Y, Miyauchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Kobe-Tokiwa University, Kobe 653-0838,
Japan. k-kakudo@kobe-tokiwa.ac.jp

Carcinoma of possible thymic epithelial origin may occur within the thyroid
gland, which was first reported by Miyauchi et al. as intrathyroid epithelial
thymoma (ITET). ITET is a rare tumor comprising about 0.08% of all primary
thyroid malignancies. It is a low-grade thyroid carcinoma with squamous cell
differentiation whose overall survival rate was found to be 71%. Lymph node
metastasis at surgery was found in 40% and hematogenous metastases developed in
bones, liver and lungs. This tumor grows within the thyroid gland and invades
into the thyroid parenchyma as well as into the extrathyroid structures. It is a 
well-circumscribed solid tumor with a sharp tumor border, but is not capsulated. 
After fixation, the cut surface of the tumor is gray-white in color and is a
solid tumor with lobulation. Tumor calcification was not detected in our 15
cases. The tumor cells show solid sheets of growth with occasional keratinization
without follicular or papillary structures. Lymphocytic infiltration in the
stroma is one of the most characteristic features of this tumor. The tumor cells 
are polygonal epithelial cells with distinct nucleoli and ill-defined cell
border. Positive immunoreactivity for CD5 is a key feature to differentiate it
from undifferentiated carcinoma, poorly differentiated carcinoma, medullary (C
cell) carcinoma and high-grade squamous cell carcinoma (so-called primary
squamous cell carcinoma) of the thyroid. Negative immunoreactivity for
calcitonin, TTF1 and thyroglobulin, and positive immunoreactivity for p63 and KIT
are also helpful for differential diagnosis. Nuclear atypia is mild and mitoses
are less frequent, with an intermediate proliferation index (MIB-1 labeling index
is usually less than 20%), which are also helpful to differentiate it from
high-grade primary squamous cell carcinoma of the thyroid. The tumors in our 15
cases demonstrate 3 histological subtypes: keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
type, non-keratinizing basaloid cell carcinoma (lymphoepithelioma-like) type and 
neuroendocrine carcinoma type, which correspond to subtypes of the mediastinal
thymic carcinomas.

PMID: 23233417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Virchows Arch. 2013 Mar;462(3):337-41. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1353-5. Epub 2012 
Dec 9.

SALL4 is a useful marker in the diagnostic work-up of germ cell tumors in
extra-testicular locations.

Camparo P(1), Comperat EM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Pathologie Amiens Picardie, 51 rue Jeanne d'Arc, 80000 Amiens,
France. philippecamparo@gmail.com

We evaluated the impact of SALL4 immunostaining on the diagnosis of
non-testicular germ cell tumors in clinical practice. We retrieved cases of six
mediastinal, five retroperitoneal, and eight central nervous system tumors that
were diagnosed as extra-testicular germ cell tumors (GCT) as well as 20
location-matched non-GCT. Each tumor we stained immunohistochemically for PLAP,
OCT3-4, CD117, CD30, FP, -HCG, glycipan-3, SALL 4, AE1-AE3, EMA, CK7, CK20, CD45,
TTF1, vimentin, and GFA. The results were assessed independently by two
experienced pathologists. In 18 of 19 cases (95 %), SALL4 was strongly expressed,
either homogenously (16 cases) or focally (two cases). All other GCT markers
(PLAP, OCT3-4, CD117, CD30, FP, -HCG, and glycipan-3) were expressed with a lower
frequency (21-69 %). The specificity of SALL4 was 100 % in our series. SALL4
should be part of the first panel of antibodies for the diagnosis of a midline
tumor (mediastinal, retroperitoneal, or pineal) in patients under the age of 40
years. We also recommend that SALL4 be used in the diagnostic work-up of
undifferentiated tumors in any location and in patients of any age. When a tumor 
is SALL4 positive, in case of need the diagnosis of germ cell tumor can be
further confirmed using additional conventional markers.

PMID: 23224120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2012;53(3 Suppl):817-20.

The role of immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of neoplastic pleural
effusions.

Dinu M(1), Ciurea RN, Stefan M, Georgescu AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy of Craiova, 2-4 Petru Rares Street, Craiova, Romania.

Identification of the origin of neoplastic pleural effusion is a major concern in
lung pathology. This study followed the diagnostic role of a panel of antibodies 
that included calretinin, HBME1, D2-40, Ber-EP4, CK5/6, CEA and TTF1, in a total 
of 37 cases of pleural and lung cancer with tumor-type cytology, later confirmed 
by histopathology. For mesothelioma, positive staining for calretinin, D2-40 and 
CK5/6 and negative for CEA and TTF1 were characteristic. For lung
adenocarcinomas, we found Ber-EP4, CEA and TTF1 positivity, and calretinin, D2-40
and CK5/6 negativity. Squamous lung carcinomas were positive for Ber-EP4, CK5/6
and CEA and negative for HBME1, D2-40 and TTF1. The panel of antibodies used in
this study provides a differential diagnosis between mesotheliomas and lung
carcinomas as well as between lung adenocarcinomas and squamous carcinomas.

PMID: 23188446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Br J Cancer. 2013 Feb 5;108(2):469-76. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.495. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

EGFR pathway biomarkers in erlotinib-treated patients with advanced pancreatic
cancer: translational results from the randomised, crossover phase 3 trial
AIO-PK0104.

Boeck S(1), Jung A, Laubender RP, Neumann J, Egg R, Goritschan C, Vehling-Kaiser 
U, Winkelmann C, Fischer von Weikersthal L, Clemens MR, Gauler TC, Märten A,
Klein S, Kojouharoff G, Barner M, Geissler M, Greten TF, Mansmann U, Kirchner T, 
Heinemann V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Klinikum 
Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Marchioninistr 15, Munich
D-81377, Germany. stefan.boeck@med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: We aimed to identify molecular epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) tissue biomarkers in pancreatic cancer (PC) patients treated with the
anti-EGFR agent erlotinib within the phase 3 randomised AIO-PK0104 study.
METHODS: AIO-PK0104 was a multicenter trial comparing gemcitabine/erlotinib
followed by capecitabine with capecitabine/erlotinib followed by gemcitabine in
advanced PC; primary study end point was the time-to-treatment failure after
first- and second-line therapy (TTF2). Translational analyses were performed for 
KRAS exon 2 mutations, EGFR expression, PTEN expression, the EGFR intron 1 and
exon 13 R497K polymorphism (PM). Biomarker data were correlated with TTF, overall
survival (OS) and skin rash.
RESULTS: Archival tumour tissue was available from 208 (74%) of the randomised
patients. The KRAS mutations were found in 70% (121 out of 173) of patients and
exclusively occurred in codon 12. The EGFR overexpression was detected in 89 out 
of 181 patients (49%) by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and 77 out of 166 patients
(46%) had an EGFR gene amplification by fluorescence in-situ hybridisation
(FISH); 30 out of 171 patients (18%) had a loss of PTEN expression, which was
associated with an inferior TTF1 (first-line therapy; HR 0.61, P=0.02) and TTF2
(HR 0.66, P=0.04). The KRAS wild-type status was associated with improved OS (HR 
1.68, P=0.005); no significant OS correlation was found for EGFR-IHC (HR 0.96),
EGFR-FISH (HR 1.22), PTEN-IHC (HR 0.77), intron 1 (HR 0.91) or exon 13 R497K PM
(HR 0.83). None of the six biomarkers correlated with the occurrence of skin
rash.
CONCLUSION: The KRAS wild-type was associated with an improved OS in
erlotinib-treated PC patients in this phase 3 study; it remains to be defined
whether this association is prognostic or predictive.

PMCID: PMC3566829
PMID: 23169292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cancer Sci. 2013 Feb;104(2):266-73. doi: 10.1111/cas.12065. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Lung cancer with loss of BRG1/BRM, shows epithelial mesenchymal transition
phenotype and distinct histologic and genetic features.

Matsubara D(1), Kishaba Y, Ishikawa S, Sakatani T, Oguni S, Tamura T, Hoshino H, 
Sugiyama Y, Endo S, Murakami Y, Aburatani H, Fukayama M, Niki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Pathology, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Tochigi, Japan.

BRG1 and BRM, two core catalytic subunits in SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling
complexes, have been suggested as tumor suppressors, yet their roles in
carcinogenesis are unclear. Here, we present evidence that loss of BRG1 and BRM
is involved in the progression of lung adenocarcinomas. Analysis of 15 lung
cancer cell lines indicated that BRG1 mutations correlated with loss of BRG1
expression and that loss of BRG1 and BRM expression was frequent in
E-cadherin-low and vimentin-high cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of 93
primary lung adenocarcinomas showed loss of BRG1 and BRM in 11 (12%) and 16 (17%)
cases, respectively. Loss of expression of BRG1 and BRM was frequent in solid
predominant adenocarcinomas and tumors with low thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1, master regulator of lung) and low cytokeratin7 and E-cadherin (two
markers for bronchial epithelial differentiation). Loss of BRG1 was correlated
with the absence of lepidic growth patterns and was mutually exclusive of
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations. In contrast, loss of BRM was
found concomitant with lepidic growth patterns and EGFR mutations. Finally, we
analyzed the publicly available dataset of 442 cases and found that loss of BRG1 
and BRM was frequent in E-cadherin-low, TTF-1-low, and vimentin-high cases and
correlated with poor prognosis. We conclude that loss of either or both BRG1 and 
BRM is involved in the progression of lung adenocarcinoma into solid predominant 
tumors with features of epithelial mesenchymal transition and loss of the
bronchial epithelial phenotype. BRG1 loss was specifically involved in the
progression of EGFR wild-type, but not EGFR-mutant tumors.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23163725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Ann Pathol. 2012 Nov;32(5 Suppl):S32-3. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2012.08.003. Epub
2012 Oct 12.

[Transcription factors: which diagnostic applications?].

[Article in French]

Scoazec JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie pathologique, hôpital Édouard-Herriot, 5, place d'Arsonval,
69437 Lyon cedex 03, France. jean-yves.scoazec@chu-lyon.fr

PMID: 23127931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;41(8):570-2. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.08.017.

[Significance of molecular technology in diagnosis and therapy of non-small-cell 
lung cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XX, Zhou CC.

PMID: 23157756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;41(8):525-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.08.004.

[Pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia and tumorlets in bronchiectasis: a
clinicopathologic study of 22 cases with review of literature].

[Article in Chinese]

Huo Z(1), Shi XH, Cui QC, Luo YF, Cao JL, Liu HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical and pathological features of pulmonary
neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia and tumorlets with bronchiectasis.
METHODS: Both the clinicopathologic changes and immunohistochemical findings were
examined with microscopy and EnVision method in 22 cases of pulmonary
neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia and tumorlets.
RESULTS: The average age of the 22 patients was 53 years, with a male to female
ratio of 9:13. On macroscopic examination the lungs showed bronchiectasis; one
case was accompanied by gray-white, soft nodules (diameter < 5 mm). Microscopy of
the HE sections showed the basic pathologic change was bronchiectasis,
accompanied by neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia and tumorlet formation in the
pulmonary parenchyma surrounding the bronchioles, presenting as single nodule (10
patients), or multifocal nodules (12 patients), with average size of 1.6 mm in
diameter. No tumor cells were identified in the lymph nodes. Sixteen of 22
patients were disease-free after an average follow-up period of 58 months (17 -
117 months); one patient died suddenly after surgery; and five were loss of
follow up. Immunohistologically, the tumor cells were positive for CgA (18/18),
Syn (16/16), AE1/AE3 (16/16) , TTF-1 (14/15), and CD56 (14/14), and Ki-67 index
was < 2% in 12 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistological staining for CgA, Syn, CD56, TTF-1 and AE1/AE3
can confirm the diagnosis. Early detection, pulmonary resection and follow-up
help prevent the progression of these diseases.

PMID: 23157743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;41(8):505-10. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.08.001.

[Relevance of molecular alterations in histopathologic subtyping of lung
adenocarcinoma based on 2011 International Multidisciplinary Lung Adenocarcinoma 
Classification].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu B(1), Shi SS, Wang X, Xu Y, Zhang XH, Yu B, Lu ZF, Wang JD, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinical School of Medical College of Nanjing
University, Nanjing General Hospital of Nanjing Command, Nanjing 210002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relevance of molecular alterations and
histopathological subtypes of lung adenocarcinoma according to 2011 International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European
Respiratory Society International Multidisciplinary Lung Adenocarcinoma
Classification.
METHODS: Mutations of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 18-21 exons
(E18-21), KRAS 12/13 codons and EML4-ALK fusion in 212 cases of lung
adenocarcinoma which underwent complete tumor resection, were detected by
immunohistochemistry, PCR-amplifying and gene sequencing. The relevance of the
molecular alterations to histopathological subtypes based on the new
classification and 2004 WHO classification were further characterized.
RESULTS: Mutations of EGFR were observed in 49.6% of lung adenocarcinomas,
involving mainly E21 (52.4%, 55/105) and E19 (36.2%, 38/105). Mutations of KRAS
were detected in 8% cases of adenocarcinoma, involving mainly codon 12 (15/17).
EML4-ALK fusions were found in 6.1% of lung adenocarcinoma, the most common
fusion mutation was type V1 (E13; A20) (7/13), followed by type V3a/b (E6a/b;
A20) (4/13). Based on the new classification, 7/10 lepidic, 63.2% (48/76)
papillary, and 5/8 micropapillary predominant adenocarcinomas harbored EGFR
mutations. EGFR mutations showed significant difference among different
histological subtypes (P = 0.008). KRAS mutations were most frequently found in
invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (1/2), followed by colloid predominant
adenocarcinoma (3/7). There was significant difference of KRAS mutations among
different histological subtypes (P = 0.003). EML4-ALK fusions were most
frequently found in the solid predominant with mucin production subtype (15.4%,
6/39), followed by colloid predominant adenocarcinoma (1/7), and no significant
difference of EML4-ALK fusions was found among different histological subtypes (P
= 0.181). Significant TTF-1 overexpression was observed in adenocarcinomas
harbored EGFR mutations (P = 0.008), and no or significantly lower level
expression of TTF-1 was observed in adenocarcinomas harbored KRAS mutations (P = 
0.000). However, there was no association between TTF-1 expression and EML4-ALK
fusions (P = 0.274). Based on the 2004 WHO classification, mutations of KRAS (P =
0.002) and EML4-ALK (P = 0.000), rather than EGFR (P = 0.502), showed significant
differences among different subtypes. According to both classification systems,
the difference of "triple negative" adenocarcinomas was not significant among
different subtypes (P = 0.684, P = 0.449, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The new classification, combined with TTF-1 immunomarker, can help
to predict the molecular alterations of EGFR and KRAS genes, but can not indicate
the EML4-ALK fusion in lung adenocarcinoma. Lepidic, papillary, and
micropapillary predominant adenocarcinomas with TTF-1 expression are closely
related to the presence of EGFR mutation, and invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma,
while colloid predominant adenocarcinoma without TTF-1 expression is closely
related to the presence of KRAS mutation.

PMID: 23157740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2012;2012:520430. doi: 10.1155/2012/520430. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

A Case of a Metastatic Disease to the Pancreas from a Small-Cell Lung Carcinoma
Documented by a CT-Scan-Guided Trucut Biopsy: The Diagnostic Role of
Cytomorphology and Immunohistochemistry.

Bouyahia N(1), Daoudi K, Moumna K, Hijri FZ, Benhammane H, Brahmi SA, Arifi S,
Mellas N, Amarti A, El Mesbahi O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco.

Unlike primary pancreatic carcinoma, metastatic lesions of the pancreas are
uncommon and account for approximately 2% of pancreatic malignancies. Small-cell 
lung carcinoma (SCLC) represents a group of highly malignant tumors giving rise
to early and widespread metastasis at the time of diagnosis. However, the
pancreas is a relatively infrequent site of metastasis by this neoplasm, and
reports on metastatic small-cell carcinoma (SCC) in the pancreas, either of
pulmonary or extrapulmonary origin, to be diagnosed by CT-scan-guided trucut
biopsy (CT-TCB) are very rare. A 56-year-old man presented with a laterocervical 
lymphadenopathy associated to a mixed-density lung mass and a mass in the
pancreatic body. CT-TCB slides from the pancreatic mass contained small, round
tumor cells with extensive nuclear molding. The cytomorphological and
histological diagnosis was metastatic SCC. Immunocytochemical staining showed
that a variable number of neoplastic cells were positive for cytokeratin 7, TTF1,
chromogranin A, and synaptophysin but negative for leukocyte common antigen and
cytokeratin 20 with a very high expression of KI67. The transbronchial needle
biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of an SCC. This case represents a rare metastatic 
lesion in the pancreas from SCLC, diagnosed by CT-TCB histological and
immunohistochemical studies.

PMCID: PMC3479941
PMID: 23119202  [PubMed]


183. Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:913517. doi: 10.1155/2012/913517. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

CD34 Expression in the Stromal Cells of Alveolar Adenoma.

De Rosa N(1), Maiorino A, De Rosa I, Curcio C, Sellitto C, Amore D.

Author information: 
(1)Complex Operative Unit of Pathology, AORN Monaldi, Naples, 80131 Naples,
Italy.

The alveolar adenoma of the lung is a rare benign tumor characterized by a
proliferation of both the alveolar epithelial cells and the mesenchymal septal
cells. Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells stain for cytokeratin (CK)
AE1AE3, CK7, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), and surfactant apoprotein
confirming the derivation by the type 2 pneumocytes. The stromal cells are
negative for these markers but they show focally smooth muscle and
muscle-specific actin positivity. We describe two cases that showed
immunohistochemically a CD34 positivity of the mesenchymal septal cells. This
aspect has been previously described in a two cases report, but not emphasized by
the authors as a distinctive feature of the lesion. We consider this CD34
positivity as a marker of immaturity or stemness of the lesional septal spindle
cells, that could be responsible of the different phenotypic and morphological
profile of the interstitial cells, that could be, therefore, considered
neoplastic and not reactive.

PMCID: PMC3480015
PMID: 23118769  [PubMed]


184. Chirurgia (Bucur). 2012 Sep-Oct;107(5):640-5.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma -- analysis of risk factors and immunological markers.

Anghel I(1), Anghel AG, Dumitru M, Soreanu CC.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, Coltea Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
ionangheldoc@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: To analyze the risk factors associated with Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
(NPC)in patients admitted to the ENT Department at Coltea Clinical Hospital in
order to assess the similarities and differences as compared to the
epidemiological data internationally reported.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a retrospective study on 178 cases that met the
inclusion criteria from 2003 to 2011.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS: There are a number of specific characteristics noticed
in our study group: a larger number of cases aged over 60 than younger patients; 
a linear fall in number of the cases aged between 30-39 years; approximately one 
third of the cases did not have any of the traditional risk factors; more than
10% of the cases were associated with lymphoma, etc.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunologic pattern of our patients presenting undifferentiated 
NPC is the following: MNF116, CK19, S100, CD34betaE12, Ki67, EBV positive. The
rest of the markers were negative (CerB2, EGFR, COX2, p53, CK7, CD117, VGFR,
PCNA, L26/CD20, UHCL1, CD15, CD30, VIM, TTF1, CLA, CK17, CEA, LMP, CD79a, EMA).

RevistaChirurgia.

PMID: 23116839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Cytol. 2012 Jul;29(3):177-82. doi: 10.4103/0970-9371.101167.

Effectiveness of the cell block technique in diagnostic cytopathology.

Khan S(1), Omar T, Michelow P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Division of Cytopathology, National Health
Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: One of the constraints of the conventional FNA smear is the limited
material available for adjuvant diagnostic investigations including
immunocytochemistry. The cell block technique employs the retrieval of small
tissue fragments from a FNA specimen which are processed to form a paraffin
block. It is widely accepted that cell block technique increases the cellular
yield and improves diagnostic accuracy. The ability to obtain numerous tissue
sections allows for multiple immunostains and other studies to be performed akin 
to paraffin sections produced in histopathology.
AIMS: To determine the effectiveness of the cell block technique by comparing
cytomorphological preservation and immunocytochemistry (ICC) stains on paired
cell block and conventional fine needle aspiration (FNA) samples.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this prospective study, material for both glass slides 
and cell blocks were collected simultaneously during fine needle aspirates from
47 samples comprising lung and liver masses. Grading of cellularity,
morphological preservation, architectural preservation, immunocytochemical
staining intensity and presence of background staining on paired FNA smears and
cell block samples were compared. Each arm of the paired analysis was performed
blindly without knowledge of the grading outcome of the other. The Kappa
statistic (<U+03BA>) was used to measure inter-rater agreement.
RESULTS: The 47 samples evaluated included FNAs from the lung, 24/47 (51%) and
liver, 23/47 (49%). The immunocytochemistry stains consisted of 44/47 (94%) CK7; 
44/47 (94%) CK20; 18/47 (38%) TTF1; 10/47 (21%) synaptophysin; 10/47 (21%)
Hepar-1 and 7/47 (15%) AE1/3. There was no overall agreement in preservation of
cytomorphological detail and ICC staining between the two methods. The
Papanicolaou-stained conventional FNA smears fared better than the cell block for
the evaluation of nuclear and morphologic characteristics. The ICC stains worked 
better on the cell block samples due to lack of background and aberrant staining.
CONCLUSION: Direct FNA smears and cell blocks complement each other and our
results indicate that both are needed in the diagnostic work-up of patients. The 
cost implications of performing both techniques on all FNA material warrants
further evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3480766
PMID: 23112458  [PubMed]


186. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Nov;138(5):703-11. doi: 10.1309/AJCPKVBXTI9O3TEM.

Comparison of monoclonal napsin A, polyclonal napsin A, and TTF-1 for determining
lung origin in metastatic adenocarcinomas.

Mukhopadhyay S(1), Katzenstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pathology, State University of New York Upstate Medical University,
750 E Adams St, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. mukhopas@upstate.edu

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is currently the best immunohistochemical 
marker for carcinomas of lung origin. Our aim was to compare napsin A to TTF-1
for identifying pulmonary origin in metastatic adenocarcinoma and its mimics. One
hundred fifty-five metastatic carcinomas (55 pulmonary, 100 nonpulmonary) were
stained with monoclonal napsin A and TTF-1, and most also with polyclonal napsin 
A. The sensitivity of monoclonal napsin A, polyclonal napsin A, and TTF-1 for
metastatic adenocarcinomas of pulmonary origin was 76%, 81%, and 82%,
respectively. Two lung carcinomas were diffusely positive for monoclonal napsin
A, but negative or equivocal for TTF-1. TTF-1 stained 9 of 100 nonpulmonary
carcinomas (all thyroid), monoclonal napsin A stained 12 of 100 (4 sites), and
polyclonal napsin A stained 27 of 91 (8 sites). Napsin A is expressed in a wider 
variety of metastatic nonpulmonary carcinomas than TTF-1, and the monoclonal
antibody is more specific. Napsin A is a useful adjunct to TTF-1, because
occasional lung adenocarcinomas are TTF-1 negative but napsin A positive.

PMID: 23086771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013 Jan;40(1):61-71. doi: 10.1007/s00259-012-2242-5.
Epub 2012 Oct 19.

CD133-expressing thyroid cancer cells are undifferentiated, radioresistant and
survive radioiodide therapy.

Ke CC(1), Liu RS, Yang AH, Liu CS, Chi CW, Tseng LM, Tsai YF, Ho JH, Lee CH, Lee 
OK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: (131)I therapy is regularly used following surgery as a part of thyroid 
cancer management. Despite an overall relatively good prognosis, recurrent or
metastatic thyroid cancer is not rare. CD133-expressing cells have been shown to 
mark thyroid cancer stem cells that possess the characteristics of stem cells and
have the ability to initiate tumours. However, no studies have addressed the
influence of CD133-expressing cells on radioiodide therapy of the thyroid cancer.
The aim of this study was to investigate whether CD133(+) cells contribute to the
radioresistance of thyroid cancer and thus potentiate future recurrence and
metastasis.
METHODS: Thyroid cancer cell lines were analysed for CD133 expression,
radiosensitivity and gene expression.
RESULTS: The anaplastic thyroid cancer cell line ARO showed a higher percentage
of CD133(+) cells and higher radioresistance. After <U+03B3>-irradiation of the cells,
the CD133(+) population was enriched due to the higher apoptotic rate of CD133(-)
cells. In vivo (131)I treatment of ARO tumour resulted in an elevated expression 
of CD133, Oct4, Nanog, Lin28 and Glut1 genes. After isolation, CD133(+) cells
exhibited higher radioresistance and higher expression of Oct4, Nanog, Sox2,
Lin28 and Glut1 in the cell line or primarily cultured papillary thyroid cancer
cells, and lower expression of various thyroid-specific genes, namely NIS, Tg,
TPO, TSHR, TTF1 and Pax8.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the existence of CD133-expressing thyroid
cancer cells which show a higher radioresistance and are in an undifferentiated
status. These cells possess a greater potential to survive radiotherapy and may
contribute to the recurrence of thyroid cancer. A future therapeutic approach for
radioresistant thyroid cancer may focus on the selective eradication of CD133(+) 
cells.

PMCID: PMC3510415
PMID: 23081821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Virchows Arch. 2012 Dec;461(6):629-38. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1324-x. Epub 2012 
Oct 12.

Correlation of immunohistochemical staining p63 and TTF-1 with EGFR and K-ras
mutational spectrum and diagnostic reproducibility in non small cell lung
carcinoma.

Thunnissen E(1), Boers E, Heideman DA, Grünberg K, Kuik DJ, Noorduin A, van
Oosterhout M, Pronk D, Seldenrijk C, Sietsma H, Smit EF, van Suylen R, von der
Thusen J, Vrugt B, Wiersma A, Witte BI, den Bakker M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081
HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. e.thunnissen@vumc.nl

For treatment purposes, distinction between squamous cell carcinoma and
adenocarcinoma is important. The aim of this study is to examine the diagnostic
accuracy on lung cancer small biopsies for the distinction between adenocarcinoma
and squamous cell carcinoma and relate these to immunohistochemical and KRAS and 
EGFR mutation analysis. An interobserver study was performed on 110 prospectively
collected biopsies obtained by bronchoscopy or transthoracic needle biopsy of
patients with non-small cell lung cancer. The diagnosis was correlated with
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis for markers of adeno- (TTF1 and/or mucin
positivity) and squamous cell differentiation (P63 and CK5/6) as well as KRAS and
EGFR mutation analysis. Eleven observers independently read H&E-stained slides of
110 cases, resulting in a kappa value of 0.55<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.10. The diagnosis non-small
cell lung cancer not otherwise specified was given on average on 29.5 % of the
biopsies. A high concordance was observed between hematoxylin-eosin-based
consensus diagnosis (=8/11 readings concordant) and IHC markers. In all cases
with EGFR (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1) and KRAS (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) mutations, adenodifferentiation as determined
by IHC was present and p63 staining was absent. In 2 of 25 cases with a consensus
diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma, additional stainings favored
adenodifferentation, and a KRAS mutation was present. P63 is most useful for
distinction between EGFR/KRAS mutation positive and negative patients. In the
diagnostic work-up of non-small cell lung carcinoma the limited reproducibility
on small biopsies is optimized with immunohistochemical analysis, resulting in
reliable delineation for predictive analysis.

PMID: 23064619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Dec;16(6):459-69. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2012.08.007. 
Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Biphasic alveolosquamoid renal carcinoma: a histomorphological,
immunohistochemical, molecular genetic, and ultrastructural study of a
distinctive morphologic variant of renal cell carcinoma.

Petersson F(1), Bulimbasic S, Hes O, Slavik P, Martínek P, Michal M, Gomolcáková 
B, Hora M, Damjanov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague-Faculty of Medicine in
Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic.

Only a few cases of sarcomatoid renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) with squamous
differentiation have been published. We present 2 RCCs exhibiting a hitherto not 
reported biphasic neoplastic cell population exhibiting a predominantly alveolar 
architecture where squamoid differentiation was identified in one of the
neoplastic cell populations. None of the tumors showed chromophobe features or
any evidence of sarcomatoid transformation. The tumors arose in 2 adult patients 
and were characterized by routine histology, immunohistochemistry,
ultrastructure, array comparative genomic hybridization, confirmatory fluorescent
in situ hybridization, and loss of heterozygosity analysis. Tumors measured 3 and
4 cm and were located within the renal parenchyma and had no pelvicalyceal
connection. Both tumors were composed of a distinctly dual-cell population. The
larger tumor cells displayed squamoid features and formed round well-demarcated
solid alveolated islands that, in large parts, were surrounded by a smaller
neoplastic cell component. The squamoid cells were immunoreactive for
cytokeratins (CKs) (AE1-AE3, Cam 5.2, CK5/6, CK7, and CK20), epithelial membrane 
antigen, racemase/AMACR, and carboanhydrase IX (in 1 case focally). The small
cell population was positive for CK7, epithelial membrane antigen, and
racemase/AMACR, whereas CK20, AE1-3, and carboanhydrase IX were negative. CD10
was focally positive in the large squamoid cells in 1 case. Cathepsin K,
E-cadherin, and CD117 displayed focal positivity in 1 case. Vimentin, RCC marker,
parvalbumin, S100 protein, S100 A1, p63, p53, CDX2, uroplakin III, HMB45, TFE3,
WT1, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, thyroglobulin, and TTF1 were negative. The
proliferative activity (Ki-67) was low (1%) in the small cell component in both
cases, whereas the large neoplastic tumor cells displayed a significantly higher 
proliferation (20%-35%). Ultrastructurally, desmosomes and tonofilaments were
identified in the large tumor cells, confirming squamoid differentiation in a
subset of tumor cells. Array comparative genomic hybridization of 1 analyzable
case (confirmed with fluorescent in situ hybridization and loss of heterozygosity
analysis) revealed partial or complete losses of chromosomes 2, 5, 6, 9, 12, 15, 
16, 17, 18 and 22, (including biallelic loss of CDKN2A locus) and partial gains
of chromosomes 1, 5, 11, 12 and 13. Follow-up at 6 years showed no recurrence or 
metastasis in 1 patient. The other (male) patients had a subcutaneous metastasis 
at presentation, but during a 1-year follow-up no evidence of recurrence or
further metastatic events have been documented. Our data indicate that biphasic
alveolosquamoid renal carcinoma is a unique and distinctive tumor. The large
squamoid and small tumor cells have overlapping but still distinctive
immunohistochemical patterns of protein expression. Multiple chromosomal
aberrations were identified, some of them located in regions with known tumor
suppressor genes and oncogenes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Pathol. 2013 Mar;44(3):427-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.06.008. Epub 2012 
Sep 29.

Small cell-like change in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, intraductal
carcinoma, and invasive prostatic carcinoma: a study of 7 cases.

Lee S(1), Han JS, Chang A, Ross HM, Montironi R, Yorukoglu K, Lane Z, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Small cell carcinoma of the prostate is associated with poor prognosis and
different treatment from conventional acinar adenocarcinoma. Given the important 
clinicopathologic implications of a diagnosis of small cell carcinoma, we report 
7 cases showing unusual, extensive small cell-like change in intraductal
carcinoma and invasive carcinoma. Prostatic biopsies from 3 patients and radical 
prostatectomy specimens from 4 patients showed variably extensive small cell-like
high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and intraductal carcinoma. Five
cases were associated with conventional acinar adenocarcinoma (2 cases with
Gleason score 4 + 3 = 7; 3 cases with Gleason 3 + 4 = 7). No small cell carcinoma
was seen. Small and large ducts with small cell-like change showed solid and
cribriform proliferations of atypical cells with abrupt transition between
centrally located populations of small cells and more typical large dysplastic
cells at the duct periphery. Rosette-like formations were noted within some
involved ducts. Small cell-like change was characterized by crowded cells with
uniformly bland vesicular nuclei and minimal cytoplasm and no significant mitotic
or apoptotic activity. In 3 cases, similar small cell-like morphology was noted
focally in invasive carcinoma. The small cell-like areas were negative for
synaptophysin and chromogranin, focally positive for TTF-1, and weakly positive
for racemase. Ki-67 labeled less than 5% with predominant labeling of the larger 
atypical cells and minimal reactivity in the small cell-like population. In
summary, small cell-like change in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia,
intraductal carcinoma, and invasive carcinoma is not associated with small cell
carcinoma; shows no immunohistochemical evidence of neuroendocrine
differentiation; and likely is not an adverse prognostic feature.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):2088-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.05.027. Epub
2012 Sep 29.

Pulmonary-type adenocarcinoma and signet ring mucinous adenocarcinoma arising in 
an ovarian dermoid cyst: report of a unique case.

Boyd C(1), Patel K, O'Sullivan B, Taniere P, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust and Molecular
Pathology Programme, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens
University Belfast, BT12 6BA Belfast, UK.

Dermoid cysts are common benign ovarian germ cell neoplasms. Occasionally, one of
the mature elements undergoes malignant transformation resulting in the formation
of a somatic malignancy; most commonly this is squamous carcinoma. We report a
unique case where 2 separate malignancies arose within a dermoid cyst, one a
signet ring mucinous adenocarcinoma and the other a pulmonary-type
adenocarcinoma. There have been only occasional earlier case reports of a
possible pulmonary-type adenocarcinoma arising in a dermoid cyst. In the case we 
report, the pulmonary-type adenocarcinoma was closely associated with a bronchial
structure and exhibited diffuse positive immunohistochemical staining with TTF1, 
PE10, and napsin A. Molecular studies revealed no evidence of epidermal growth
factor receptor mutation, a molecular alteration which may be found in primary
pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Exp Oncol. 2012 Jul;34(2):129-33.

Thyroid metastases from a breast cancer diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration
biopsy. Case report and overview of the literature.

Lacka K(1), Breborowicz D, Uliasz A, Teresiak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. K_Lacka@wp.pl

AIM: Intrathyroid metastases are uncommon in cytology practice. We report a case 
of metastatic lesion in the thyroid from breast carcinoma which was recognized in
a fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy and confirmed by immunohistopathology. In
addition, we provide an overview of the literature describing similar cases.
STUDY DESIGN: The patient was a 54-year old woman with a large, multinodular
goiter and bilaterally enlarged lymph nodes in the supraclavicular areas.
Fourteen years earlier she had undergone radical mastectomy followed by chemio-
and radiotherapy due to a breast carcinoma.
RESULTS: FNA of the thyroid nodules showed a metastatic breast carcinoma and was 
followed by total strumectomy and lymphadenectomy. Histological reassessment of
the surgical thyroid specimens as well as the neck lymph nodes revealed multiple 
breast metastases. This was strongly confirmed by immunohistochemical
examinations, which revealed a positive staining for: CKMNF 116, CK7, CEA as well
as for ER, PgR and HER2, and a negative staining for: CK20, thyroglobulin, TTF1, 
calcitonin, and chromogranin.
CONCLUSION: Every new aggregate in the thyroid in patients with even a long-term 
history of cancer should be considered as potentially metastatic until proved
otherwise. FNA could be helpful in the diagnosis of thyroid metastatic lesion,
but it should be confirmed by immunohistopathology.

PMID: 23013767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Pathologe. 2012 Nov;33 Suppl 2:269-72. doi: 10.1007/s00292-012-1664-y.

[Translational research and diagnostics in lung cancer].

[Article in German]

Göke F(1), Perner S.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Prostatatkarzinom-Forschung, Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn.

Lung cancer is the most common malignant disease leading to death worldwide.
Histologically, it is broadly subcategorized into small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), with the latter mainly consisting of the 
major entities adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. However, molecular
profiling of various lung cancer entities has revealed major molecular
differences within distinct histological tumor entities, resulting in the
integration of molecular alterations in the subclassification of lung cancers.
These findings can only estimate the genetic complexity of lung tumors. Large
scale molecular profiling has the potential to identify novel diagnostic,
prognostic and predictive markers as well as therapeutic targets. Importantly,
this recently arising categorization of lung carcinomas can be regarded as an
example for the characterization of malignomas of other organ systems. The
pioneer model for this molecular subcategorization is the classification of
malignant lymphomas.

PMID: 22968733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Oct;40(19):9441-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks720. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Interaction of nucleolin with ribosomal RNA genes and its role in RNA polymerase 
I transcription.

Cong R(1), Das S, Ugrinova I, Kumar S, Mongelard F, Wong J, Bouvet P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, CNRS USR 3010,
Laboratoire Joliot-Curie, 69364 Lyon, France.

Nucleolin is a multi-functional nucleolar protein that is required for ribosomal 
RNA gene (rRNA) transcription in vivo, but the mechanism by which nucleolin
modulates RNA polymerase I (RNAPI) transcription is not well understood.
Nucleolin depletion results in an increase in the heterochromatin mark H3K9me2
and a decrease in H4K12Ac and H3K4me3 euchromatin histone marks in rRNA genes.
ChIP-seq experiments identified an enrichment of nucleolin in the ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) coding and promoter region. Nucleolin is preferentially associated with
unmethylated rRNA genes and its depletion leads to the accumulation of RNAPI at
the beginning of the transcription unit and a decrease in UBF along the coding
and promoter regions. Nucleolin is able to affect the binding of transcription
termination factor-1 on the promoter-proximal terminator T0, thus inhibiting the 
recruitment of TIP5 and HDAC1 and the establishment of a repressive
heterochromatin state. These results reveal the importance of nucleolin for the
maintenance of the euchromatin state and transcription elongation of rDNA.

PMCID: PMC3479187
PMID: 22859736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Jun;7(2):163-70. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0385-0. Epub 2012
Jul 31.

Carcinosarcoma ex non-recurrent pleomorphic adenoma composed of TTF-1 positive
large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and myofibrosarcoma: apropos a rare Case.

Petersson F(1), Loh KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, 5 Lower Kent Ridge
Road, Singapore, 119074, Singapore. fredrikpetersson@live.se

We present a carcinosarcoma ex non-recurrent pleomorphic adenoma composed of a
large cell neuroendocrine carcinomatous component and a spindle cell sarcoma with
myofibroblastic differentiation. The tumor contained a hyalinized transition zone
where the classical PA appeared to acquire two different histopathological
patterns of malignant transformation of the epithelial component. The
carcinomatous component was strongly and diffusely positive for low-molecular
weight cytokeratins (AE1-3), synaptophysin, thyroid transcription factor-1 and
focally positive for chromogranin A. All these markers were negative in the
sarcomatous component. The sarcomatous component displayed immunoreactivity for
smooth muscle actin with a predominantly linear, subplasmalemmal pattern. No
expression of CD31, S100 protein, h-caldesmon, desmin, CD34, p63, myogenin, Myo
D1 and c-kit was detected. Strong immunohistochemical expression of p53 was
documented in both the carcinomatous and sarcomatous components as well as in the
atypical epithelial component in the transition zone associated with the
hyalinized pleomorphic adenoma.

PMCID: PMC3642266
PMID: 22847723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;41(4):279-80. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.04.018.

[Concurrent medullary and papillary thyroid carcinoma: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin KR, Huang ZL, Huang XW, Zheng XY, Chen GR.

PMID: 22800531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 31;109(31):12592-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204710109. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Neuroepithelial body microenvironment is a niche for a distinct subset of
Clara-like precursors in the developing airways.

Guha A(1), Vasconcelos M, Cai Y, Yoneda M, Hinds A, Qian J, Li G, Dickel L,
Johnson JE, Kimura S, Guo J, McMahon J, McMahon AP, Cardoso WV.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA. aguha@bu.edu

Clara cells of mammalian airways have multiple functions and are morphologically 
heterogeneous. Although Notch signaling is essential for the development of these
cells, it is unclear how Notch influences Clara cell specification and if
diversity is established among Clara cell precursors. Here we identify expression
of the secretoglobin Scgb3a2 and Notch activation as early events in a program of
secretory cell fate determination in developing murine airways. We show that
Scgb3a2 expression in vivo is Notch-dependent at early stages and ectopically
induced by constitutive Notch1 activation, and also that in vitro Notch signaling
together with the pan-airway transcription factor Ttf1 (Nkx2.1) synergistically
regulate secretoglobin gene transcription. Furthermore, we identified a
subpopulation of secretory precursors juxtaposed to presumptive neuroepithelial
bodies (NEBs), distinguished by their strong Scgb3a2 and uroplakin 3a (Upk3a)
signals and reduced Ccsp (Scgb1a1) expression. Genetic ablation of Ascl1
prevented NEB formation and selectively interfered with the formation of this
subpopulation of cells. Lineage labeling of Upk3a-expressing cells during
development showed that these cells remain largely uncommitted during embryonic
development and contribute to Clara and ciliated cells in the adult lung.
Together, our findings suggest a role for Notch in the induction of a Clara
cell-specific program of gene expression, and reveals that the NEB
microenvironment in the developing airways is a niche for a distinct subset of
Clara-like precursors.

PMCID: PMC3412014
PMID: 22797898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Gut. 2013 May;62(5):751-9. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302759. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Gemcitabine plus erlotinib followed by capecitabine versus capecitabine plus
erlotinib followed by gemcitabine in advanced pancreatic cancer: final results of
a randomised phase 3 trial of the 'Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie' 
(AIO-PK0104).

Heinemann V(1), Vehling-Kaiser U, Waldschmidt D, Kettner E, Märten A, Winkelmann 
C, Klein S, Kojouharoff G, Gauler TC, von Weikersthal LF, Clemens MR, Geissler M,
Greten TF, Hegewisch-Becker S, Rubanov O, Baake G, Höhler T, Ko YD, Jung A,
Neugebauer S, Boeck S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Klinikum 
Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Marchioninistr. 15, D-81377
Munich, Germany. volker.heinemann@med.uni-muenchen.de

Comment in
    Gut. 2013 May;62(5):660-1.

OBJECTIVE: AIO-PK0104 investigated two treatment strategies in advanced
pancreatic cancer (PC): a reference sequence of gemcitabine/erlotinib followed by
2nd-line capecitabine was compared with a reverse experimental sequence of
capecitabine/erlotinib followed by gemcitabine.
METHODS: 281 patients with PC were randomly assigned to 1st-line treatment with
either gemcitabine plus erlotinib or capecitabine plus erlotinib. In case of
treatment failure (eg, disease progression or toxicity), patients were allocated 
to 2nd-line treatment with the comparator cytostatic drug without erlotinib. The 
primary study endpoint was time to treatment failure (TTF) after 1st- and
2nd-line therapy (TTF2; non-inferiority design). KRAS exon 2 mutations were
analysed in archival tumour tissue from 173 of the randomised patients.
RESULTS: Of the 274 eligible patients, 43 had locally advanced and 231 had
metastatic disease; 140 (51%) received 2nd-line chemotherapy. Median TTF2 was
estimated with 4.2 months in both arms; median overall survival was 6.2 months
with gemcitabine/erlotinib followed by capecitabine and 6.9 months with
capecitabine/erlotinib followed by gemcitabine, respectively (HR 1.02, p=0.90).
TTF for 1st-line therapy (TTF1) was significantly prolonged with
gemcitabine/erlotinib compared to capecitabine/erlotinib (3.2 vs 2.2 months; HR
0.69, p=0.0034). Skin rash was associated with both TTF2 (rash grade
0/1/2-4:2.9/4.3/6.7 months, p<0.0001) and survival (3.4/7.0/9.6 months,
p<0.0001). Each arm showed a safe and manageable toxicity profile during 1st- and
2nd-line therapy. A KRAS wild-type status (52/173 patients, 30%) was associated
with an improved overall survival (HR 1.68, p=0.005).
CONCLUSION: Both treatment strategies are feasible and demonstrated comparable
efficacy; KRAS may serve as biomarker in patients with advanced PC treated with
erlotinib.

PMID: 22773551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Head Neck Pathol. 2013 Mar;7(1):76-84. doi: 10.1007/s12105-012-0379-y. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma of the nasal cavity: clinico-pathologic
and molecular study of a case and review of the literature.

La Rosa S(1), Furlan D, Franzi F, Battaglia P, Frattini M, Zanellato E, Marando
A, Sahnane N, Turri-Zanoni M, Castelnuovo P, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, viale Borri 57, 21100 Varese,
Italy. stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Sinonasal intestinal-type adenocarcinomas (ITACs) are rare neoplasms
histologically resembling intestinal adenocarcinomas. Although a neuroendocrine
differentiation in ITACs has been described, true mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine
carcinomas, neoplasms in which each component represents at least 30 % of the
lesion, are extremely rare and their molecular alterations are largely unknown.
We describe herein the clinico-pathologic features, the methylation profile,
chromosomal gains and losses, and mutation analysis of KRAS, BRAF and p53 in a
nasal mixed exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinoma resected in a 79-year-old man. The 
tumor was composed of an ITAC and a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine
carcinoma. Both exocrine and neuroendocrine components were CK8, CK20, CDX2 and
p53 positive, and CK7 and TTF1 negative. The neuroendocrine component also showed
immunoreactivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, serotonin and glicentin.
Gains and losses were found at following chromosome regions: 17p13 (TP53), 14q24 
(MLH3), 19q13 (KLK3), 5q21 (APC), 7q21 (CDK6), 9q34 (DAPK1), 12p13 (TNFRSF 1A,
CDKN1B), 13q12 (BRCA2), 17p13.3 (HIC1), 18q21 (BCL2), and 22q12 (TIMP3). Aberrant
methylation was detected only in the neuroendocrine component and involved APC
and DAPK1 genes. No mutation of KRAS (exons 2-4), BRAF (exon 15), and p53 (exons 
4-10) was found in both components. The results suggest a monoclonal origin of
the tumor from a pluripotent cell undergoing a biphenotypic differentiation and
that the neuroendocrine differentiation may be from an exocrine to an endocrine
pathway. We have also reviewed the literature on sinonasal mixed
exocrine-neuroendocrine carcinomas to give to the reader a comprehensive overview
of these very rare tumor types.

PMCID: PMC3597157
PMID: 22740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(2):334-46. doi: 10.1159/000339068. Epub 2012 Jun
25.

MAPK and JAK-STAT signaling pathways are involved in the oxidative stress-induced
decrease in expression of surfactant protein genes.

Park SK(1), Dahmer MK, Quasney MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53201,
USA.

Oxidative stress is generated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) including hydrogen
peroxide (H(2)O(2)), hydroxyl radical (•OH ) and superoxide anion (O(2--)), which
are produced as by-products of cellular metabolism. An imbalance in cellular
redox status is a potent pathogenic factor that contributes to various chronic
inflammatory diseases. In this study, we demonstrate that H(2)O(2 )decreases
surfactant protein A, B and ABCA3 mRNA level, and increases SP-D mRNA level in
human pulmonary lung epithelial cells. The decreased mRNA level of SP-A and SP-B 
were significant with a maximum inhibition of 79 and 87%, respectively by 150 µM 
H(2)O(2 )after 24 hrs of incubation. In addition, ABCA3 mRNA level was decreased 
with a maximum inhibition of 55% by 150 µM H(2)O(2 )after 12 hrs of incubation.
In contrast, 150 µM H(2)O(2 )caused the SP-D mRNA level to increase to 200% of
control after 8 hrs of incubation. The H(2)O(2)-induced gene repression or
activation of SP-A, SP-B, SP-D and ABCA3 was blocked by pretreatment with the
antioxidants N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and catalase. Furthermore, the inhibition 
of SP-A and SP-B was associated with reduced thyroid transcription factor -1
(TTF-1) DNA binding activity, and this reduced TTF-1 binding activity may be due 
to decreased TTF-1 protein expression level. The analyses of signal transduction 
pathways that may play a role in the regulation of gene expression by H(2)O(2
)using several specific inhibitors showed that U0126, an inhibitor of ERK1/2
upstream kinase MEK1/2, blocked both H(2)O(2)-induced inhibition of SP-A and SP-B
gene expression, whereas SB203580, an inhibitor of p38 MAPK, partially blocked
H(2)O(2)-mediated inhibition of SP-A gene expression but not SP-B expression. In 
contrast, AG-490, a specific inhibitor of JAK-STAT pathway, blocked
H(2)O(2)-mediated inhibition of SP-B gene expression but not SP-A expression.
Immunoblot analyses using specific phosphor-antibodies demonstrated that ERK1/2, 
p38 MAPK and STAT3 are phosphorylated by oxidative stress suggesting that
H(2)O(2)-induced inhibition of SP-A and SP-B gene expression is associated with
MAPK and JAKSTAT signaling pathway. These data, therefore, suggest that H(2)O(2
)affects SP-A and SP-B gene regulation by reducing TTF-1 DNA binding activity via
MAPKs or STAT signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22739240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2012;53(2):337-42.

Histopathological and immunohistochemical study of laterocervical lymph node
metastases of unknown primary origin.

Malin RD(1), Ionita E, Osman I, Mogoanta CA, Cioroianu L, Ciolofan S, Anghelina
F, Enachescu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of ENT, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova,
Romania. ramona_denise@yahoo.com

In this study, we examined histopathologically and immunohistochemically 24 cases
of laterocervical lymph node metastases with unknown primary origin. For
immunohistochemical study, we used a large panel of antibodies represented by
CK7, CK19, CK20, CKAE1/AE3, CK34betaE12, TTF1, HBME-1, CEA, MUC5AC and EBV. In
the cases studied tumors accompanied by seemingly primitive adenopathies were
located in the thyroid, lung, esophagus, stomach, rhinopharynx, hypopharynx,
oropharynx and larynx.

PMID: 22732803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Histopathology. 2012 Sep;61(3):454-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04247.x.
Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma: a clinicopathological study with
identification of potential diagnostic mimics.

Quinn AM(1), Blackhall F, Wilson G, Danson S, Clamp A, Ashcroft L, Brierley J,
Hasleton P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK.
amquinn2003@yahoo.co.uk

AIMS: To evaluate the clinicopathological features of small cell carcinoma
arising outside the lung.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty-seven cases with a pathology diagnosis of
extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma (EPSCC) were selected. The clinical notes
were reviewed and tumour blocks were selected for a fresh haematoxylin and eosin 
(H&E) section and immunohistochemical stains. The most common tumour locations
were cervix and bladder. Twenty-five cases (68%) were finally diagnosed as EPSCC,
nine of which were found with coexisting non small cell carcinoma. Two cases (5%)
were diagnosed as large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) of the cervix. The 
remainder was classified as 10 poorly differentiated carcinomas (PDCs) (27%).
Positive staining for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) was noted in nine
cases of EPSCC and in none of the cases of PDC (P = 0.034). Synaptophysin
immunoreactivity was found in 20 cases of EPSCC and two cases of PDC with
neuroendocrine differentiation (P = 0.002), as well as two cases of LCNEC. 34ßE12
was positive in eight cases of SCC and two cases of PDC.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on this series, EPSCC may be overdiagnosed.
Immunohistochemistry for TTF-1, used in combination with synaptophysin, may help 
to discriminate EPSCC from PDC.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22687056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2012 May 29;3(3):21. doi: 10.1186/scrt112.

Characterization of lung stem cell niches in a mouse model of bleomycin-induced
fibrosis.

Banerjee ER(1), Henderson WR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Center
for Allergy and Inflammation, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
enarb1@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: In lung fibrosis, alveolar epithelium degenerates progressively.
The goal of regenerative medicine is to aid repair and regeneration of the lost
tissues in parenchyma and airways for which mobilization of tissue-resident
endogenous or bone marrow-derived exogenous stem cells niches is a critical step.
We used a lung injury model in mice to identify and characterize functional lung 
stem cells to clarify how stem cell niches counteract this degenerative process.
METHODS: Short term assay (STA) - Bleomycin-induced lung inflammation and
fibrosis were assessed in a model of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in wild-type
(WT), gp91phox-/- (NOX-/-), and gp91phoxMMP-12 double knockout (DKO) mice on
C57Bl/6 background and Hoechst 33322 dye effluxing side population (SP) cells
characterized. Long term assay (LTA) - In a bleomycin induced lung fibrosis model
in C57Bl6 mice, the number of mature cells were quantified over 7, 14, and 21
days in bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood (PB), lung parenchyma (LP) and
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid by FACS. BrdU pulse chase experiment (10
weeks) was used to identify label retaining cells (LRC). BrdU+ and BrdU- cells
were characterized by hematopoietic (CD45+), pluripotency (TTF1+, Oct3/4+,
SSEA-3+, SSEA-4+, Sca1+, Lin-, CD34+, CD31+), and lung lineage-specific (SPC+,
AQP-5+, CC-10+) markers. Clonogenic potential of LRCs were measured by CFU-c
assays.
RESULTS: STA- In lung, cellularity increased by 5-fold in WT and 6-fold in NOX-/-
by d7. Lung epithelial markers were very low in expression in all SP flow sorted 
from lung of all three genotypes cultured ex vivo. (p < 0.01). Post-bleomycin,
the SP in NOX-/- lung increased by 3.6-fold over WT where it increased by 20-fold
over controls. Type I and II alveolar epithelial cells progressively diminished
in all three genotypes by d21 post-bleomycin. D7 post-bleomycin, CD45+ cells in
BALf in NOX-/- was 1.7-fold > WT, 57% of which were Mf that decreased by 67% in
WT and 83% in NOX-/- by d21.LTA- Cellularity as a factor of time remained
unchanged in BM, PB, LP and BAL fluid. BrdU+ (LRC) were the putative stem cells. 
BrdU+CD45+ cells increased by 0.7-fold and SPC+CC10+ bronchoalveolar stem cells
(BASC), decreased by ~40-fold post-bleomycin. BrdU+VEGF+ cells decreased by
1.8-fold while BrdU-VEGF+ cells increased 4.6-fold. Most BrdU- cells were CD45-. 
BrdU- BASCs remained unchanged post-bleomycin. CFU-c of the flow-sorted BrdU+
cells remained similar in control and bleomycin-treated lungs.
CONCLUSION: STA- Inflammation is a pre-requisite for fibrosis; SP cells, being
the putative stem cells in the lungs, were increased (either by self renewal or
by recruitment from the exogenous bone marrow pool) post-bleomycin in NOX-/- but 
not in DKO indicating the necessity of cross-talk between gp91phox and MMP-12 in 
this process; ex vivo cultured SP progressively lose pluripotent markers, notably
BASC (SPC+CC10+) - significance is unknown. LTA- The increase in the
hematopoietic progenitor pool in lung indicated that exogenous progenitors from
circulation contribute to lung regeneration. Most non-stem cells were
non-hematopoietic in origin indicating that despite tissue turnover, BASCs are
drastically depleted possibly necessitating recruitment of progenitors from the
hematopoietic pool. Loss of VEGF+ LRC may indicate a signal for progenitor
mobilization from niches. BrdU- BASC population may be a small quiescent
population that remains as a reserve for more severe lung injury. Increase in
VEGF+ non-LRC may indicate a checkpoint to counterbalance the mobilization of
VEGF+ cells from the stem cell niche.

PMCID: PMC3392768
PMID: 22643035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Jun;137(6):946-56. doi: 10.1309/AJCP77KMKJXNMPMS.

Tissue-sparing application of the newly proposed IASLC/ATS/ERS classification of 
adenocarcinoma of the lung shows practical diagnostic and prognostic impact.

Sterlacci W(1), Savic S, Schmid T, Oberaigner W, Auberger J, Fiegl M, Tzankov A.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Hospital Feldkirch, Affiliation of the Medical University Innsbruck, 
Institute for Pathology, Carinagasse 47, 6807 Feldkirch, Austria.

The histologic subtype of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) determines treatment
strategies and the need for genetic analyses. Since most NSCLC are diagnosed on
small biopsy or cytologic specimens, an accurate but tissue-sparing approach is
necessary. To date, consensus for a general diagnostic algorithm is lacking. To
test the diagnostic and clinical relevance of the recently published
multidisciplinary guidelines by the International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer, American Thoracic Society, and European Respiratory Society, we
examined 371 surgically resected NSCLCs brought into tissue microarray format.
The antibody panel thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), p63, cytokeratin
(CK)5/6, and CK7 is diagnostic for most cases (>94%). Faint/focal staining for
CK7 is negligible for classificatory purposes. Grading adenocarcinomas according 
to histologic architecture is prognostically significant (median overall survival
for well/moderate differentiation, 72.5 months; for poor differentiation, 38.5
months; P = .019). Double stains combining the aforementioned nuclear and
membranous markers are highly diagnostic for NSCLC, conserving tumor tissue for
subsequent analyses.

PMID: 22586054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 22;109(21):8161-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1201262109. Epub 2012 May 8.

The chromatin remodeling complex NuRD establishes the poised state of rRNA genes 
characterized by bivalent histone modifications and altered nucleosome positions.

Xie W(1), Ling T, Zhou Y, Feng W, Zhu Q, Stunnenberg HG, Grummt I, Tao W.

Author information: 
(1)The Education Ministry, Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

rRNA genes (rDNA) exist in two distinct epigenetic states, active promoters being
unmethylated and marked by euchromatic histone modifications, whereas silent ones
are methylated and exhibit heterochromatic features. Here we show that the
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation (NuRD) complex establishes a specific
chromatin structure at rRNA genes that are poised for transcription activation.
The promoter of poised rRNA genes is unmethylated, associated with components of 
the preinitiation complex, marked by bivalent histone modifications and covered
by a nucleosome in the "off" position, which is refractory to transcription
initiation. Repression of rDNA transcription in growth-arrested and
differentiated cells correlates with elevated association of NuRD and increased
levels of poised rRNA genes. Reactivation of transcription requires resetting the
promoter-bound nucleosome into the "on" position by the DNA-dependent ATPase CSB 
(Cockayne syndrome protein B). The results uncover a unique mechanism by which
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes with opposing activities establish a
specific chromatin state and regulate transcription.

PMCID: PMC3361413
PMID: 22570494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mod Pathol. 2012 Sep;25(9):1265-74. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.76. Epub 2012 May
4.

Ciliated adenocarcinomas of the lung: a tumor of non-terminal respiratory unit
origin.

Park WY(1), Kim MH, Shin DH, Lee JH, Choi KU, Kim JY, Park do Y, Lee CH, Sol MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University,
Yangsan, Korea.

Whereas most carcinomas occur through a sequential step, atypical adenomatous
hyperplasia and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma pathway is known for pulmonary
adenocarcinoma. This type is known as terminal respiratory unit adenocarcinoma.
Based on our observation of transitions from normal ciliated columnar cells to
adenocarcinoma via dysplastic mucous columnar cells, we reviewed our archive of
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Terminal respiratory unit type adenocarcinoma was
defined as adenocarcinoma with type II pneumocyte, Clara cell, or bronchiolar
cell morphology according to previous reports. Among 157 cases, 121 cases have
been identified as terminal respiratory unit type adenocarcinoma and 36 cases as 
non-terminal respiratory unit type adenocarcinoma. Among non-terminal respiratory
unit type adenocarcinoma, 24 cases revealed mucous columnar cell changes that
were continuous with bronchial ciliated columnar cells. The mucous columnar cells
became dysplastic showing loss of cilia, disorientation, and enlarged nuclei.
Adenocarcinoma arose from these dysplastic mucous columnar cells and,
characteristically, this type of adenocarcinoma showed acute inflammation, and
honeycombing changes in the background. TTF1 immunostaining was consistently
negative. In a case study with 14 males and 10 females, including 12 smokers or
ex-smokers, EGFR and KRAS mutations were detected in 3 and 6 patients,
respectively. We think that this kind of adenocarcinoma arising through mucous
columnar cell change belongs to non-terminal respiratory unit type
adenocarcinoma, and mucous columnar cell change is a precursor lesion of
pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22555174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2012 Jun;21(2):93-104. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e318240503b.

DNA methylation of the homeobox genes PITX2 and SHOX2 predicts outcome in
non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

Dietrich D(1), Hasinger O, Liebenberg V, Field JK, Kristiansen G, Soltermann A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
dimo.dietrich@googlemail.com

Biomarkers that facilitate prediction of disease progression in lung cancer
patients might be clinically valuable in optimizing individualized therapy. In
this study, the ability of the DNA methylation biomarkers PITX2 and SHOX2 to
predict disease outcome in lung cancer patients has been evaluated. Quantitative,
methylation-specific (HeavyMethyl), real-time polymerase chain reaction assays
were used to measure DNA methylation of PITX2 and SHOX2 in bisulfite-converted
DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from 474 non-small-cell lung
cancer patients. In univariate Cox Proportional Hazard analysis, high methylation
of SHOX2 and PITX2 was a significant predictor of progression-free survival
[SHOX2: n=465, hazard ratio (HR)=1.395 (1.130 to 1.721), P=0.002; PITX2: n=445,
HR=1.312 (1.059 to 1.625), P=0.013]. Patients with low methylation of either
PITX2 and/or SHOX2 (n=319) showed a significantly higher risk of disease
progression as compared with patients with higher methylation of both genes
[n=126; HR=1.555 (1.210 to 1.999), P=0.001]. This was particularly true for the
subgroup of patients receiving no adjuvant radiotherapy or chemotherapy [n=258,
HR=1.838 (1.252 to 2.698), P=0.002]. In multivariate analysis, both biomarkers
added significant independent prognostic information to pT, pN, pM, and grade.
Another interesting finding of this study was that SHOX2 and PITX2 DNA
methylation was shown to be inversely correlated with TTF1 (also known as NKX2-1)
expression (PITX2: P=0.018, SHOX2: P<0.001). TFF1 expression was previously found
to be associated with improved survival in the same patient cohort. DNA
methylation of PITX2 and SHOX2 is an independent prognostic biomarker for disease
progression in non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

PMID: 22555092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 May;36(5):737-43. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824aba59.

PDX-1, CDX-2, TTF-1, and CK7: a reliable immunohistochemical panel for pancreatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms.

Chan ES(1), Alexander J, Swanson PE, Jain D, Yeh MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
98195-6100, USA.

Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) occur in virtually all sites of the body. As NETs
arising in different organs share similar morphologic features, distinguishing
metastatic from primary NETs on the basis of morphologic grounds alone is
difficult. Pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX-1) is a Hox-type transcription
factor that is essential for both exocrine and endocrine pancreatic
differentiation and maintenance of ß-cell function. We investigated PDX-1 as an
immunohistochemical (IHC) marker in primary pancreatic NETs. Eighty primary NETs 
[25 pancreatic, 29 bronchopulmonary, and 26 in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract]
and 13 metastatic NETs in the liver were studied. Clinical and radiologic data
were reviewed to confirm the stated primary sites. IHC analysis for PDX-1, CDX-2,
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), keratin 7 (CK7), and keratin 20 (CK20)
was performed, and the results were based on review blinded to the primary sites.
PDX-1 was seen in 18 of 25 (72%) pancreatic NETs; in contrast, only 3 of 29 (10%)
bronchopulmonary NETs and 1 of 26 (4%) GI NETs were positive. PDX-1 was therefore
93% specific and 72% sensitive for pancreatic NETs. TTF-1 was expressed only in
bronchopulmonary NETs; all other NETs were negative for TTF-1. CK7 was also very 
specific (92%) and moderately sensitive (66%) for bronchopulmonary NETs. CDX-2
was seen in 22 of 26 (85%) cases of GI NETs and in only 1 of 51 (2%) cases of
extra-GI NETs. Thus, CDX-2 was 98% specific and 85% sensitive for GI NETs. In
terms of metastatic NETs found in the liver, PDX-1 was positive in 5 of 5 cases
of metastatic pancreatic NETs and 2 of 2 cases of metastatic duodenal NETs. PDX-1
is highly specific, with very good overall diagnostic accuracy for pancreatic
NETs. An IHC panel including PDX-1, CDX-2, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20 may be useful in 
distinguishing NETs of pancreatic origin from other primaries.

PMID: 22498824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Gene Ther. 2012 Jun;19(6):402-11. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2012.13. Epub 2012 Apr 
13.

Combining transfer of TTF-1 and Pax-8 gene: a potential strategy to promote
radioiodine therapy of thyroid carcinoma.

Mu D(1), Huang R, Li S, Ma X, Lou C, Kuang A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Cotransfer of thyroid-specific transcription factor (TTF)-1 and Pax-8 gene to
tumor cells, resulting in the re-expression of iodide metabolism-associated
proteins, such as sodium iodide symporter (NIS), thyroglobulin (Tg),
thyroperoxidase (TPO), offers the possibility of radioiodine therapy to
non-iodide-concentrating tumor because the expression of iodide
metabolism-associated proteins in thyroid are mediated by the thyroid
transcription factor TTF-1 and Pax-8. The human TTF-1 and Pax-8 gene were
transducted into the human thyroid carcinoma (K1 and F133) cells by the
recombinant adenovirus, AdTTF-1 and AdPax-8. Re-expression of NIS mRNA and
protein, but not TPO and Tg mRNA and protein, was detected in AdTTF-1-infected
F133 cells, following with increasing radioiodine uptake (6.1-7.4 times),
scarcely iodide organification and rapid iodide efflux (t(1/2) ˜ 8-min in vitro, 
t(1/2) ˜ 4.7-h in vivo). On contrast, all of the re-expression of NIS, TPO and Tg
mRNA and proteins were detected in F133 cells coinfected with AdTTF-1 and
AdPax-8. AdTTF-1- and AdPax-8-coinfected K1 and F133 cells could effectively
accumulate radioiodine (6.6-7.5 times) and obviously retarded radioiodine
retention (t(1/2) ˜ 25-30-min in vitro, t(1/2) ˜ 12-h in vivo) (P<0.05).
Accordingly, the effect of radioiodine therapy of TTF-1 and Pax-8 cotransducted
K1 and F133 cells (21-25% survival rate in vitro) was better than that of
TTF-1-transducted cells (40% survival rate in vitro) (P<0.05). These results
indicate that single TTF-1 gene transfer may have limited efficacy of radioiodine
therapy because of rapid radioiodine efflux. The cotransduction of TTF-1 and
Pax-8 gene, with resulting NIS-mediated radioiodine accumulation and TPO and
Tg-mediated radioiodine organification and intracellular retention, may lead to
effective radioiodine therapy of thyroid carcinoma.

PMID: 22498723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2012 Dec;20(6):573-9. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182494009.

IMP3, NESP55, TTF-1 and CDX2 serve as an immunohistochemical panel in the
distinction among small-cell carcinoma, gastrointestinal carcinoid, and
pancreatic endocrine tumor metastasized to the liver.

Denby KS(1), Briones AJ, Bourne PA, Spaulding BO, Lu D, Fischer-Colbrie R, Qu Z, 
Wang HL, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester Medical Center, NY, USA.

Histopathologic distinction among small-cell carcinoma (SCC), pancreatic
endocrine tumor (PET), and gastrointestinal carcinoids metastasized to the liver 
in needle core biopsies can be extremely challenging because of limited material,
crush artifact, and lack of detailed clinical history. In this study, a total of 
61 surgically resected or biopsied specimens, including 27 SCCs (lung, 17; colon,
1; gallbladder, 2; stomach, 1; and unknown primary, 6), 18 gastrointestinal
carcinoid tumors (GICTs) (stomach, 2; small intestine, 14; colon, 2), and 16 PETs
were immunohistochemically examined for the expression of IMP3, TTF-1, CDX2, and 
NESP55 to evaluate their diagnostic value. The results showed that 24 (89%) of 27
SCCs exhibited strong cytoplasmic staining for IMP3 in 60% to 100% of the tumor
cells. Eighteen (67%) SCCs were strongly and diffusely positive for TTF-1. In the
remaining 9 TTF-1-negative SCCs (including 4 extrapulmonary cases), 7 showed
strong and diffuse IMP3 expression. All SCCs were negative for CDX2 except for 1 
case of colonic origin that showed strong CDX2 immunoreactivity. All 16
metastatic PETs were positively stained for IMP3 with 12 cases (75%) showing a
diffuse and moderate-to-strong staining pattern while they were negative for
TTF-1. Six PETs exhibited moderate-to-strong positivity for CDX2 with nuclear
staining in 5% to 40% of tumor cells, and 5 showed a varying degree of positivity
for NESP55. Three (17%) of 18 metastatic GICTs showed moderate IMP3 staining in
50% to 90% of the tumor cells, whereas CDX2 was expressed in 17 (94%) cases with 
moderate-to-strong staining in 50% to 100% of tumor cells. No NESP55
immunoreactivity was detected in metastatic SCCs and GICTs. In conclusion, a
panel of these 4 markers is useful in segregating among SCC, PET, and GICT to
help determine the primary site of hepatic metastasis.

PMID: 22495359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int J Surg Pathol. 2012 Dec;20(6):629-32. doi: 10.1177/1066896912441830. Epub
2012 Apr 11.

Cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma in an 8-year-old girl: 
a case report with immunohistochemical and molecular testing.

Rossi ED(1), Revelli L, Martini M, Taddei A, Pintus C, Panunzi C, Fadda G.

Author information: 
(1)Università Cattolica Del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

The description of the histological features and the immunohistochemical and
molecular analyses of a case of cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma in an 8-year-old girl with a family history of adenomatous polyposis is
presented. The neoplasm was multifocal and bilateral, with a mixed pattern of
solid, trabecular, and morular areas. The neoplasm showed angioinvasive behavior,
extracapsular infiltration with extension to the perythyroidal muscles, and lymph
node metastases. Tumor cells were positive for CAM 5.2, cytokeratins 5/6, TTF-1, 
HBME-1, galectin-3, and ß-catenin. In addition, the molecular tests did not
reveal BRAF mutations, RET/PTC rearrangement, APC mutation, or KRAS mutation.

PMID: 22494995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Ann Ital Chir. 2012 Mar-Apr;83(2):87-9.

Bilateral lung lesions: when the eyes deceive the brain!

Fiorelli A(1), Vicidomini G, Palladino A, Curcio C, Caterino U, Nappi G, Santini 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Unit, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

We report a clinic case of patient in whom angiosarcoma of the heart presents as 
bilateral pulmonary nodular infiltrates. The cardiac tumor was clinically silent,
the electrocardiogram was normal and the cough was the only symptom. Chest CT
scan (Fig. 1) showed bilateral diffuse nodular infiltrates ranging. Clinical
clues, the results of laboratory tests and all of the cultures obtained excluded 
an infectious etiologies; the findings of CT-guided needle biopsy was
inconclusive for a definitive diagnosis. Thus, the patient was scheduled for a
thoracoscopic biopsy. Surprisingly, the pre-operatory echocardiogram showed a
soft tissue mass fixed to the posterior wall of the right atrium. On
retrospective reviewing of chest CT scan, a tumor was evident in the right
atrium, but it was missed initially. In theory, the lung lesions attract the
attention of the observer who had not taken into account anything else as to say:
"the brain knows what the eyes want". The diagnosis ofpulmonary metastases was
obtained by means ofpleural biopsy during right thoracoscopy. Immunoistochemical 
staining revealed a CK-, CK7-, EMA-, ESA-, CEA-, TTF1-, Vimentina+, CD31+, CD117+
lesion. Because at the time of diagnosis our patient already had lung metastases,
he underwent chemotherapy.

PMID: 22462325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):799-807. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824a72c6.

Mesonephric adenocarcinomas of the uterine cervix and corpus: HPV-negative
neoplasms that are commonly PAX8, CA125, and HMGA2 positive and that may be
immunoreactive with TTF1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß.

Kenny SL(1), McBride HA, Jamison J, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast,
Northern Ireland.

Mesonephric adenocarcinomas are rare neoplasms that most commonly arise in the
uterine cervix and exceptionally rarely in the uterine corpus. Although the
morphologic features of these neoplasms are well described, there has been
relatively limited investigation of the immunoprofile. We report a series of 8
mesonephric adenocarcinomas arising in the uterine cervix (7 cases) and corpus (1
case) and undertake a comprehensive immunohistochemical analysis. This includes
markers that have not been investigated previously in mesonephric adenocarcinomas
but that are commonly used in gynecologic pathology and may be undertaken when
other, mainly Mullerian, adenocarcinomas are considered in the differential
diagnosis. Linear array human papillomavirus (HPV) genotyping was also performed.
Our results broadly confirm the immunohistochemical profile demonstrated in
previous studies with the majority of mesonephric adenocarcinomas staining
positively with CD10 (6 of 8), epithelial membrane antigen (8 of 8), vimentin (8 
of 8), and calretinin (7 of 8). Estrogen receptor was positive in 2,
carcinoembryonic antigen in 3, and inhibin in 4 cases. p16 was positive in 5
cases (1 diffuse and strong), despite all being HPV negative (in 1 case, there
was insufficient DNA for HPV analysis). Novel findings in our study were the
demonstration of nuclear positivity with PAX8 and HMGA2 in 7 cases, CA125
immunoreactivity in all 8 cases, and TTF1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß
staining in 3 cases. As PAX8, CA125, HMGA2, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß are
commonly positive in a variety of Mullerian adenocarcinomas arising in the female
genital tract, this may result in diagnostic confusion. All cases were WT1
negative.

PMID: 22456609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):156-61. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.02.013. Epub 2012
Mar 13.

Napsin A is an independent prognostic factor in surgically resected
adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Lee JG(1), Kim S, Shim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Napsin A is regarded as a marker of lung adenocarcinoma. However,
no comprehensive analyses of napsin A-positive lung ADCs or the prognostic
significance of napsin A expression have been reported to date.
METHODS: 110 primary lung adenocarcinoma cases were analyzed for
clinicopathologic parameters, including overall survival, stage, histology,
napsin A and TTF-1 expression, EGFR mutation, and ALK rearrangement.
RESULTS: Napsin A-positive adenocarcinomas were significantly more prevalent
among tumors characterized as relatively small (p = 0.023), non-solid predominant
(p < 0.001), non-mucinous/enteric (p < 0.001), positive for TTF-1 expression (p <
0.001), and positive for EGFR mutation (p = 0.001). Multivariate analysis of
overall survival demonstrated that the absence of napsin A was an independent
prognostic factor for reduced survival time (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Clinicopathologic characteristics associated with napsin A-positive
lung ADC are similar to and overlap with those of TTF-1-positive ADCs. The
absence of napsin A is an independent poor prognostic factor in surgically
resected adenocarcinoma. Further studies are necessary to determine the role of
napsin A in the progression of lung adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22418245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 May 15;302(10):C1523-30. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00460.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Mechanical loading induces the expression of a Pol I regulon at the onset of
skeletal muscle hypertrophy.

von Walden F(1), Casagrande V, Östlund Farrants AK, Nader GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

The main goal of the present study was to investigate the regulation of ribosomal
DNA (rDNA) gene transcription at the onset of skeletal muscle hypertrophy. Mice
were subjected to functional overload of the plantaris by bilateral removal of
the synergist muscles. Mechanical loading resulted in muscle hypertrophy with an 
increase in rRNA content. rDNA transcription, as determined by 45S pre-rRNA
abundance, paralleled the increase in rRNA content and was consistent with the
onset of the hypertrophic response. Increased transcription and protein
expression of c-Myc and its downstream polymerase I (Pol I) regulon (POL1RB,
TIF-1A, PAF53, TTF1, TAF1C) was also consistent with the increase in rRNA.
Similarly, factors involved in rDNA transcription, such as the upstream binding
factor and the Williams syndrome transcription factor, were induced by mechanical
loading in a corresponding temporal fashion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed that these factors, together with Pol I, were enriched at the rDNA
promoter. This, in addition to an increase in histone H3 lysine 9 acetylation,
demonstrates that mechanical loading regulates rRNA synthesis by inducing a gene 
expression program consisting of a Pol I regulon, together with accessory factors
involved in transcription and chromatin remodeling at the rDNA promoter.
Altogether, these data indicate that transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms
take place in the regulation of ribosome production at the onset of muscle
hypertrophy.

PMID: 22403788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2012;5(2):143-51. Epub 2012 Feb 12.

Follicular thyroid adenoma dominated by spindle cells: report of two unusual
cases and literature review.

Agaimy A(1), Hahn T, Schroeder J, Elhag A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
abbas.agaimy@uk-erlangen.de

Primary spindle cell neoplasms of the thyroid gland are quite rare. They
encompass a heterogeneous group of benign and malignant lesions of mesenchymal
and epithelial origin. We herein describe two unusual follicular thyroid adenomas
dominated by spindle cells with occasional areas of colloid-forming follicular
differentiation. The tumors affected a 77-year woman and a 70-year old man; both 
had a long-history of monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS). One
tumor presented as a large cold thyroid nodule and the other was an autopsy
finding. The tumors were predominantly composed of fibroblast-like spindled
cells. One case showed prominent meningioma-like concentric perivascular
arrangement and contained cytoplasmic melanin-like pigment. Stromal hyalinization
was a prominent feature of both. By immunohistochemistry, the spindled cells
expressed vimentin, pankeratin (KL1), thyroglobulin and TTF1 consistent with a
follicular differentiation. They did not stain with calcitonin, CEA and other
lineage-specific mesenchymal, neuroendocrine and melanocytic markers. There was
no evidence of metastasis at autopsy (case 2) or at last follow-up 2 years after 
surgery (case 1). These cases demonstrate the diversity of follicular thyroid
neoplasms and the unusual occurrence of extensive spindle cell metaplasia. These 
uncommon lesions need to be distinguished from spindle cell medullary carcinoma, 
paucicellular spindle cell anaplastic carcinoma, spindle cell foci in papillary
and follicular carcinoma, solitary fibrous tumor and other rare benign and
malignant mesenchymal lesions.

PMCID: PMC3294228
PMID: 22400075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mod Pathol. 2012 Jun;25(6):893-901. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.34. Epub 2012 Mar
2.

Value of Islet 1 and PAX8 in identifying metastatic neuroendocrine tumors of
pancreatic origin.

Koo J(1), Mertens RB, Mirocha JM, Wang HL, Dhall D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA. jamie.koo@cshs.org

Neuroendocrine tumors can present as liver metastases before discovery of the
primary tumor. Islet 1 and PAX8 have recently been proposed as markers for
neuroendocrine tumors of pancreatic origin. In this study, we compared the
utility of Islet 1 and PAX8 in distinguishing pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors
from neuroendocrine tumors of other sites and determined the usefulness of an
immunohistochemical panel, including TTF1, CDX2, Islet 1 and/or PAX8, in
identifying metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. A total of 110 primary
neuroendocrine tumors (33 pancreatic, 31 pulmonary, 23 ileal, 14 rectal, and 9
gastric) and 73 metastatic neuroendocrine tumors (28 pancreatic, 5 pulmonary, 37 
ileal, 1 rectal, 1 colonic, and 1 duodenal) were studied. Islet 1 and PAX8 were
positive in 27/33 (82%) and 29/33 (88%), respectively, of primary pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors, and in 19/28 (68%) and 15/28 (54%), respectively, of
metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. No cases of primary (0/23) or
metastatic (0/37) ileal neuroendocrine tumors were positive with either Islet 1
or PAX8. There was Islet 1 positivity in 2/31 (6%) primary pulmonary, 12/14 (86%)
primary rectal, and 1/1 metastatic rectal neuroendocrine tumors, and PAX8
positivity in 7/31 (23%) primary pulmonary, 11/14 (79%) primary rectal, and 2/9
(22%) primary gastric neuroendocrine tumors. ROC curve analysis incorporating
sensitivity and specificity data of immunohistochemical panels for metastatic
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors showed that a four-stain panel, including Islet 
1, PAX8, TTF1, and CDX2 significantly outperformed a three-stain panel composed
of PAX8, TTF1, and CDX2 (P=0.019), and also showed a trend for better performance
compared with a three-stain panel composed of Islet 1, TTF1, and CDX2 (P=0.072). 
Both Islet 1 and PAX8 are reliable immunohistochemical markers for pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors and would be useful adjuncts to other markers (TTF1, CDX2) 
currently used to work up a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor of unknown primary.

PMID: 22388755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5357-67. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks198. Epub 2012
Mar 1.

The cellular abundance of the essential transcription termination factor TTF-I
regulates ribosome biogenesis and is determined by MDM2 ubiquitinylation.

Lessard F(1), Stefanovsky V, Tremblay MG, Moss T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Centre and Department of Molecular Biology, Medical
Biochemistry and Pathology of Laval University, CHUQ Research Centre, Pavillon St
Patrick, 9 rue McMahon, Québec, G1R 3S3 Québec, Canada.

The ARF tumour suppressor stabilizes p53 by negatively regulating the E3
ubiquitin ligase MDM2 to promote cell cycle arrest and cell death. However, ARF
is also able to arrest cell proliferation by inhibiting ribosome biogenesis. In
greater part this is achieved by targeting the transcription termination factor I
(TTF-I) for nucleolar export, leading to an inhibition of both ribosomal RNA
synthesis and processing. We now show that in the absence of ARF, TTF-I is
ubiquitinylated by MDM2. MDM2 interacts directly with TTF-I and regulates its
cellular abundance by targeting it for degradation by the proteasome. Enhanced
TTF-I levels inhibit ribosome biogenesis by suppressing ribosomal RNA synthesis
and processing, strongly suggesting that exact TTF-I levels are critical for
efficient ribosome biogenesis. We further show that concomitant with its ability 
to displace TTF-I from the nucleolus, ARF inhibits MDM2 ubiquitinylation of TTF-I
by competitively binding to a site overlapping the MDM2 interaction site. Thus,
both the sub-nuclear localization and the abundance of TTF-I are key regulators
of ribosome biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3384320
PMID: 22383580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):895-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182498f2b.

A study of <U+0394>Np63 expression in lung non-small cell carcinomas.

Nonaka D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester, UK. DNonaka@msn.com

Distinguishing between lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma is
becoming increasingly important, given the different treatment regimens
available. Although histologic subdivision between the two is generally not
difficult in differentiated tumors, it can be challenging in poorly
differentiated tumors and may require a panel of immunohistochemistry stains. The
p63 gene encodes two different N-termini (TA and <U+0394>N). <U+0394>Np63 is selectively
expressed in squamous cell carcinoma, whereas TAp63 is not restricted only to it.
4A4, a widely used anti-p63 antibody, identifies both isoforms and is expressed
in about 15% of adenocarcinomas, and, although generally focal, its expression
can be diffuse. In this study, a total of 150 lung adenocarcinomas and 50
squamous cell carcinomas were immunostained by antibodies for p63 (4A4), <U+0394>Np63
(p40), and TTF-1 (8G7G3/1). Twenty-seven adenocarcinomas (18%) were positive for 
p63 to a variable extent, with diffuse reaction being seen in 13 tumors (8.7%).
p63 expression was seen in all subtypes of adenocarcinomas, except for the
mucinous type. p40 was negative in all adenocarcinomas. All squamous cell
carcinomas were diffusely positive for both p63 and p40. Four of 27 p63-positive 
adenocarcinomas were negative for TTF-1. p63 expression is not uncommonly seen in
adenocarcinomas, whereas <U+0394>Np63 (p40) expression is specific for squamous cell
carcinoma, with sensitivity comparable to that of p63 expression. Presence of
p63-positive cells in poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma may be
erroneously interpreted as evidence of squamous cell differentiation. p40 appears
to be a more reliable marker for squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 22367298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. FASEB J. 2012 Jun;26(6):2338-50. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-200139. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Loss of Shp2 in alveoli epithelia induces deregulated surfactant homeostasis,
resulting in spontaneous pulmonary fibrosis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang Y, Tao B, Teng L, Li Y, Cao R, Gui Q, Ye M, Mou X, Cheng H, Hu 
H, Zhou R, Wu X, Xie Q, Ning W, Lai M, Shen H, Feng GS, Ke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, P.O. Box 59, 866 Yuhangtang Rd., Hangzhou 310058, China.

Type II alveolar epithelial (AT-II) cells produce pulmonary surfactant proteins
that are essential for alveolar function. AT-II is a major target in lung injury,
and ineffective repair of damaged alveolar epithelia has been postulated to cause
pulmonary fibrosis. Previous studies have shown that tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 is
expressed highly in the embryonic lung epithelial buds, and Shp2 activity is
required for FGF-induced lung branching morphogenesis. To investigate in vivo
function of pulmonary Shp2, we generated alveoli epithelia-specific Shp2-knockout
(Shp2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)) mice. Shp2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice exhibit marked reduction in surfactant proteins,
disorganized lamellar bodies, increased alveolar epithelial apoptosis, and
interstitial pulmonary fibrosis without preceding inflammation. Mechanistically, 
Shp2 acts to mediate expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and
ATP-binding cassette subfamily A member 3 (ABCA3). Shp2 also plays a central role
in mediating FGF/GAB/ERK activity, required for epithelial repair program.
Together, our results identify a novel role of tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 in
surfactant homeostasis, and deregulation of Shp2 triggers spontaneous pulmonary
fibrosis with minimal inflammation.

PMID: 22362894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Neuroendocrinol. 2012 Jun;24(6):916-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2012.02302.x.

Thyroid transcription factor 1, a homeodomain containing transcription factor,
contributes to regulating periodic oscillations in GnRH gene expression.

Matagne V(1), Kim JG, Ryu BJ, Hur MK, Kim MS, Kim K, Park BS, Damante G, Smiley
G, Lee BJ, Ojeda SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center/ Oregon
Health Sciences University, Beaverton, OR, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), a member of the Nkx family of
transcription factors required for basal forebrain morphogenesis, functions in
the postnatal hypothalamus as a transcriptional regulator of genes encoding
neuromodulators and hypophysiotrophic peptides. One of these peptides is
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH). In the present study, we show that Ttf1
mRNA abundance varies in a diurnal and melatonin-dependent fashion in the
preoptic area of the rat, with maximal Ttf1 expression attained during the dark
phase of the light/dark cycle, preceding the nocturnal peak in GnRH mRNA content.
GnRH promoter activity oscillates in a circadian manner in GT1-7 cells, and this 
pattern is enhanced by TTF1 and blunted by small interfering RNA-mediated Ttf1
gene silencing. TTF1 transactivates GnRH transcription by binding to two sites in
the GnRH promoter. Rat GnRH neurones in situ contain key proteins components of
the positive (BMAL1, CLOCK) and negative (PER1) limbs of the circadian
oscillator, and these proteins repress Ttf1 promoter activity in vitro. By
contrast, Ttf1 transcription is activated by CRY1, a clock component required for
circadian rhythmicity. In turn, TTF1 represses transcription of Rev-erba, a heme 
receptor that controls circadian transcription within the positive limb of the
circadian oscillator. These findings suggest that TTF1 is a component of the
molecular machinery controlling circadian oscillations in GnRH gene
transcription.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neuroendocrinology © 2012 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3350608
PMID: 22356123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;40(12):850-3.

[Advances in poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun J, Yang D, Cui QC.

PMID: 22336216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2012 Mar;31(2):133-40. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e318228f577.

A detailed immunohistochemical analysis of 2 cases of papillary cystadenoma of
the broad ligament: an extremely rare neoplasm characteristic of patients with
von hippel-lindau disease.

Brady A(1), Nayar A, Cross P, Patel A, Naik R, Lee S, Kaushik S, Barton D,
McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast,
Northern Ireland.

We report 2 cases of papillary cystadenoma, a rare neoplasm characteristic of
patients with Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, involving the pelvic soft tissues 
of women and probably arising within the broad ligament. In only one of the women
was there a history of VHL disease. The other woman was investigated for VHL
disease after the diagnosis of papillary cystadenoma and all tests were negative.
There has been debate as to whether papillary cystadenomas in women are of
mesonephric (Wolffian) or of Mullerian origin and to investigate this we
undertook a detailed immunohistochemical analysis. Both tumors were positive with
AE1/3, Ber EP4, epithelial membrane antigen, CK7, CD10, CA125, CA19.9,
calretinin, and vimentin. One exhibited focal nuclear staining with WT1 and PAX8.
The tumors were negative with estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, androgen 
receptor, CK20, CEA, TTF1, inhibin, RCC marker, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß.
Although favoring a mesonephric origin, the immunohistochemical findings are
essentially inconclusive and not definitive for either a mesonephric or a
Mullerian origin. We believe that patients found to have papillary cystadenoma
should be investigated for VHL disease if there is no history of this. This is
the second reported example of papillary cystadenoma in a woman not known to have
VHL disease and the first in which investigations have excluded this disease.

PMID: 22317868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Apr;36(4):601-11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318242e21c.

Colorectal poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas and mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinomas: insights into the diagnostic immunophenotype,
assessment of methylation profile, and search for prognostic markers.

La Rosa S(1), Marando A, Furlan D, Sahnane N, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy.
stefano.larosa@ospedale.varese.it

Colorectal poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) and mixed
adenoneuroendocrine carcinomas (MANECs) are well-recognized entities generally
known to be associated with biological aggressiveness and poor patient survival. 
However, a few published papers have highlighted the existence of a subgroup of
tumors with a better survival than expected; however, to date, there are no
established parameters that usefully identify this category. In the present study
we have investigated the morphologic features, the CpG methylator phenotype
(CIMP), microsatellite instability (MSI), and the immunohistochemical profile,
including the expression of transcription factors (TTF1, ASH1, CDX2, and PAX5),
stem cell markers (CD117 and CD34), and cytokeratins 7 and 20, in a series of 39 
carcinomas (27 NECs and 12 MANECs) to better characterize such neoplasms and to
search for prognostic indicators. No different patient survival was observed
between NECs and MANECs. Neoplasms showed a heterogenous spectrum of morphologic 
and immunohistochemical features; however, only large-cell subtype, significant
peritumoral lymphoid reaction, CD117 immunoreactivity, vascular invasion, and
MSI/CIMP+ status were significantly correlated with prognosis on univariable
analysis. Furthermore, vascular invasion and CD117 immunoreactivity were
independent prognostic markers on multivariable analysis. In addition to these
prognostic features, neoplasms showed different expression of transcription
factors, stem cell markers, and cytokeratins that should be considered for
diagnostic purposes and, especially, for discriminating among possible
differential diagnoses.

PMID: 22314183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Endocr Pathol. 2012 Jun;23(2):132-4. doi: 10.1007/s12022-012-9193-z.

Images in endocrine pathology: spindle cell lesion of the thyroid gland.

Rossi ED(1), Martini M, Cingolani N, Ranaldi R, Fadda G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology and Histology, Universita' Cattolica Sacro
Cuore, Agostino Gemelli School of Medicine, Rome, Italy.

PMID: 22311188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2012 Sep;114(7):1107-9. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2012.01.004. Epub 2012 Jan 31.

Unusual CNS presentation of thyroid cancer.

Heery CR(1), Engelhard HH, Slavin KV, Michals EA, Villano JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
United States.

As advanced therapies allow cancer patients to live longer, disease failure in
the central nervous system increases from limited therapeutic penetration.
Primary thyroid malignancies rarely metastasize to the brain and have a small
number of investigations in literature on the subject. The majority of brain
metastases involve the brain parenchyma, reflecting the mass and blood
distribution within the brain and central nervous system. Here, we report two
cases of the most common differentiated thyroid cancers; follicular thyroid
cancer having brain involvement from extra-axial growth and papillary thyroid
cancer having brain involvement from a single intraventricular metastasis,
presumed as metastasis from the vascular choroid plexus. Both of our cases had
widespread systemic involvement. For our follicular thyroid cancer, brain
involvement was a result of extra-axial growth from cavarial bone, and our
papillary thyroid cancer had brain involvement from a single intraventricular
metastasis that was initially resected and nearly a year later developed
extensive brain involvement. Unlike the usual gray-white junction metastases seen
in the majority of metastatic brain tumors, including thyroid, our cases are
uncommon. They reflect differences in tumor biology that allows for spread and
growth in the brain. Although there is growing genetic knowledge on tumors that
favor brain metastases, little is known about tumors that rarely involve the
brain.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22296651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Feb;7(2):323-30. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182381515.

High incidence of EGFR mutations in Korean men smokers with no intratumoral
heterogeneity of lung adenocarcinomas: correlation with histologic subtypes,
EGFR/TTF-1 expressions, and clinical features.

Sun PL(1), Seol H, Lee HJ, Yoo SB, Kim H, Xu X, Jheon S, Lee CT, Lee JS, Chung
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation has been known to 
be associated with adenocarcinoma with bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC;
lepidic) feature. This study was aimed to characterize the frequency of EGFR
mutations and their association with histologic subtypes in Korean nonsmall cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
METHODS: Three hundred eighty-two (88 biopsies and 294 resections) NSCLC patients
were investigated for EGFR mutations (exons 18-21) by polymerase chain reaction
and direct sequencing method. For the resected adenocarcinoma specimens,
histologic subtypes were classified according to both 2004 World Health
Organization classification and 2011 International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society
classification. The results were correlated with EGFR mutation and
clinicopathologic features.
RESULTS: EGFR mutations were detected in 196 of 382 NSCLCs (51.3%) and were more 
frequent in women than in men (65.7% versus 34.3%, p < 0.001) and in nonsmokers
than in smokers (63.4% versus 32.0%, p < 0.001). Regarding histologic subtypes of
adenocarcinoma, mixed acinar and BAC pattern showed the most frequent EGFR
mutation (67.6%), followed by mixed papillary and acinar (65.2%), mixed solid and
acinar (38.2%), micropapillary and acinar (30.4%), and acinar and mucinous BAC
(13.3%). In addition, EGFR mutations were more frequently observed in tumors with
BAC or papillary components than those with mucinous BAC or solid components.
Identical EGFR mutations were detected in a single tumor showing mixed
histological features. EGFR protein expression was seen more frequently in tumors
with EGFR mutations than those without EGFR mutations (75.3% versus 24.7%,
p=0.003). EGFR mutations were significantly more common in tumors with thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression than those without TTF-1 (p < 0.001),
and almost all (92.7%) mutated adenocarcinomas were TTF-1 positive.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of EGFR mutations is variable according to histologic 
subtypes, gender, and smoking history. The mixed acinar and BAC and papillary and
acinar subtypes, the presence of BAC (lepidic) or papillary components, EGFR, and
TTF-1 protein expression can predict higher EGFR mutation in lung adenocarcinoma.
However, intratumoral heterogeneity of EGFR mutation was not found. In addition, 
relatively high incidence of EGFR mutations in Korean men who smoked with
adenocarcinoma histology suggests that these patients should not be left behind
EGFR mutation test.

PMID: 22237264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Signal. 2012 Apr;24(4):922-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.12.015. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

SnoN oncoprotein enhances estrogen receptor-a transcriptional activity.

Band AM(1), Laiho M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Biology Program, Biomedicum Helsinki and Haartman Institute, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) signaling
pathways are essential regulators during mammary gland development and
tumorigenesis. Ski-related novel gene (SnoN) is an oncoprotein and a negative
feedback inhibitor of TGF-ß signaling. We have previously reported that low
expression of SnoN in ERa positive breast carcinomas is associated with favorable
prognosis (Zhang et al. Cancer Res. (2003) 63, 5005-5010). Here we have studied
the mechanism of a possible cross-talk between ERa and SnoN. We find that SnoN
interacts with the estrogen-activated form of ERa in the nucleus. SnoN contains
two highly conserved nuclear receptor binding LxxLL-like motifs and we show that 
mutations in these motifs reduce the interaction of SnoN with ERa.
Over-expression of SnoN enhanced the transcriptional activity of ERa in estrogen 
response element (ERE)-reporter assays, augmented the expression of several ERa
target genes and increased the proliferation of MCF7 breast carcinoma cells in an
estrogen-dependent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that SnoN
interacts with ERa at the TTF1 (pS2) gene promoter. Conversely, silencing of SnoN
reduced both ERE-reporter activity and the expression of ERa target genes in MCF7
and T-47D breast cancer cells. Histone deacetylase inhibition increased the level
of SnoN and SnoN-dependent enhancement of ERa-dependent transcription and SnoN
supported the recruitment of p300 histone acetylase to ERa. This study reveals a 
novel mechanism that interconnects ERa and TGF-ß signaling pathways by SnoN.
Accordingly, the results indicate that high SnoN level promotes ERa signaling and
possibly breast cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3612938
PMID: 22227247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):184-98. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.12.004.
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Transcription of the human EAP1 gene is regulated by upstream components of a
puberty-controlling Tumor Suppressor Gene network.

Mueller JK(1), Koch I, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Rulfs T, Castellano JM, Kiess W,
Ojeda S, Heger S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Mammalian puberty is initiated by an increased pulsatile release of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from specialized neurons located in the
hypothalamus. GnRH secretion is controlled by neuronal and glial networks, whose 
activity appears to be coordinated via transcriptional regulation. One of the
transcription factors involved in this process is thought to be the recently
described gene Enhanced at Puberty 1 (EAP1), which encodes a protein with dual
transcriptional activity. In this study we used gene reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays to examine the hypothesis that EAP1 expression 
is controlled by transcriptional regulators earlier postulated to serve as
central nodes of a gene network involved in the neuroendocrine control of
puberty. These regulators include Thyroid Transcription Factor 1 (TTF1), Yin Yang
1 (YY1), and CUX1, in addition to EAP1 itself. While TTF1 has been shown to
facilitate the advent of puberty, YY1 (a zinc finger protein component of the
Polycomb silencing complex) may play a repressive role. The precise role of CUX1 
in this context is not known, but like EAP1, CUX1 can either activate or repress 
gene transcription. We observed that DNA segments of two different lengths (998
and 2744bp) derived from the 5'-flanking region of the human EAP1 gene display
similar transcriptional activity. TTF1 stimulates transcription from both DNA
segments with equal potency, whereas YY1, CUX1, and EAP1 itself, behave as
transcriptional repressors. All four proteins are recruited in vivo to the EAP1
5'-flanking region. These observations suggest that EAP1 gene expression is under
dual transcriptional regulation imposed by a trans-activator (TTF1) and two
repressors (YY1 and CUX1) previously postulated to be upstream components of a
puberty-controlling gene network. In addition, EAP1 itself appears to control its
own expression via a negative auto-feedback loop mechanism. Further studies are
needed to determine if the occupancy of the EAP1 promoter by these regulatory
factors changes at the time of puberty.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3288847
PMID: 22209758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Gynecol Oncol Case Rep. 2012 Dec 14;4:38-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gynor.2012.12.004.
eCollection 2012.

Primary neuroendocrine carcinoma of the fallopian tube: A case report.

Crochet P(1), Luneau F(2), Rojat-Habib MC(3), Agostini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, La Conception Hospital, 147 boulevard
Baille, 13005 Marseille, France. (2)Department of Gynecology, Centre Hospitalier 
Henry Duffaut, 84000 Avignon, France. (3)Service d'anatomie pathologique et de
neuropathologie, hôpital de la Timone, Marseille cedex 05, France.

<U+25BA> This case is an exceptionally rare primary neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
fallopian tube, with a clinical presentation as torsion. <U+25BA> TTF1 immunoreactivity 
can be found in neuroendocrine carcinomas originating from the fallopian tube.

PMCID: PMC3862233
PMID: 24371668  [PubMed]


231. J Med Dent Sci. 2012 Mar 13;59(1):29-41.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis.

Yasui M(1), Miyazaki Y, Mitaka K, Ishizuka M, Unoura K, Tamaoka M, Sumi Y, Inase 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Pulmonology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) causes progressive and irreversible
pulmonary fibrosis, a disease also observed in conjunction with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Previous studies have demonstrated that the
myofibroblast, a cell type whose origins involve the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), may play a role in the pathogenesis of IPF. The goal of this
study was to determine whether EMT has a role in the pathogenesis of chronic HP. 
Lung specimens from a chronic HP model and from patients with chronic HP were
analyzed. Cellular co-localization of epithelial and mesenchymal markers on the
same alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) were examined using immunohistochemistry
and cadherin switching by western blotting as indicators of EMT. EMT cells in the
AECs were significantly more prevalent in lung specimens from Th2-prone A/J mice 
than in specimens from Th1-prone C57BL/6 mice. The percentage of EMT cells was
correlated with the mRNA expressions of IL-13 and TGF-ß1, the fibrosis score, and
the collagen content in the A/J mice. In human, EMT cells in the AECs were
significantly more prevalent in lungs specimens from patients with usual
interstitial pneumonia pattern than in specimens from patients with nonspecific
interstitial pneumonia pattern at the moderate stage of fibrosis. In conclusion, 
EMT may play an important role in the fibrotic process of chronic HP under the
Th2-biased environment.

PMID: 23896962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov 28;17(44):4875-82. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i44.4875.

Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis by TTF1 from extract of herbal medicine.

Liu C(1), Li XW, Cui LM, Li LC, Chen LY, Zhang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College, Yanbian University, Yanji 133002, Jilin Province,
China.

AIM: To study the inhibition of tumor angiogenesis by
5,2,4´-trihydroxy-6,7,5´-trimethoxyflavone (TTF1) isolated from an extract of
herbal medicine Sorbaria sorbifolia.
METHODS: Angiogenic activity was assayed using the chick embryo chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) method. Microvessel density (MVD) was determined by staining
tissue sections immunohistochemically for CD34 using the Weidner capillary
counting method. The mRNA and protein levels of vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), vascular endothelialgrowth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2, Flk-1/KDR), 
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 and
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a were detected by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting analysis.
RESULTS: The TTF1 inhibition rates for CAM were 30.8%, 38.2% and 47.5% with
treatment concentrations of 25, 50 and 100 µg/embryo × 5 d, respectively. The
inhibitory rates for tumor size were 43.8%, 49.4% and 59.6% at TTF1 treatment
concentrations of 5, 10, and 20 µmol/kg, respectively. The average MVD was 14.2, 
11.2 and 8.5 at treatment concentrations of 5 µmol/kg, 10 µmol/kg and 20 µmol/kg 
TTF1, respectively. The mRNA and protein levels of VEGF, KDR, bFGF, COX-2 and
HIF-1a in mice treated with TTF1 were significantly decreased.
CONCLUSION: TTF1 can inhibit tumor angiogenesis, and the mechanism may be
associated with the down-regulation of VEGF, KDR, bFGF, HIF-1a and COX-2.

PMCID: PMC3235630
PMID: 22171128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Surg Pathol. 2012 Aug;20(4):411-5. doi: 10.1177/1066896911429942. Epub 2011
Dec 7.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma-like tumor of the kidney: a case report.

Khoja HA(1), Almutawa A, Binmahfooz A, Aslam M, Ghazi AA, Almaiman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. hkhoja@mtsinai.on.ca

Thyroid carcinoma-like tumor of the kidney is an extremely rare variant of renal 
cell carcinoma. Most previously reported cases were incidental finding; and none 
of them showed papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) nuclear features. This study
reports the first case of PTC (follicular variant)-like tumor of the kidney in
which a female patient presented with hematuria, weight loss, and flank pain.
Imaging studies revealed a left renal mass with enlarged hilar lymph nodes.
Histologically, the renal tumor had a striking resemblance to follicular variant 
of PTC. However, no radiological abnormalities were found in the thyroid,
mediastinum, or pelvis. Tumor cells were negative for thyroid markers
(thyroglobulin and TTF1). According to the authors, this is the first case of PTC
(follicular variant)-like tumor of the kidney.

PMID: 22158951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Jan;7(1):105-14. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182352a45.

Expression profiling-based subtyping identifies novel non-small cell lung cancer 
subgroups and implicates putative resistance to pemetrexed therapy.

Hou J(1), Lambers M, den Hamer B, den Bakker MA, Hoogsteden HC, Grosveld F,
Hegmans J, Aerts J, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: A challenge of cancer therapy is to optimize therapeutical options 
to individual patients. Cancers with similar histology may show dramatically
different responses to therapy, indicating that a refined approach needs to be
developed to classify tumors by intrinsic characteristics that may predict
response to chemotherapy. Global expression profile-based classification has the 
potential to identify such tumor-intrinsic subclasses. Pemetrexed effectiveness
has been related to the expression of its target thymidylate synthase. The
relatively frequent resistance of squamous cell carcinoma to Pemetrexed is
correlated with high levels of thymidylate synthase expression.
METHODS: A global expression profile-based molecular classification of non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was performed. Gene expression was used to predict
Pemetrexed responsiveness. The distinct molecular attributes of NSCLCs predicted 
likely to be resistant to Pemetrexed were bioinformatically characterized. We
tested if routine immunohistochemical markers can be used to distinguish putative
Pemetrexed responders, predicted by gene signatures, from nonresponders.
RESULTS: Ninety NSCLCs were divided into six subclasses by gene expression
signatures. The relevance of this novel phenotyping was linked to other tumor
characteristics. Two of the subclasses correlated to putative Pemetrexed
resistance. In addition, the identified signature genes characterizing putative
Pemetrexed responsiveness predicted therapeutic benefit in a subset of squamous
cell carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression signatures can be used to identify NSCLC subgroups
and have potential to predict resistance to Pemetrexed therapy. We suggest that a
combination of classical pathological markers can be used to identify molecular
tumor subclasses associated with predicted Pemetrexed response.

PMID: 22134068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2011 Nov;11(4):248-52.

Bronchioloalveolar differentiation in lung adenocarcinomas.

Dukic N(1), Babic B, Eri Z, Zec D, Lovrenski A, Kolarov V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pulmonary Diseases of Vojvodina, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia.
djukicnevena@yahoo.com

The goals of the study were to determine what percentage of neoplasms with a
bronchioloalveolar (BAC) component were considered pure BAC by current World
Health Organization (WHO) criteria. Next, we wanted to determine the number of
mucinous BACs using histochemical staining with Alcian Blue PAS. Finally, we
aimed to elucidate by immunohistochemistry the thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1) frequency and cytokeratin 7 (CK7) expression, particularly in regard to
the mucinous and non-mucinous subtypes of BAC tumors. We made a retrospective
review of Hematoxylin and Eosin stained slides and classification of histologic
grade, tumor subtype, and percentage of pure BAC pattern, with further
characterization by histochemical staining for Alcian Blue PAS and
Immunohistochemical staining for thyroid TTF-1 and CK7. Only 10 of 30 tumors
examined could be classified as BAC by current strict WHO criteria. Nine cases
were classified into non-mucinous and only one case was recognized as mucinous
BAC, which showed positive staining for Alcian Blue PAS. TTF-1 positivity was in 
100% of the non-mucinous BACs and complete absence of staining was in one case of
mucinous BACs. CK7 expression in bronchioloalveolar carcinoma has demonstrated
CK7 marked staining in 90% of non-mucinous BACs, also one case of mucinous BACs
showed marked staining for TTF-1. BACs of mucinous morphology were notable for
their conspicuous absence of TTF-1 immunoreactivity.

PMCID: PMC4362581
PMID: 22117833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;40(7):487.

[Thyroid metastatic renal clear cell carcinoma: report of a case].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang F(1), Wang LQ.

Author information: 
(1)yangfang112233@163.com

PMID: 22088379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 18;31(2):481-93. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.416. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

MYBPH, a transcriptional target of TTF-1, inhibits ROCK1, and reduces cell
motility and metastasis.

Hosono Y(1), Yamaguchi T, Mizutani E, Yanagisawa K, Arima C, Tomida S, Shimada Y,
Hiraoka M, Kato S, Yokoi K, Suzuki M, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Neurological Diseases and
Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Cell migration driven by actomyosin filament assembly is a critical step in
tumour invasion and metastasis. Herein, we report identification of myosin
binding protein H (MYBPH) as a transcriptional target of TTF-1 (also known as
NKX2-1 and TITF1), a master regulator of lung development that also plays a role 
as a lineage-survival oncogene in lung adenocarcinoma development. MYBPH
inhibited assembly competence-conferring phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory
light chain (RLC) as well as activating phosphorylation of LIM domain kinase
(LIMK), unexpectedly through its direct physical interaction with Rho kinase 1
(ROCK1) rather than with RLC. Consequently, MYBPH inhibited ROCK1 and negatively 
regulated actomyosin organization, which in turn reduced single cell motility and
increased collective cell migration, resulting in decreased cancer invasion and
metastasis. Finally, we also show that MYBPH is epigenetically inactivated by
promoter DNA methylation in a fraction of TTF-1-positive lung adenocarcinomas,
which appears to be in accordance with its deleterious functions in lung
adenocarcinoma invasion and metastasis, as well as with the paradoxical
association of TTF-1 expression with favourable prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma 
patients.

PMCID: PMC3261566
PMID: 22085929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Histopathology. 2012 Jan;60(2):361-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03983.x. Epub
2011 Nov 10.

Napsin A expression in pulmonary sclerosing haemangioma.

Rossi G, Cadioli A, Mengoli MC, Piccioli S, Cavazza A.

PMID: 22074388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Feb;7(2):281-90. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31823815d3.

<U+0394>Np63 (p40) and thyroid transcription factor-1 immunoreactivity on small biopsies
or cellblocks for typing non-small cell lung cancer: a novel two-hit,
sparing-material approach.

Pelosi G(1), Fabbri A, Bianchi F, Maisonneuve P, Rossi G, Barbareschi M, Graziano
P, Cavazza A, Rekhtman N, Pastorino U, Scanagatta P, Papotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,Fondazione IRCCS National
Cancer Institute, Milan, Italy. giuseppe.pelosi@istitutotumori.mi.it

INTRODUCTION: Diagnosing non-small cell lung cancer on biopsy/cellblock samples
by morphology may be demanding. As sparing material for molecular testing is
mandatory, a minimalist immunohistochemistry (IHC)-based diagnostic approach is
warranted by means of novel, reliable, and easy-to-assess biomarkers.
METHODS: Forty-six consecutive biopsy/cellblock samples and the corresponding
resection specimens (as the gold standard for morphology and IHC) from 30
adenocarcinomas (AD), 10 squamous carcinomas (SQC), 5 adenosquamous carcinomas
(ADSQC), and 1 sarcomatoid carcinoma (SC) were IHC-evaluated for p40
[corresponding to nontransactivating <U+0394>Np63 isoforms] and thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF1) by semiquantitative assessment. For p40, also immunodecoration
intensity was taken into account and dichotomized as strong or low.
RESULTS: Nonrandom and overlapping distributions of the relevant markers were
found in biopsy/cellblock and surgical specimens, which closely correlated with
each other and the diverse tumor categories, with no differences in area under
curve-receiver-operating-characteristic curves for each marker between any two
samples, including p40 and p63. Diagnostic combinations were p40-/TTF1+ or TTF1- 
for AD (where p40 was negative, apart from 5/30 AD showing at the best 1-2% tumor
cells with low intensity); p40+/TTF1- (p40 strong and by far higher than 50%) for
SQC; and p40+/TTF1+ or p40+/TTF1- (p40 strong and less than 50%) for ADSQC. The
single SC case was p40-/TTF1-, suggesting glandular lineage. Practically, 41/46
(89%) tumors were correctly classified by IHC on small samples, including 30 AD, 
10 SQC, 1/5 ADSQC, and no SC. Underdiagnosis of ADSQC was actually because of
sampling error of biopsies/cellblocks rather than insufficient biomarker
robustness, whereas underdiagnosis of SC was really because of the failure of
either marker to highlight epithelial-mesenchymal transition.
CONCLUSIONS: This minimalist IHC-based model of p40 and TTF1 on biopsy/cellblock 
samples was effective to correctly subtype most cases of lung cancer.

PMID: 22071786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Eur J Cancer. 2012 Jan;48(1):61-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2011.09.022. Epub 2011 Oct
27.

Establishing an EGFR mutation screening service for non-small cell lung cancer - 
sample quality criteria and candidate histological predictors.

Leary AF(1), Castro DG, Nicholson AG, Ashley S, Wotherspoon A, O'Brien ME, Popat 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.

INTRODUCTION: EGFR screening requires good quality tissue, sensitivity and
turn-around time (TAT). We report our experience of routine screening, describing
sample type, TAT, specimen quality (cellularity and DNA yield), histopathological
description, mutation result and clinical outcome.
METHODS: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) sections were screened for EGFR
mutations (M+) in exons 18-21. Clinical, pathological and screening outcome data 
were collected for year 1 of testing. Screening outcome alone was collected for
year 2.
RESULTS: In year 1, 152 samples were tested, most (72%) were diagnostic. TAT was 
4.9 days (95%confidence interval (CI)=4.5-5.5). EGFR-M+ prevalence was 11% and
higher (20%) among never-smoking women with adenocarcinomas (ADCs), but 30% of
mutations occurred in current/ex-smoking men. EGFR-M+ tumours were non-mucinous
ADCs and 100% thyroid transcription factor (TTF1+). No mutations were detected in
poorly differentiated NSCLC-not otherwise specified (NOS). There was a trend for 
improved overall survival (OS) among EGFR-M+ versus EGFR-M- patients (median
OS=78 versus 17 months). In year 1, test failure rate was 19%, and associated
with scant cellularity and low DNA concentrations. However 75% of samples with
poor cellularity but representative of tumour were informative and mutation
prevalence was 9%. In year 2, 755 samples were tested; mutation prevalence was
13% and test failure only 5.4%. Although samples with low DNA concentration (<2
ng/µL) had more test failures (30% versus 3.9% for [DNA]>2.2 ng/µL), the mutation
rate was 9.2%.
CONCLUSION: Routine epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) screening using
diagnostic samples is fast and feasible even on samples with poor cellularity and
DNA content. Mutations tend to occur in better-differentiated non-mucinous TTF1+ 
ADCs. Whether these histological criteria may be useful to select patients for
EGFR testing merits further investigation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22036089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer. 2012 Jun 1;118(11):2889-99. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26584. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Histologic patterns and molecular characteristics of lung adenocarcinoma
associated with clinical outcome.

Solis LM(1), Behrens C, Raso MG, Lin HY, Kadara H, Yuan P, Galindo H, Tang X, Lee
JJ, Kalhor N, Wistuba II, Moran CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma is histologically heterogeneous and has 5
distinct histologic growth patterns: lepidic, acinar, papillary, micropapillary, 
and solid. To date, there is no consensus regarding the clinical utility of these
patterns.
METHODS: The authors performed a detailed semiquantitative assessment of
histologic patterns of 240 lung adenocarcinomas and determined the association
with patients' clinicopathologic features, including recurrence-free survival
(RFS) and overall survival (OS) rates. In a subset of tumors, expression levels
of 2 prognostic molecular markers were evaluated: thyroid transcription factor-1 
(TTF-1) (n = 218) and a panel of 5 proteins (referred as the FILM signature
index) (n = 185).
RESULTS: Four mutually exclusive tumor histology pattern groups were identified: 
1) any solid (38%), 2) any papillary but no solid (14%), 3) lepidic and acinar
but no solid or papillary (30%), and 4) acinar only (18%). Patients in group 3
had a higher RFS rate than patients in group 1 (hazard ratio [HR], 0.4510; P =
.0165) and group 2 (HR, 0.4253; P = .0425). Solid pattern tumors (group 1) were
associated with a lower OS rate than nonsolid pattern tumors (all stages: HR;
1.665; P = .0144; stages I and II: HR, 2.157; P = .008). In the patients who had 
tumors with a nonsolid pattern, high TTF-1 expression was associated
significantly with higher RFS (HR, 0.994; P = .0017) and OS (HR, 0.996; P =
.0276) rates in all stages, and a high FILM signature index score was associated 
with lower RFS and OS rates in all stages (RFS: HR, 1.343; P = .0192; OS: HR,
1.371; P = .0156) and in stages I and II (RFS: HR, 1.419; P = .0095; OS: HR,
1.315; P = .0422).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of a solid histologic pattern was identified as a
marker of unfavorable prognosis in patients with primary lung adenocarcinoma.
High TTF-1 expression and low FILM signature index scores were associated with a 
better prognosis for patients who had tumors with a nonsolid pattern.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3369269
PMID: 22020674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Thorac Oncol. 2012 Jan;7(1):76-84. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318232b98a.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 amplification and expressions in lung
adenocarcinoma tissues and pleural effusions predict patient survival and
prognosis.

Li X(1), Wan L, Shen H, Geng J, Nie J, Wang G, Jia N, Dai M, Bai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Guangdong Provincial Institute of Nephrology, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of
China.

INTRODUCTION: Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) plays a role in lung
adenocarcinoma development. We investigated the significance of TTF1 in primary
lung adenocarcinomas, lymph node metastases, and malignant pleural effusions
(MPEs).
METHODS: We studied TTF1 in 175 primary lung adenocarcinomas, 52 lymph node
metastases, and 46 MPE using microarray-based fluorescence in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemistry, and messenger RNA (mRNA) in situ hybridization. Real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction was used to investigate
correlations between TTF1 amplification and mRNA expression. Correlations between
clinicopathologic characteristics, TTF1 amplification, TTF1 expressions, overall 
survival, and prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: TTF1 was amplified in 7% of primary lung adenocarcinomas, 4% of lymph
node metastases, and 4% of MPE. TTF1 amplification in lung adenocarcinomas was
associated with pathologic subtypes (p = 0.029). Patients with positive TTF1
protein and mRNA expressions had improved overall survival if TTF1 was
unamplified compared with those with TTF1 amplification (p = 0.068). A
multivariate model did not show patients with positive TTF1 expressions tended to
have better prognoses if TTF1 was unamplified compared with those with TTF1
amplification (p = 0.068). Survival time was longer for patients with TTF1
expressions in both primary lung tissues (p < 0.001) and MPE (p = 0.045). A
multivariate model confirmed the prognostic value of TTF1 expressions in lung
adenocarcinoma (p < 0.001). A multivariate model confirmed the prognostic value
of TTF1 expressions in lung adenocarcinoma tissues (p < 0.001) while not in MPE
(p = 0.058). TTF1 mRNA level was higher in cases with TTF1 amplification compared
with those without TTF1 amplification.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with lung adenocarcinoma without TTF1 amplification tend to
have better prognoses than those with TTF1 amplification in cases with positive
TTF1 expressions. Positive TTF1 expressions in lung adenocarcinoma tissues are
favorable prognostic parameters in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22011671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer. 2012 Mar 15;118(6):1607-18. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26450. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Molecular classification of nonsmall cell lung cancer using a 4-protein
quantitative assay.

Anagnostou VK(1), Dimou AT, Botsis T, Killiam EJ, Gustavson MD, Homer RJ, Boffa
D, Zolota V, Dougenis D, Tanoue L, Gettinger SN, Detterbeck FC, Syrigos KN,
Bepler G, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. valsamo.anagnostou@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: The importance of definitive histological subclassification has
increased as drug trials have shown benefit associated with histology in
nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The acuity of this problem is further
exacerbated by the use of minimally invasive cytology samples. Here we describe
the development and validation of a 4-protein classifier that differentiates
primary lung adenocarcinomas (AC) from squamous cell carcinomas (SCC).
METHODS: Quantitative immunofluorescence (AQUA) was employed to measure proteins 
differentially expressed between AC and SCC followed by logistic regression
analysis. An objective 4-protein classifier was generated to define likelihood of
AC in a training set of 343 patients followed by validation in 2 independent
cohorts (n = 197 and n = 235). The assay was then tested on 11 cytology
specimens.
RESULTS: Statistical modeling selected thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1),
CK5, CK13, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) to generate a weighted
classifier and to identify the optimal cutpoint for differentiating AC from SCC. 
Using the pathologist's final diagnosis as the criterion standard, the molecular 
test showed a sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 93%. Blinded analysis of the 
validation sets yielded sensitivity and specificity of 96% and 97%, respectively.
Our assay classified the cytology specimens with a specificity of 100% and
sensitivity of 87.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular classification of NSCLC using an objective quantitative
test can be highly accurate and could be translated into a diagnostic platform
for broad clinical application.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 22009766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Pathologica. 2011 Jun;103(3):61-3.

Solitary extramedullary plasmacytoma of the thyroid gland associated with
multinodular goiter: case report and review of the literature.

Puliga G(1), Olla L, Bellisano G, Di Naro N, Ganau M, Lai ML, Faa G, Tolu GA.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Anatomic Pathology, San Martino Hospital, Oristano, Italy.

Solitary extramedullary plasmacytoma (SEP) is a rare malignant neoplasm arising
from plasma cells most commonly occurring in the nasal cavity, nasopharynx and
larynx. Thyroid involvement is rare and less than 75 cases of SEP of the thyroid 
gland have been reported to date. A 74-year-old woman with an history of
multinodular goiter presented with dysphonia and painful neck swelling, related
to a rapidly growing nodule in the right thyroid lobe. Thyroid function tests
showed subclinical hypothyroidism; no evidence of Hashimoto's disease was found. 
Ultrasound confirmed the presence of an isoechoic nodule, 35 mm in diameter, with
a CDIII vascular pattern. FNAC showed a monotonous population of atypical cells, 
interpreted as suspicious for malignant neoplasia (Thyr. 4). The patient
underwent total thyroidectomy. Histopathological examination showed a
unencapsulated neoplasm composed of atypical tumour cells characterized by
abundant cytoplasm and eccentric nuclei. At immunohistochemistry, tumour cells
revealed diffuse reactivity for CD138 and CD45RB and predominant staining for
kappa chains. Pan-cytokeratins, TTF1, thyreoglobulin, calcitonin, CD20 and CD79a 
were negative. Clinically, a complete multiple myeloma workup was negative. On
this basis, a definitive diagnosis of SEP was made. At 16 months follow-up, the
patient showed good clinical conditions without evidence of multiple myeloma. In 
conclusion, SEP should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a rapidly
enlarging thyroid nodule. Clinical correlation and immunocytochemistry are
crucial in avoiding pitfalls. Surgery remains the best modality of treatment
whenever the lesion is localized and easily removable.

PMID: 22007566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Diagn Cytopathol. 2013 Mar;41(3):247-52. doi: 10.1002/dc.21770. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

"Cannonballs" and psammoma bodies: unusual cytologic features of metastatic
pulmonary small-cell carcinoma in a pleural effusion.

Conway AB(1), Hart MK, Jessurun J, Pambuccian SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, Mayo
MMC 609, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Large three-dimensional cell aggregates and psammoma bodies are usually
encountered in benign serous effusions (mesothelial hyperplasia and
endosalpingiosis), mesotheliomas, and metastatic papillary carcinomas. We report 
a case of pulmonary small-cell carcinoma occurring in an 88-year-old woman that
initially presented with a malignant pleural effusion characterized cytologically
by a predominance of large three-dimensional neoplastic cell aggregates
("cannonballs"), associated with rare psammoma bodies. Although the crowded
three-dimensional tumor-cell aggregates did not allow detailed cytologic
examination, the diagnosis of metastatic small-cell carcinoma could be
established noting the characteristic chromatin features of the occasional single
neoplastic cells and the characteristic "cell-in-cell" and "stack-of-coins"
arrangements of rare small clusters of neoplastic cells. Immunoperoxidase stains 
showing positivity of the tumor cells for CD56, synaptophysin, and TTF1 further
supported this diagnosis. Endobronchial ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration 
of a mediastinal lymph node subsequently confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary
small-cell carcinoma. Metastatic pulmonary small-cell carcinoma should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of serous effusions showing large
three-dimensional neoplastic cell aggregates and psammoma bodies to prevent a
potential diagnostic pitfall.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21987407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011 Oct 4;6:128. doi: 10.1186/1749-8090-6-128.

Cystic mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lung: a case report.

Cabibi D(1), Sciuto A, Geraci G, Lo Nigro C, Modica G, Cajozzo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, University of Medicine, Policlinico, Via del
Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy. cabibidaniela@virgilio.it

Mucinous cystic tumors of the lung are uncommon, the preoperative pathologic
diagnosis is difficult and their biological behavior is still controversial. We
report the case of a patient with a clinically benign cystic lesion that
post-operatively showed to be consistent with an invasive adenocarcinoma arising 
in a mucinous cystadenoma of the lung. We underline the difficulty of the
clinical pre-operative diagnosis of this cystic neoplasia radiologically
mimicking a hydatid cyst, and we report the negative TTF1 immunostaining
potentially misleading in the differential diagnosis with metastatic mucinous
carcinomas. Finallly, we evidence the presence of a pre-existing mucinous benign 
lesion suggesting early and complete resection of benign appearing lung cysts
because they can undergo malignant transformation if left untreated or they can
already harbor foci of invasive carcinoma at the time of the presentation. Even
if a good prognosis, better than in other lung carcinomas, with no recurrrence or
metastasis after complete surgical exicision, has been reported for cystic
mucinous cystoadenocarcinomas, the follow-up showed an aggressive biological
behaviour, with the early onset of metastasis, in keeping with P53 positive
immunostaining and high Ki-67 proliferation index.

PMCID: PMC3199241
PMID: 21970610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Histopathology. 2012 Mar;60(4):531-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03854.x.
Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Personalized medicine for lung cancer: new challenges for pathology.

Kerr KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen University Medical School, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen, UK. k.kerr@abdn.ac.uk

Recent advances in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) therapy mean the relatively
simple discrimination between small-cell and 'non-small-cell' carcinoma is
insufficient to determine the best treatment for individual patients. Safety,
efficacy and prescribing requirements mandate more specific subtyping of NSCLC
for several new drugs: practice made difficult by the tumour heterogeneity
combined with the paucity of tissue in most diagnostic samples.
Immunohistochemical approaches have emerged as accurate predictors of probable
tumour histotype. P63 and/or cytokeratins 5 and 6 and thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF1) are among the best predictors, respectively, of squamous and
adenocarcinoma histology. Molecular characteristics may predict response to both 
newer molecular targeted agents and traditional cytotoxic agents. Specific
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene as predictors of
response to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (erlotinib, gefitinib) is the first
example of markers which predict response to targeted agents. Actual drug targets
[e.g. thymidilate synthase (TS) - pemetrexed] or markers of the tumour's ability 
to repair cytotoxic drug-induced damage [e.g. excision repair
cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) - cisplatin] may well also complement NSCLC
diagnosis. This extended diagnostic requirement from increasingly limited
material provided by minimally invasive biopsy techniques poses major challenges 
for pathology.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21916947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Respir Res. 2011 Aug 25;12:115. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-115.

Altered surfactant homeostasis and recurrent respiratory failure secondary to
TTF-1 nuclear targeting defect.

Peca D(1), Petrini S, Tzialla C, Boldrini R, Morini F, Stronati M, Carnielli VP, 
Cogo PE, Danhaive O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital IRCCS, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of genes affecting surfactant homeostasis, such as SFTPB,
SFTPC and ABCA3, lead to diffuse lung disease in neonates and children.
Haploinsufficiency of NKX2.1, the gene encoding the thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1)--critical for lung, thyroid and central nervous system
morphogenesis and function--causes a rare form of progressive respiratory failure
designated brain-lung-thyroid syndrome. Molecular mechanisms involved in this
syndrome are heterogeneous and poorly explored. We report a novel TTF-1 molecular
defect causing recurrent respiratory failure episodes in an infant.
METHODS: The subject was an infant with severe neonatal respiratory distress
syndrome followed by recurrent respiratory failure episodes, hypopituitarism and 
neurological abnormalities. Lung histology and ultrastructure were assessed by
surgical biopsy. Surfactant-related genes were studied by direct genomic DNA
sequencing and array chromatine genomic hybridization (aCGH). Surfactant protein 
expression in lung tissue was analyzed by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy.
For kinetics studies, surfactant protein B and disaturated phosphatidylcholine
(DSPC) were isolated from serial tracheal aspirates after intravenous
administration of stable isotope-labeled (2)H(2)O and (13)C-leucine; fractional
synthetic rate was derived from gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (2)H and
(13)C enrichment curves. Six intubated infants with no primary lung disease were 
used as controls.
RESULTS: Lung biopsy showed desquamative interstitial pneumonitis and lamellar
body abnormalities suggestive of genetic surfactant deficiency. Genetic studies
identified a heterozygous ABCA3 mutation, L941P, previously unreported. No SFTPB,
SFTPC or NKX2.1 mutations or deletions were found. However, immunofluorescence
studies showed TTF-1 prevalently expressed in type II cell cytoplasm instead of
nucleus, indicating defective nuclear targeting. This pattern has not been
reported in human and was not found in two healthy controls and in five ABCA3
mutation carriers. Kinetic studies demonstrated a marked reduction of SP-B
synthesis (43.2 vs. 76.5 ± 24.8%/day); conversely, DSPC synthesis was higher
(12.4 vs. 6.3 ± 0.5%/day) compared to controls, although there was a marked
reduction of DSPC content in tracheal aspirates (29.8 vs. 56.1 ± 12.4% of total
phospholipid content).
CONCLUSION: Defective TTF-1 signaling may result in profound surfactant
homeostasis disruption and neonatal/pediatric diffuse lung disease. Heterozygous 
ABCA3 missense mutations may act as disease modifiers in other genetic surfactant
defects.

PMCID: PMC3179724
PMID: 21867529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Lung Cancer. 2012 Mar;75(3):300-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 
Aug 19.

ALK translocation is associated with ALK immunoreactivity and extensive
signet-ring morphology in primary lung adenocarcinoma.

Popat S(1), Gonzalez D, Min T, Swansbury J, Dainton M, Croud JG, Rice AJ,
Nicholson AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ, UK.
sanjay.popat@rmh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: ALK rearrangement is particularly observed in signet-ring sub-type
adenocarcinoma. Since fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is not suitable
for mass screening, we aimed to characterize the predictive utility of tumour
morphology and ALK immunoreactivity to identify ALK rearrangement, in a primary
lung adenocarcinoma dataset enriched for signet-ring morphology, compared with
that of other morphology.
METHODS: 7 adenocarcinomas from diagnostic archives reported with signet-ring
morphology were assessed and compared with 11 adenocarcinomas without signet-ring
features over the same time period. Growth patterns were reviewed, ALK expression
was assessed by standard immunohistochemistry using ALK1 clone and Envision
detection (Dako), and ALK rearrangement was assessed by FISH (Abbott Molecular). 
Associations between groups and predictive utility of tumour morphology and ALK
expression using FISH as gold standard were calculated.
RESULTS: 2 excision lung biopsy cases with pure (100%) signet-ring morphology and
solid patterns demonstrated diffuse moderate cytoplasmic ALK immunoreactivity
(2+) and harboured ALK rearrangements (p=0.007), unlike 5 mixed-signet-ring and
11 non-signet-ring adenocarcinomas, which showed negative or 1+ immunoreactivity;
and did not harbour ALK rearrangements (p>0.1). ALK expression was not associated
with ALK copy number. 6 of 7 cases with signet ring morphology stained for TTF-1.
Pure signet-ring morphology and moderate ALK expression were both associated with
ALK rearranged tumours.
CONCLUSION: ALK rearrangement is strongly associated with ALK immunoreactivity,
and was seen only in tumours with pure signet-ring morphology and solid growth
pattern. Tumour morphology, growth pattern and ALK immunoreactivity appear to be 
good indicators of ALK rearrangement, with TTF-1 positivity aiding in proving
primary pulmonary origin.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21855164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biotech Histochem. 2012 Jan;87(1):30-4. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2011.591838. Epub
2011 Aug 15.

Diagnostic utility of PAX8, TTF-1 and napsin A for discriminating metastatic
carcinoma from primary adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Ye J(1), Hameed O, Findeis-Hosey JJ, Fan L, Li F, McMahon LA, Yang Q, Wang HL, Xu
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

TTF-1 and napsin A are useful biomarkers for differentiating primary lung
adenocarcinoma from metastatic tumors. Studies have shown, however, that TTF-1
and napsin A also can be expressed in extrapulmonary carcinomas, and that a small
fraction of primary lung adenocarcinomas do not co-express these two markers. We 
attempted to determine whether a tissue-specific transcriptional factor, PAX8,
can help determine primary sites of lung carcinomas. Immunohistochemical stains
for PAX8, TTF-1 and napsin A were performed on 103 cases of metastatic lung
carcinomas from a variety of origins and 120 cases of primary lung
adenocarcinomas. Our data demonstrated that all 103 metastatic carcinomas were
negative for napsin A, while 14 (13.6%; four thyroid, two endometrium, three
colon, one prostate, one salivary adenoid cystic, two renal cell carcinomas, and 
one ovary) showed weak to strong TTF-1 nuclear staining in 5-60% of the tumor
cells. All primary lung adenocarcinomas were negative for PAX8, whereas 46
(44.7%) metastatic carcinomas from the kidney (29/33), ovary (6/8), endometrium
(5/5), endocervix (1/1), thyroid (4/5) and urinary tract (1/3) were positive for 
PAX8. Our data demonstrate that of combined use of PAX8, TTF-1 and napsin A is
reliable to separate reliably lung primary from metastatic tumors.

PMID: 21838611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022280. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is a direct enhancer of thyroid transcription
factor-1 in human papillary thyroid carcinoma cells.

Gilbert-Sirieix M(1), Makoukji J, Kimura S, Talbot M, Caillou B, Massaad C,
Massaad-Massade L.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 8203 CNRS/Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is involved in the normal development of
thyroid gland, but its disregulation provokes the appearance of several types of 
cancers, including papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) which are the most common
thyroid tumours. The follow-up of PTC patients is based on the monitoring of
serum thyroglobulin levels which is regulated by the thyroid transcription factor
1 (TTF-1): a tissue-specific transcription factor essential for the
differentiation of the thyroid. We investigated whether the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway
might regulate TTF-1 expression in a human PTC model and examined the molecular
mechanisms underlying this regulation. Immunofluorescence analysis, real time
RT-PCR and Western blot studies revealed that TTF-1 as well as the major Wnt
pathway components are co-expressed in TPC-1 cells and human PTC tumours.
Knocking-down the Wnt/ß-catenin components by siRNAs inhibited both TTF-1
transcript and protein expression, while mimicking the activation of Wnt
signaling by lithium chloride induced TTF-1 gene and protein expression.
Functional promoter studies and ChIP analysis showed that the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway exerts its effect by means of the binding of ß-catenin to TCF/LEF
transcription factors on the level of an active TCF/LEF response element at
[-798, -792 bp] in TTF-1 promoter. In conclusion, we demonstrated that the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is a direct and forward driver of the TTF-1 expression. The
localization of TCF-4 and TTF-1 in the same area of PTC tissues might be of
clinical relevance, and justifies further examination of these factors in the
papillary thyroid cancers follow-up.

PMCID: PMC3141030
PMID: 21814573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Tumori. 2011 May-Jun;97(3):411-4. doi: 10.1700/912.10043.

Endometrial metastasis of lung adenocarcinoma: a case report.

Tiseo M(1), Bersanelli M, Corradi D, Bartolotti M, Gelsomino F, Nizzoli R, Barili
MP, Ardizzoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.
mtiseo@ao.pr.it

The female genital tract is an infrequent site of metastasis, in particular from 
extragenital primary tumors such as non-small cell lung cancer. Ovarian
metastases have been described as disseminations of lung adenocarcinoma; rare
cases of secondary localizations in adnexa, cervix and vagina were also observed 
in the literature, but none of these had endometrial involvement. We report the
first case, to our knowledge, of non-small cell lung cancer with metastatic
spread to the endometrium.

PMID: 21789025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Aug;6(8):1392-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182208ea8.

Significance of thymidylate synthase and thyroid transcription factor 1
expression in patients with nonsquamous non-small cell lung cancer treated with
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy.

Sun JM(1), Han J, Ahn JS, Park K, Ahn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: This study is to evaluate whether thymidylate synthase (TS) or
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) protein expression can predict clinical
outcomes for pemetrexed-based chemotherapy in patients with nonsquamous non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: Two hundred eighty-five consecutive patients with nonsquamous NSCLC
treated with pemetrexed-based chemotherapy were immunohistochemically analyzed
for the expressions of TS and TTF1.
RESULTS: TS and TTF1 expression were successfully analyzed in 193 and 284 cases, 
respectively. Tumors with TS-negativity or TTF1-positivity were more frequent in 
patients who were female, younger, had adenocarcinoma, or had never smoked.
Higher response rates for pemetrexed-based chemotherapy were associated with
TS-negativity (33.7% versus 14.1%, p = 0.002) and TTF1-positivity (28.1% versus
9.8%, p < 0.001). In univariate analysis, progression-free survival for
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy was significantly longer in groups with
adenocarcinoma (2.9 versus 1.4 months, p = 0.001), TS-negativity (4.1 versus 2.0 
months, p = 0.001), and TTF1-positivity (3.8 versus 1.3 months, p < 0.001). In
multivariate analysis, TS-negativity (hazard ratio [HR] = 0.70; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 0.51-0.97) and TTF1-positivity (HR = 0.51; 95% CI, 0.35-0.73) were
associated with longer progression-free survival. Patients with TTF1-positive
tumors also had significantly longer overall survival times than patients with
TTF1-negative tumors (25.4 versus 14.2 months, HR = 0.55; 95% CI, 0.39-0.77).
CONCLUSIONS: Low TS or high TTF1 protein expression was significantly associated 
with better clinical outcomes in nonsquamous NSCLC patients who were treated with
pemetrexed-based chemotherapy. The predictive role of TS or TTF1 expression
should be further validated in a prospective randomized study.

PMID: 21716147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Dec;45(6):1212-21. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0325OC.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

The milieu of damaged alveolar epithelial type 2 cells stimulates alveolar wound 
repair by endogenous and exogenous progenitors.

Buckley S(1), Shi W, Carraro G, Sedrakyan S, Da Sacco S, Driscoll BA, Perin L, De
Filippo RE, Warburton D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Saban Research Institute,
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, California, USA.

Alveolar epithelial integrity is dependent upon the alveolar milieu, yet the
milieu of the damaged alveolar epithelial cell type 2 (AEC2) has been little
studied. Characterization of its components may offer the potential for ex vivo
manipulation of stem cells to optimize their therapeutic potential. We examined
the cytokine profile of AEC2 damage milieu, hypothesizing that it would promote
endogenous epithelial repair while recruiting cells from other locations and
instructing their engraftment and differentiation. Bronchoalveolar lavage and
lung extract from hyperoxic rats represented AEC2 in vivo damage milieu, and
medium from a scratch-damaged AEC2 monolayer represented in vitro damage. CINC-2 
and ICAM, the major cytokines detected by proteomic cytokine array in AEC2 damage
milieu, were chemoattractive to normoxic AECs and expedited in vitro wound
healing, which was blocked by their respective neutralizing antibodies. The AEC2 
damage milieu was also chemotactic for exogenous uncommitted human amniotic fluid
stem cells (hAFSCs), increasing migration greater than 20-fold. hAFSCs attached
within an in vitro AEC2 wound and expedited wound repair by contributing
cytokines migration inhibitory factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 to
the AEC2 damage milieu, which promoted wound healing. The AEC2 damage milieu also
promoted differentiation of a subpopulation of hAFSCs to express SPC, TTF-1, and 
ABCA3, phenotypic markers of distal alveolar epithelium. Thus, the
microenvironment created by AEC2 damage not only promotes autocrine repair but
also can attract uncommitted stem cells, which further augment healing through
cytokine secretion and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3262671
PMID: 21700959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 6;342(1-2):8-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.04.025.
Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Transcriptional regulation of the human KiSS1 gene.

Mueller JK(1), Dietzel A, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Tefs K, Kiess W, Danne T, Ojeda
SR, Heger S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

Kisspeptin, the product of the KiSS1 gene, has emerged as a key component of the 
mechanism by which the hypothalamus controls puberty and reproductive
development. It does so by stimulating the secretion of gonadotropin releasing
hormone (GnRH). Little is known about the transcriptional control of the KiSS1
gene. Here we show that a set of proteins postulated to be upstream components of
a hypothalamic network involved in controlling female puberty regulates KiSS1
transcriptional activity. Using RACE-PCR we determined that transcription of
KiSS1 mRNA is initiated at a single transcription start site (TSS) located
153-156bp upstream of the ATG translation initiation codon. Promoter assays
performed using 293 MSR cells showed that the KiSS1 promoter is activated by TTF1
and CUX1-p200, and repressed by EAP1, YY1, and CUX1-p110. EAP1 and CUX-110 were
also repressive in GT1-7 cells. All four TFs are recruited in vivo to the KiSS1
promoter and are expressed in kisspeptin neurons. These results suggest that
expression of the KiSS1 gene is regulated by trans-activators and repressors
involved in the system-wide control of mammalian puberty.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3148268
PMID: 21672609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Aug 15;184(4):401-6. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201103-0495PP.

Intersections between pulmonary development and disease.

Whitsett JA(1), Haitchi HM, Maeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology, Perinatal, and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Recent advances in cellular, molecular, and developmental biology have
revolutionized our concepts regarding the process of organogenesis that have
important implications for our understanding of both lung formation and pulmonary
disease pathogenesis. Pulmonary investigators have long debated whether
developmental processes are recapitulated during normal repair of the lung or in 
the setting of chronic pulmonary diseases. Although the cellular events involved 
in lung morphogenesis and those causing pulmonary disease are likely to include
processes that are distinct, there is increasing evidence that the pathogenesis
of many lung disorders involves the same genetic machinery that regulates cell
growth,specification, and differentiation during normal lung development.

PMCID: PMC3175542
PMID: 21642246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncol Rep. 2011 Sep;26(3):651-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1330. Epub 2011 May 31.

TTF1-induced apoptosis of HepG-2 cells through a mitochondrial pathway.

Li Y(1), Bian L, Cui F, Li L, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College, Yanbian University, Yanji, Jilin 133000, PR China.

The Chinese medicinal herb Sorbaria sorbifolia, native to Changbai Mountain, can 
induce apoptosis in HepG-2 cells. We studied the mechanism by which 5, 2',
4'-trihydroxy-6,7, 5'-trimethoxyflavone (TTF1) isolated from acetic ether
extracts of Sorbaria sorbifolia induces apoptosis in HepG-2 cells. The results
showed that TTF1 both inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis. RT-PCR and
Western blot analysis showed that TTF1 treatment led to decreased transcription
and protein expression of bcl-2 and an increase in bax, Cyt-c, caspase-3 and
caspase-9. These results together suggest that TTF1 may induce apoptosis of
HepG-2 cells through a mitochondrial pathway.

PMID: 21637920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Intern Med J. 2011 Aug;41(8):594-605. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2011.02540.x.

Management of metastatic renal cell carcinoma in the era of targeted therapies.

Webber K(1), Cooper A, Kleiven H, Yip D, Goldstein D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia. k.webber@unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Metastatic renal cell cancer is associated with poor prognosis and
survival and is resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Therapeutic targeting of 
molecular pathways for tumour angiogenesis and other specific activation
mechanisms offers improved tumour response and prolonged survival.
AIMS: To conduct a retrospective audit of metastatic renal cell carcinoma
patients treated with targeted therapies.
METHODS: Data were extracted from clinical records of patients undergoing
targeted treatment between 2005 and 2009 at two hospital sites. Data collected
included pathology, systemic therapy class, toxicity and survival. Univariate and
multivariate survival analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Sixty-one patients were treated with 102 lines of therapy with a median 
overall survival (OS) of 23 months, median time to failure of first-line
treatment (TTF1) of 10 months and median time to failure of second-line treatment
(TTF2) of 5.2 months. Time from first diagnosis to treatment >12 months was
significantly associated with improved OS, longer TTF1, TTF2 and response to
first-line anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (anti-VEGF TKI) therapy. Variables associated with tumour biology,
natural history and the systemic inflammatory response were associated with
improved OS and TTF1. Development of hypertension was predictive of anti-VEGF TKI
outcome. Toxicities were as expected for each drug class.
CONCLUSIONS:   Survival and toxicity outcomes from two Australian sites are
comparable to published data. The adverse event profile differs to conventional
chemotherapy. Clinicians caring for patients with metastatic renal cancer will
need to become familiar with these toxicities and their management as these
agents enter widespread use.

© 2011 The Authors. Internal Medicine Journal © 2011 Royal Australasian College
of Physicians.

PMID: 21627746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mod Pathol. 2011 Oct;24(10):1348-59. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.92. Epub 2011
May 27.

Immunohistochemical algorithm for differentiation of lung adenocarcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma based on large series of whole-tissue sections with
validation in small specimens.

Rekhtman N(1), Ang DC, Sima CS, Travis WD, Moreira AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. rekhtman@mskcc.org

Immunohistochemistry is increasingly utilized to differentiate lung
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. However, detailed analysis of
coexpression profiles of commonly used markers in large series of whole-tissue
sections is lacking. Furthermore, the optimal diagnostic algorithm, particularly 
the minimal-marker combination, is not firmly established. We therefore studied
whole-tissue sections of resected adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma
(n=315) with markers commonly used to identify adenocarcinoma (TTF-1) and
squamous cell carcinoma (p63, CK5/6, 34ßE12), and prospectively validated the
devised algorithm in morphologically unclassifiable small biopsy/cytology
specimens (n=38). Analysis of whole-tissue sections showed that squamous cell
carcinoma had a highly consistent immunoprofile (TTF-1-negative and
p63/CK5/6/34ßE12-diffuse) with only rare variation. In contrast, adenocarcinoma
showed significant immunoheterogenetity for all 'squamous markers' (p63 (32%),
CK5/6 (18%), 34ßE12 (82%)) and TTF-1 (89%). As a single marker, only diffuse
TTF-1 was specific for adenocarcinoma whereas none of the 'squamous markers,'
even if diffuse, were entirely specific for squamous cell carcinoma. In contrast,
coexpression profiles of TTF-1/p63 had only minimal overlap between
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, and there was no overlap if CK5/6 was
added as a third marker. An algorithm was devised in which TTF-1/p63 were used as
the first-line panel, and CK5/6 was added for rare indeterminate cases.
Prospective validation of this algorithm in small specimens showed 100% accuracy 
of adenocarcinoma vs squamous cell carcinoma prediction as determined by
subsequent resection. In conclusion, although reactivity for 'squamous markers'
is common in lung adenocarcinoma, a two-marker panel of TTF-1/p63 is sufficient
for subtyping of the majority of tumors as adenocarcinomas vs squamous cell
carcinoma, and addition of CK5/6 is needed in only a small subset of cases. This 
simple algorithm achieves excellent accuracy in small specimens while conserving 
the tissue for potential predictive marker testing, which is now an essential
consideration in advanced lung cancer specimens.

PMID: 21623384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Jul;6(7):1190-9. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318219ac78.

Utility of 10 immunohistochemical markers including novel markers (desmocollin-3,
glypican 3, S100A2, S100A7, and Sox-2) for differential diagnosis of squamous
cell carcinoma from adenocarcinoma of the Lung.

Tsuta K(1), Tanabe Y, Yoshida A, Takahashi F, Maeshima AM, Asamura H, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology and Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. ktsuta@ncc.go.jp

INTRODUCTION: Recent clinical trials revealed that accurate histologic typing of 
non-small cell lung cancer, especially squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), is
essential.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed 10 antibodies expression in 150 SCC cases (53
well-, 51 moderately, and 46 poorly differentiated cases) and 159 adenocarcinoma 
(AC) cases (49 well-, 52 moderately, and 58 poorly differentiated cases).
RESULTS: In all SCC and AC cases, p63 was the most sensitive marker for SCC
(98.7%), followed by high-molecular-weight (HM) cytokeratin (CK) (97.3%), CK5/6
(93.3%), Sox2 (80%), thrombomodulin (79.3%), desmocollin-3 (72.7%), S100A7
(70.7%), S100A2 (63.3%), and glypican-3 (46.7%). Desmocollin-3 was the most
specific marker for SCC (100%), followed by CK5/6 (98%), Sox2 (95.5%), glypican-3
(92.4%), S100A7 (86.8%), thrombomodulin (79.9%), S100A2 (64.6%), p63 (51.6%), and
HMCK (33.3%). Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression was observed in
87.4% of AC cases and 2.0% of SCC cases. When analyzing only poorly
differentiated tumors, HMCK was the most sensitive marker for SCC (100%),
followed by p63 (97.8%), CK5/6 (87.0%), Sox2 (71.7%), thrombomodulin (58.7%),
desmocollin-3 (52.2%), S100A2 (50%), glypican-3 (45.7%), and S100A7 (45.7%).
Desmocollin-3 was the most specific marker for poorly differentiated SCC (100%), 
followed by CK5/6 (98.3%), glypican-3 (94.8%), Sox2 (94.8%), S100A2 (81%), S100A7
(75.9%), thrombomodulin (72.4%), p63 (48.3%), and HMCK (36.8%). The 10-fold
crossvalidated classification and regression tree analysis revealed that the
combination of CK5/6 and TTF-1 was the best immunohistochemical marker panel for 
the differentiation between SCC and AC.
CONCLUSION: CK5/6 is the best marker for differentiating SCC and AC, irrespective
of the histological grade of the tumor. Thus, the combination of CK5/6 and TTF-1 
is the most recommended combination of immunohistochemical markers.

PMID: 21623236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Pathol. 2011 Sep;225(1):83-95. doi: 10.1002/path.2897. Epub 2011 May 19.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor inhibition overcomes gefitinib resistance
in mucinous lung adenocarcinoma.

Hurbin A(1), Wislez M, Busser B, Antoine M, Tenaud C, Rabbe N, Dufort S, de
Fraipont F, Moro-Sibilot D, Cadranel J, Coll JL, Brambilla E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U823, Grenoble, France. amandine.hurbin@ujf-grenoble.fr

The appropriate selection of patients is a major challenge in the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). Prospective trials in adenocarcinoma demonstrated 
that the mucinous subtype presents a poorer outcome under EGFR-TKI treatment than
the non-mucinous subtype. Our aim was to determine the molecular characteristics 
associated with resistance to EGFR-TKIs in mucinous and non-mucinous
adenocarcinoma. Eighty adenocarcinoma samples, including 34 tumours from patients
treated with gefitinib in a phase II clinical trial (IFCT0401), were classified
as mucinous (n = 32) or non-mucinous (n = 48) adenocarcinoma. We demonstrated
that four biological markers were differentially expressed between the two
subtypes: mucinous tumours that overexpressed IGF1R (p < 0.0001) and amphiregulin
(p = 0.004) with a tendency for more frequent KRAS mutations, in contrast to
non-mucinous tumours that overexpressed EGFR (p < 0.0001) and TTF-1 (p < 0.0001) 
with more frequent EGFR mutations (p = 0.037). Higher IGF1R (p = 0.02) and lower 
TTF-1 (p = 0.02) expression was associated with disease progression under
gefitinib treatment. We observed in vitro cross-talk between EGFR and IGF1R
signalling pathways in gefitinib-resistant H358 mucinous cells. Anti-amphiregulin
siRNAs and anti-IGF1R treatments sensitized the H358 cells to gefitinib-induced
apoptosis with additive effects, suggesting that these treatments could overcome 
the resistance of mucinous tumours to EGFR-TKIs, including those with KRAS
mutation. Our results highlighted that mucinous and non-mucinous adenocarcinoma
subtypes are different entities with different therapeutic responses to
EGFR-TKIs. These data will foster the development of therapeutic strategies for
treating adenocarcinoma with mucinous component.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21598249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Head Neck Pathol. 2011 Dec;5(4):410-2. doi: 10.1007/s12105-011-0263-1. Epub 2011 
May 20.

Metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma deposit arising within a cutaneous basal cell
carcinoma: a case report.

Carey E(1), Jones SD, Griffiths P, Baxter P.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Gwent Hospital, Newport, Wales, UK. ellecarey@doctors.org.uk

Skin metastases are rare complications of internal malignancies, and most
commonly arise from primary lung carcinoma (Brownstein and Helwig in Arch
Dermatol 105:82-68, 1972). Metastatic cutaneous lesions have not previously been 
documented to arise within other skin tumours. We report our experience of a
solitary pulmonary adenocarcinoma metastasis that arose within a pre-existing
basal cell carcinoma in a patient with undiagnosed lung cancer.
Immunohistochemistry was invaluable in confirming both the metastatic nature of
the secondary skin lesion and its site of origin.

PMCID: PMC3210218
PMID: 21597983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 27;6(4):e19354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019354.

Dedifferentiation of human primary thyrocytes into multilineage progenitor cells 
without gene introduction.

Suzuki K(1), Mitsutake N, Saenko V, Suzuki M, Matsuse M, Ohtsuru A, Kumagai A,
Uga T, Yano H, Nagayama Y, Yamashita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Atomic Bomb Disease Institute, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Nagasaki, Japan.

While identification and isolation of adult stem cells have potentially important
implications, recent reports regarding dedifferentiation/reprogramming from
differentiated cells have provided another clue to gain insight into source of
tissue stem/progenitor cells. In this study, we developed a novel culture system 
to obtain dedifferentiated progenitor cells from normal human thyroid tissues.
After enzymatic digestion, primary thyrocytes, expressing thyroglobulin, vimentin
and cytokeratin-18, were cultured in a serum-free medium called SAGM. Although
the vast majority of cells died, a small proportion (~0.5%) survived and
proliferated. During initial cell expansion, thyroglobulin/cytokeratin-18
expression was gradually declined in the proliferating cells. Moreover, sorted
cells expressing thyroid peroxidase gave rise to proliferating clones in SAGM.
These data suggest that those cells are derived from thyroid follicular cells or 
at least thyroid-committed cells. The SAGM-grown cells did not express any
thyroid-specific genes. However, after four-week incubation with FBS and TSH,
cytokeratin-18, thyroglobulin, TSH receptor, PAX8 and TTF1 expressions
re-emerged. Moreover, surprisingly, the cells were capable of differentiating
into neuronal or adipogenic lineage depending on differentiating conditions. In
summary, we have developed a novel system to generate multilineage progenitor
cells from normal human thyroid tissues. This seems to be achieved by
dedifferentiation of thyroid follicular cells. The presently described culture
system may be useful for regenerative medicine, but the primary importance will
be as a tool to elucidate the mechanisms of thyroid diseases.

PMCID: PMC3083435
PMID: 21556376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Nov;40(11):949-55. doi: 10.1002/dc.21680. Epub 2011 Apr
15.

The application and diagnostic utility of immunocytochemistry on direct smears in
the diagnosis of pulmonary adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.

Roh MH(1), Schmidt L, Placido J, Farmen S, Fields KL, Courey AJ, Arenberg DA,
Knoepp SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

The importance of subclassifying pulmonary nonsmall cell carcinoma (NSCLC) in
cytologic material is becoming increasingly paramount. Occasionally, cell blocks 
traditionally used for ancillary studies are sparsely cellular or acellular.
Hence, we investigated the diagnostic utility of immunocytochemistry for
Napsin-A, TTF-1, and p63 on direct smears of NSCLC. Immunohistochemistry for
Napsin-A was initially tested on a tissue microarray (TMA) composed of pulmonary 
adenocarcinoma. Subsequently, in 25 cases, immunocytochemistry for Napsin-A,
TTF-1, and p63 was performed on cytologic direct smears. Smears were prepared
from tumor cells scraped from lung resection specimens (n = 10), endobronchial
ultrasound-guided transbronchial fine-needle aspirates (n = 13), and pelleted
cell material from pleural effusions (n = 2). Immunohistochemistry utilizing the 
TMA revealed Napsin-A positivity in 73% of pulmonary ADCs. Next,
immunocytochemistry on direct cytologic smears demonstrated a
Napsin-A(+)/TTF-1(+) immunophenotype in 15 of 18 adenocarcinomas; p63 was
completely negative (n = 12) or only focally positive (n = 3) in these 15
adenocarcinomas. The remaining three adenocarcinomas were negative for all three 
markers. All six squamous cell carcinomas were Napsin-A(-)/TTF-1(-) and diffusely
p63(+). In conclusion, direct smears represent a feasible and robust source of
cellular material for immunocytochemical studies to diagnose pulmonary ADC and
SQC. Our method allows the cytologist to confirm on site that material for
diagnostic immunocytochemistry is present thereby serving as a safeguard in
instances where the cell block is of insufficient cellularity.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21500373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Mar;43 Suppl 4:S356-60. doi: 10.1016/S1590-8658(11)60591-4.

Gastroenteropancreatic (neuro)endocrine neoplasms: the histology report.

Rindi G(1), Bordi C, La Rosa S, Solcia E, Delle Fave G; Gruppo Italiano Patologi 
Apparato Digerente (GIPAD); Società Italiana di Anatomia Patologica e
Citopatologia Diagnostica/International Academy of Pathology, Italian division
(SIAPEC/IAP).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, UCSC-Policlinic A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy.
guido.rindi@rm.unicatt.it

Based on the year 2000 World Health Organization (WHO) classification and the
European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) grading and staging proposals, we
here define the minimal guidelines for pathology reporting of (neuro)endocrine
neoplasms. The macroscopical description is recommended according to standard
procedures and the microscopical description according to recognized
architectural and cytological features for endocrine lesions. Minimal diagnostic 
immunohistochemistry entails the use of chromogranin A, synaptophysin and Ki67.
Other potentially useful tests are those for CD56 N-CAM, PGP 9.5 and hormones for
diagnosis, the somatostatin receptor subtype 2 for potential radiodiagnostics and
therapy, and transcription factors like TTF1 and CDX2, for site of origin.
Grading definition is always mandatory as well as TNM staging for surgical
specimens.

Copyright © 2011 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21459341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Apr 4;2(2):16. doi: 10.1186/scrt57.

Stimulation of Activin A/Nodal signaling is insufficient to induce definitive
endoderm formation of cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem cells.

Filby CE(1), Williamson R, van Kooy P, Pébay A, Dottori M, Elwood NJ, Zaibak F.

Author information: 
(1)Early Development and Disease, Murdoch Childrens' Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Flemington Rd, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
filby@wehi.EDU.AU

INTRODUCTION: Unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) derived from umbilical cord 
blood are an attractive alternative to human embryonic stem cells (hESC) for
cellular therapy. USSC are capable of forming cells representative of all three
germ line layers. The aim of this study was to determine the potential of USSC to
form definitive endoderm following induction with Activin A, a protein known to
specify definitive endoderm formation of hESC.
METHODS: USSC were cultured for (1) three days with or without 100 ng/ml Activin 
A in either serum-free, low-serum or serum-containing media, (2) three days with 
or without 100 ng/ml Activin A in combination with 10 ng/ml FGF4 in pre-induction
medium, or (3) four days with or without small molecules Induce Definitive
Endoderm (IDE1, 100 nM; IDE2, 200 nM) in serum-free media. Formation of
definitive endoderm was assessed using RT-PCR for gene markers of endoderm
(Sox17, FOXA2 and TTF1) and lung epithelium (surfactant protein C; SPC) and
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; CFTR). The differentiation
capacity of Activin A treated USSC was also assessed.
RESULTS: Activin A or IDE1/2 induced formation of Sox17+ definitive endoderm from
hESC but not from USSC. Activin A treated USSC retained their capacity to form
cells of the ectoderm (nerve), mesoderm (bone) and endoderm (lung). Activin A in 
combination with FGF4 did not induce formation of Sox17+ definitive endoderm from
USSC. USSC express both Activin A receptor subunits at the mRNA and protein
level, indicating that these cells are capable of binding Activin A.
CONCLUSIONS: Stimulation of the Nodal signaling pathway with Activin A or IDE1/2 
is insufficient to induce definitive endoderm formation from USSC, indicating
that USSC differ in their stem cell potential from hESC.

PMCID: PMC3226287
PMID: 21463501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 May;35(5):757-61. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182147fa8.

Diagnostic use of PAX8, CAIX, TTF-1, and TGB in metastatic renal cell carcinoma
of the thyroid.

Cimino-Mathews A(1), Sharma R, Netto GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) may present with metastatic lesions in
patients with a concurrent undiagnosed primary or a remote history of ccRCC. The 
thyroid is not uncommonly involved by metastatic ccRCC, in which a metastasis
could be misinterpreted as a clear-cell change in adenomatoid nodules, follicular
adenomas, or parathyroid glands. PAX8 is a transcription factor expressed by
thyroid and renal-lineage cells. No previous study has evaluated the diagnostic
use of PAX8 and ccRCC marker carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) in this setting. Cases 
of metastatic ccRCC in the thyroid (n=12), parathyroid glands and adenomas with
clear-cell change (n=6), papillary thyroid carcinoma (n=6), thyroid follicular
adenomas (n=5), and adenomatoid nodules with clear-cell change (n=5) were
studied. Cases were assessed by standard immunohistochemistry for thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), thyroglobulin (TGB), PAX8, and CAIX. The extent
and intensity of nuclear or cytoplasmic immunoexpression were assessed, with any 
labeling considered as a positive result. All metastatic ccRCCs were positive for
PAX8 (moderate-to-strong, patchy-to-diffuse) and CAIX (strong, diffuse), and were
negative for TTF-1 and TGB. All primary thyroid lesions labeled strongly and
diffusely for TTF-1, TGB, and PAX8, and were negative for CAIX. Parathyroid
tissues were negative for TTF-1, TGB, PAX8, and CAIX. An immunoprofile of
"TTF1(-)/TGB(-)/CAIX(+)" was 100% sensitive and specific for metastatic ccRCC of 
the thyroid. The reverse profile "TTF1(+)/TGB(+)/CAIX(-)" supported a primary
thyroid lesion. PAX8 was not useful in distinguishing metastatic ccRCC from
thyroid lesions.

PMCID: PMC3449147
PMID: 21451364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;40(2):89-93.

[Thyroid carcinoma showing thymus-like differentiation: a clinicopathologic study
of 8 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu X(1), Hadeti B, Zhang W, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830054, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, immunophenotypes and
differential diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma showing thymus-like differentiation
(CASTLE).
METHODS: The clinical and pathologic features of 8 cases of CASTLE were reviewed.
Immunohistochemical study was performed using a panel of antibodies. In-situ
hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA (EBER) was also carried out.
RESULTS: There were altogether 4 males and 4 females. The age of the patients
ranged from 25 to 57 years (mean = 48.8 years). All of them presented with
painless mass at the anterior neck. Two patients also complained of hoarseness of
voice. On CT scan, the tumor had a low density with contrast enhancement. Seven
cases were located in the mid to lower pole and the remaining one in the upper
pole of thyroid gland. Four cases were relatively circumscribed. The other 4
cases showed evidence of extrathyroidal invasion. Grossly, the tumor had a
nodular or lobulated appearance and was gray-white in color, with a mean diameter
of 4.3 cm. Microscopically, the tumor was infiltrative and consisted of islands, 
nests or lobules of epithelial cells separated by thick fibrous septa. The
fibrous stroma showed various degree of lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, resulting
in a prominent lymphoepithelioma-like pattern in 3 cases. Two cases showed
squamoid differentiation, mimicking thymic Hassall corpuscles.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor was consistently positive for cytokeratins, CD5,
bcl-2, p63 and CD117. CEA was variably expressed. The staining for thyroglobin
and TTF1 was negative. There was no labeling for EBER in all the cases. Two
patients experienced local recurrence at 22 months and 12 years after surgery,
respectively. They were treated with re-resection. All patients remained well on 
follow up. The duration of follow up ranged from 4 to 55 months.
CONCLUSIONS: CASTLE is a low-grade thyroid carcinoma with the morphologic
features and immunophenotypes overlapping with those of thymic carcinoma.
Awareness of this rare entity is important to both the pathologists and
clinicians.

PMID: 21426803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2011;52(1):187-92.

The value of the immunohistochemistry in a case of gastric neuroendocrine tumor
and thyroid metastasis.

Poiana C(1), Carsote M, Ardeleanu C, Terzea D, Avramescu ET, Neamtu MC, Miulescu 
RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathologic Physiology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of
Craiova, Romania.

Thyroid metastasis is atypical. We present a 70-year-old female case that was
first diagnosed as gastric cancer after surgical approach. Two years later a
thyroidectomy was performed and the immunohistochemistry (IHC) profile revealed a
neuroendocrine tumor (NET): poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (with 
small cells), with positive reaction for SYN, CROMO, negative for calcitonin,
TTF1 and thyreoglobulin. The Ki-67 index was 25%. Considering the unusual
metastasis, the IHC exam of the stomach tumor was performed pointing the same
features as the thyroid findings. This proved that the thyroid tumor was a
metastasis from a primary gastric neoplasia. This is an unusual case of NET
because of the thyroid involvement. Nevertheless, the IHC exam played the major
role in elucidating the diagnosis and the prognosis of the case.

PMID: 21424054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 Dec;19(6):509-13. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318212f027.

Rapid multiplex immunohistochemistry using the 4-antibody cocktail YANA-4 in
differentiating primary adenocarcinoma from squamous cell carcinoma of the lung.

Yanagita E(1), Imagawa N, Ohbayashi C, Itoh T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kobe University Hospital, Japan.

The current Food and Drug Administration-approved standard treatment for
non-small cell carcinomas consists of carboplatin/taxol/avastin. However,
nowadays more specialized protocols, depending on tumor subtype, are being used
for lung cancer patients. Therefore, accurate differentiation between
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma is essential for the selection of
appropriate therapies. We designed a rapid multiplex immunostaining method using 
a novel 4-antibody cocktail, YANA-4. This antibody cocktail consists of the
following monoclonal antibodies: rabbit for thyroid transcription factor
1(TTF-1), mouse for napsin A, mouse l for p63, and rabbit for CK14. All
procedures can be completed within 3 hours. This method labels the nuclei of
adenocarcinomas as brown with TTF-1, and cytoplasm as blue with napsin A.
Squamous cell carcinomas could be differentiated from adenocarcinomas with an
inverse staining pattern: blue nuclei with p63 and brown cytoplasm with CK14. In 
this study, 97.4% (38 of 39) of adenocarcinomas showed brown nuclei (TTF-1)
and/or blue cytoplasm (napsin A), with 4 cases showing positivity only for brown 
nuclei (TTF-1) and 1 case only for blue cytoplasm (napsin A). None of the
squamous cell carcinoma cases showed these staining patterns. Positivity for blue
nuclei (p63) and/or brown cytoplasm (CK14) was detected in 100% (25 of 25) of
squamous cell carcinomas, with 1 case showing positivity only for brown cytoplasm
(CK14) and 2 cases only for blue nuclei (p63). None of the adenocarcinoma cases
showed these patterns. This rapid immunohistochemical method can thus be
considered highly specific and sensitive for differentiating adenocarcinomas and 
squamous cell carcinomas.

PMID: 21415705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Med Sci (Paris). 2011 Feb;27(2):183-6. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2011272183. Epub 2011 
Mar 8.

[TTF-1: neither angel nor demon].

[Article in French]

Gilbert-Sirieix M(1), Massaad-Massade L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gustave Roussy, UMR 8203 CNRS, Laboratoire de vectorologie et
thérapeutiques anticancéreuses, 114, rue Édouard Vaillant, 94805 Villejuif,
France.

Expressed in thyroid, lung and diencephalon, the Thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1) regulates, in these organs, the transcription of specific genes. This
review focuses on the use of TTF-1 as a diagnostic tool in thyroid and lung
carcinomas. According to the literature, TTF-1 seems to be involved in aggressive
relapses. In some cases it could be also involved in the remission. The use of
TTF-1 as a prognostic tool for some neoplasms is discussed.

© 2011 médecine/sciences - Inserm / SRMS.

PMID: 21382327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 May;6(5):905-12. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3182111461.

Clinicopathologic characteristics and outcomes of patients with anaplastic
lymphoma kinase-positive advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma: suggestion for an
effective screening strategy for these tumors.

Koh Y(1), Kim DW, Kim TM, Lee SH, Jeon YK, Chung DH, Kim YW, Heo DS, Kim WH, Bang
YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to analyze the clinicopathologic
characteristics and outcomes of patients with anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK)-positive advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma and to devise an effective
screening strategy to identify such patients.
METHODS: We screened advanced pulmonary adenocarcinoma patients to identify
ALK-positive cases. The presence of ALK rearrangements was confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Of the 221 screened patients, 45 demonstrated ALK rearrangements, and
these individuals were younger than the ALK-negative patients (p < 0.001). The
proportion of never smokers and light smokers was found not to differ according
to the ALK status (p = 0.537). Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations 
and ALK rearrangements were found to be mutually exclusive. Thyroid-transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1) expression was observed in all ALK-positive tumors for which
immunohistochemistry data were available. The objective response rate and
progression-free survival to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy showed no
significant differences between ALK-positive and ALK-negative patients. On the
other hand, no patient with ALK-positive tumors achieved objective tumor
responses to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). ALK rearrangements were not 
found among individuals who had EGFR mutations, an objective response to a
previous EGFR TKI treatment or TTF-1-negative tumors.
CONCLUSION: The clinical outcomes of platinum-based chemotherapy were found not
to differ according to the ALK status. Both smokers and never/light smokers
should be candidates for ALK screening. We suggest that the exclusion of patients
with activating EGFR mutations, an objective response to previous EGFR TKIs, or
TTF-1-negative tumors from ALK screening could be an effective enrichment
strategy for ALK-positive cases.

PMID: 21358343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hum Pathol. 2011 Aug;42(8):1078-88. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.11.010. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

SOX2 amplification is a common event in squamous cell carcinomas of different
organ sites.

Maier S(1), Wilbertz T, Braun M, Scheble V, Reischl M, Mikut R, Menon R, Nikolov 
P, Petersen K, Beschorner C, Moch H, Kakies C, Protzel C, Bauer J, Soltermann A, 
Fend F, Staebler A, Lengerke C, Perner S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Hospital of
Tuebingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Acquired chromosomal aberrations, including gene copy number alterations, are
involved in the development and progression of human malignancies. SOX2, a
transcription factor-coding gene located at 3q26.33, is known to be recurrently
and specifically amplified in squamous cell carcinomas of the lung, the
esophagus, and the oral cavity. In these organs, the SOX2 protein plays an
important role in tumorigenesis and tumor survival. The aim of this study was to 
determine whether SOX2 amplification is also found in squamous cell carcinomas in
other organs commonly affected by this tumor entity. In addition, we examined a
large spectrum of lung cancer entities with neuroendocrine differentiation (ie,
small cell cancers, large cell cancers, typical and atypical carcinoids) for SOX2
and TTF1 copy number gains to reveal potential molecular ties to squamous cell
carcinomas or adenocarcinomas of the lung. Applying fluorescence in situ
hybridization, we assessed squamous cell carcinomas of the cervix uteri (n = 47),
the skin (n = 57), and the penis (n = 53) for SOX2 copy number alterations and
detected amplifications in 28%, 28%, and 32% of tumors, respectively.
Furthermore, we performed immunohistochemical SOX2 staining and found that SOX2
amplification is significantly associated with overexpression of the
corresponding protein in squamous cell carcinomas (P < .001). Of the lung cancer 
entities with neuroendocrine differentiation, only small cell cancers and large
cell cancers exhibited SOX2 or TTF1 amplifications at significant frequencies,
indicating that at least a subset of these might be dedifferentiated forms of
squamous cell carcinomas or adenocarcinomas of the lung. We conclude that SOX2
amplification and consequent SOX2 protein overexpression may represent important 
mechanisms of tumor initiation and progression in a considerable subset of
squamous cell carcinomas.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2011 Jun;17(5):301-7. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.01.002. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Benign hereditary chorea: an update.

Inzelberg R(1), Weinberger M, Gak E.

Author information: 
(1)Joseph Sagol Neuroscience Center, Department of Neurology, Sheba Medical
Center, 52621 Tel Hashomer, Israel. inzelber@post.tau.ac.il

Benign hereditary chorea (BHC, MIM 118700) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
manifesting with chorea in conjunction with hypothyroidism and respiratory
problems, a triad also named "brain-lung-thyroid syndrome". BHC is characterized 
by childhood onset with minimal or no progression into adult life and normal
cognitive function. The genetic basis of BHC has been partially resolved, when
mutations in the TTF1 gene on chromosome 14q13 encoding the thyroid transcription
factor-1 have been identified in a number of BHC patients, suggesting that
aberration of TTF1 transcriptional function or haploinsufficiency is associated
with this disorder. TTF1 (also known as TITF1, TEBP or NKX2-1), belonging to the 
NKX2 homeodomain transcription factor family, has been implicated in several
important molecular pathways essential for brain, thyroid and lung morphogenesis.
Clinical evaluation of TTF1 gene mutations carrier patients exposed the
involvement of each of the triad's components characterized by heterogeneity
between index cases and even within families. This review highlights the current 
updates on expanded clinical aspects of BHC, imaging and treatment experience,
its genetic markers, proposed molecular mechanisms, animal models and link to
cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21292530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Feb;34(1):45-54. doi: 10.1007/s13402-010-0004-6. Epub
2011 Feb 2.

Establishment and characterization of six human lung cancer cell lines: EGFR, p53
gene mutations and expressions of drug sensitivity genes.

Ku JL(1), Kim KH, Choi JS, Jeon YK, Kim SH, Shin YK, Kim TY, Bang YJ, Kim WH,
Park JG.

Author information: 
(1)Korean Cell Line Bank, Laboratory of Cell Biology, Cancer Research Institute, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 
110-744, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Six human lung cancer cell lines (SNU-371, SNU-963, SNU-1327,
SNU-1330, SNU-2292 and SNU-2315) were newly established through primary cell
cultures. These cell lines were derived from a pulmonary blastoma, a small cell
lung cancer, three adenocarcinomas and a squamous cell carcinoma of the lung of
six Korean lung cancer patients.
METHODS: The histopathology of the primary tumors and their in vitro growth
characteristics were described. DNA fingerprinting analysis and genetic
alterations in the p53, ß-catenin, TGFßRII, K-ras and EGFR genes were conducted. 
mRNA expressions levels of E-cadherin, COX-2, MDR1, MXR, CGA, synatophysin and
TTF1 genes were investigated and sensitivity to anticancer drugs was screened.
RESULTS: Five cell lines grew as adherent cells and one cell line grew as
floating aggregates. All lines were free of mycoplasma or bacteria and were
proven unique by DNA fingerprinting analysis. A significant polymorphism at codon
72 (Arg to Pro) of the p53 gene was found in one line (SNU-1327) and a mutation
at codon 176 was found in SNU-2292. No mutations in the K-ras, ß-catenin and
TGF-ßRII genes were observed. E-cadherin was not expressed in SNU-371 and COX-2
was overexpressed in SNU-1330, SNU-2292 and SNU-2315 cell lines. MDR1 was
overexpressed in SNU-371 and SNU-2292 cell lines and MXR was overexpressed in
SNU-1327 cell line. Interestingly, the SNU-371 cell line derived from a pulmonary
blastoma and which overexpressed MDR1 displayed cross resistance for several
anticancer drugs. Neuroendocrine markers, chromogranin A and synaptophysin, were 
overexpressed in the small cell lung cancer cell line, SNU-963 and thyroid
transcription factor-1 was also over expressed in this cell line. Two mutations
(p.Glu746_Ser752delinsVal and p.Glu746_Ala750del) in exon 19 of EGFR were found
in SNU-1330 and SNU-2315 cell lines, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These well-characterized lung cancer cell lines may be useful tools
for investigations of the biological characteristics of lung cancers,
particularly for investigations related to mutations of EGFR.

PMID: 21290211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Rev Mal Respir. 2011 Jan;28(1):71-4. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2010.04.020. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

[Muscle metastasis revealing bronchial adenocarcinoma].

[Article in French]

Ketata W(1), Feki W, Msaad S, Yangui I, Ayoub A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumo-Allergologie, CHU Hédi Chaker, 3029 Sfax, Tunisie.
wajdi.ketata@yahoo.fr

INTRODUCTION: The diagnosis of nonsmall cell lung cancer is made at a metastatic 
stage in 25% of cases. The most frequent sites are the lung, liver, bone, the
adrenal glands and the central nervous system. Skeletal muscle metastases are
uncommon and are rarely the first manifestation of a neoplastic process.
CASE REPORT: We report the case of 55 years old man presenting with a hard
painless swelling of the left arm. A scan guided biopsy revealed infiltration of 
the muscle by a thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) positive adenocarcinoma. A 
CT scan of the chest showed a partially necrotic tissue mass with moderate uptake
of contrast. The patient was treated by chemotherapy with gemcitabine and
carboplatine. The progress was unfavourable with the appearance of a second
muscular metastasis in the thigh and the patient died 3 months after diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Skeletal muscle metastases are rarely described in lung cancer and
they are an exceptional presentation of the tumour. Their symptoms can be
misleading and delay diagnosis.

Copyright © 2010 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21277477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cancer. 2011 Aug 1;117(15):3416-23. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25830. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Immunohistochemical subtyping of nonsmall cell lung cancer not otherwise
specified in fine-needle aspiration cytology: a retrospective study of 103 cases 
with surgical correlation.

Righi L(1), Graziano P, Fornari A, Rossi G, Barbareschi M, Cavazza A, Pelosi G,
Scagliotti GV, Papotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Turin at San
Luigi Hospital, Orbassano, Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Histopathological subtyping of nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is
currently relevant in treatment decision because of a differential activity of
specific therapeutic agents. Immunohistochemistry highlights cell differentiation
lineages and, in this study, it was applied to maximize the proportion of
accurately subtyped NSCLC not otherwise specified (NOS) on fine-needle aspiration
cytology (FNAC) samples.
METHODS: Cell blocks from 103 FNAC samples with a morphological diagnosis of
NSCLC-NOS were immunostained for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK5, TTF1, and p63, whereas 
p40, napsin A (Naps-A), and desmocollin-3 (DSC-3) were only assessed in a
subgroup of cases with discordant (CK7 and TTF1+ for nonsquamous, CK5 and p63+
for squamous) findings. Results were correlated with surgical specimens evaluated
by morphology alone.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven (36%) tumors with CK7/TTF1+ and CK5/p63- corresponded to 35
cases of adenocarcinoma (ADC) and 2 cases of large cell carcinoma, whereas 9 (9%)
cases with the reverse immunoprofile were squamous cell carcinoma (SQCC) at
surgery (P < .001). Although the remaining 57 cases had different marker
combinations, a correlation was found with ADC histology for TTF1+ samples
(independent of other markers) and with SQCC for p63+/TTF1- immunophenotype (P < 
.001). p40 was never expressed in p63+ ADC, whereas Naps-A was restricted to ADC 
and DSC-3 to SQCC lineage. The percentage of unclassified NSCLC-NOS decreased
from 36% to 14%. Combinations of 2 antibodies (TTF1/DSC-3 or p63/Naps-A) in the
same section allowed diagnostic optimization in scant cytological samples.
CONCLUSIONS: [corrected] This 4-antibody panel approach may contribute to refine 
lung cancer classification in FNAC cell blocks, remarkably reducing the NSCLC-NOS
diagnostic category.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21246522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jan 7;17(1):130-4. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i1.130.

Foregut duplication cysts: a report of two cases with emphasis on embryogenesis.

Khoury T(1), Rivera L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
United States. thaer.khoury@roswellpark.org

Duplication cyst of the stomach with a pseudostratified columnar ciliated
epithelium is extremely rare. We describe two cases of these cysts, with emphasis
on their immunophenotype and embryogenesis. The first patient was a 29-year-old
man who presented with cramping abdominal pain in his left lower quadrant. The
second patient was a 26-year-old woman who had a history, over several years, of 
chronic epigastric abdominal pain radiating to her back. Both lesions were
surgically removed. They showed the same histomorphology. The cysts were lined by
a pseudostratified respiratory epithelium with ciliated cells. The first cyst was
connected to the stomach, while the second cyst was not connected. Both cysts
expressed thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and surfactant. In this report, 
we explore the possible embryogenesis of these lesions in the light of TTF-1 and 
surfactant expression.

PMCID: PMC3016673
PMID: 21218094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):519-23. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9341-z. Epub
2011 Jan 4.

Immunohistochemical profile of urothelial and small cell carcinomas of the
bladder.

Fernández-Aceñero MJ(1), Córdova S, Manzarbeitia F, Medina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. mgg10167@gmail.com

Small cell carcinoma of the bladder is an uncommon and rather aggressive bladder 
tumor, representing less than 1% of all vesical tumors. Small cell carcinoma of
different organs has been shown to express markers of neuroendocrine
differentiation, and also thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1). TTF-1 is a
transcription factor and its expression has been shown mainly in pulmonary small 
cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas and in thyroid tumors. Although it was
initially proposed as a useful marker to delineate the origin of metastatic
adenocarcinomas from the lung, its expression is being increasingly reported in
tumors from different origins. The goal of this review is to analyse the
immunohistochemical profile of small cell carcinoma of the bladder and to compare
it to classical urothelial cell carcinomas. With this aim we have reviewed the
small cell bladder carcinomas diagnosed in a single tertiary hospital in Madrid
(Fundación Jiménez Díaz) in the last 12 years. We have found 6 pure small cell
carcinomas and performed a wide panel of immunohistochemistry, including
cytokeratins 7 and 20, enolase, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56 and TTF-1 to
these tumors and also to 30 high grade urothelial cell carcinomas of usual type. 
Only one of our small cell carcinoma cases showed positivity for TTF-1, while
five expressed CD56 and four neuron-specific enolase. None of our cases expressed
cytokeratin 20 or 7. To our surprise we found a case of conventional urothelial
cell carcinoma expressing focally TTF-1. These results are in accordance with the
current literature, although our rate of TTF-1 expression (16.6%) is on the low
end of the spectrum.

PMID: 21203907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Exp Mol Pathol. 2011 Apr;90(2):201-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.12.004. Epub 2010
Dec 24.

Gene expression changes in patient-matched gastric normal mucosa, adenomas, and
carcinomas.

Kim H(1), Eun JW, Lee H, Nam SW, Rhee H, Koh KH, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 120-752,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. kimhyunki@yuhs.ac

A subset of gastric carcinomas shows histologic evidence of a multistep process, 
progressing from gastric adenoma to gastric carcinoma. We examined gene
expression changes during the gastric adenoma-carcinoma sequence in 26
snap-frozen samples (normal mucosa, adenoma, and carcinoma samples from eight
patients and two additional carcinomas) by oligonucleotide microarray.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis demonstrated differential gene
expression between gastric normal mucosa, adenomas and carcinomas. We identified 
319 and 422 genes differentially regulated in adenoma and carcinoma,
respectively, relative to normal mucosa, using a combination of Welch's t-test
and fold-change analysis. Applying a combination of robust multi-category support
vector machines to the data, reveal that 39 and 21 genes were gradually up- and
down-regulated, respectively, in succession in normal mucosa, adenoma, and
carcinoma samples. We validated gene expression levels of four genes:
hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase 15 (HPGD), follistatin-like 1, trefoil factor 
1 (TTF1) and trefoil factor 2 (TFF2) by RT-PCR and found direct correlation with 
microarray results. The expressions of the TFF2 and HPGD genes were further
evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 103 adenomas and 70 carcinomas; expression
of both proteins was decreased in these tissues. The progressive alteration in
gene expression in the transition from normal mucosa to carcinoma suggests that
these changes may play critical roles in gastric carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jan;35(1):15-25. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182036d05.

Subclassification of non-small cell lung carcinomas lacking morphologic
differentiation on biopsy specimens: Utility of an immunohistochemical panel
containing TTF-1, napsin A, p63, and CK5/6.

Mukhopadhyay S(1), Katzenstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. mukhopas@upstate.edu

The availability of targeted therapies has created a need for precise subtyping
of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs). The aim of this study was to assess
the utility of immunohistochemical markers in subtyping poorly differentiated
NSCLC and to compare the results of immunohistochemical staining on biopsies with
the corresponding resections. Thirty-nine cases of NSCLC that could not be
further classified on biopsy and had subsequent resection specimens were
identified. Classification of the tumor was based on the resection specimen using
the World Health Organization criteria. All biopsies and resections were stained 
with CK7, TTF-1, napsin A (novel aspartic proteinase of the pepsin family), p63, 
CK5/6, and 34ßE12. The specimens included 20 adenocarcinomas (ACs), 15 squamous
cell carcinomas (SCCs), and 4 large-cell carcinomas (LCCs). TTF-1 was positive in
biopsies from 16 of 20 ACs, 2 of 4 LCCs, and none of the SCCs. p63 was positive
in all 15 SCCs, 2 of 20 ACs (both were also positive for TTF-1 and napsin A), and
none of the LCCs. CK5/6 was positive in 11 of 15 SCCs (all p63 positive) but none
of the ACs or LCCs. Napsin A stained 11 of 19 ACs (all TTF-1 positive) but none
of the other tumors. Staining for CK7 was present in 19 of 19 ACs and 9 of 15
SCCs. 34ßE12 stained both SCCs (15 of 15) and ACs (12 of 20). The combination of 
TTF-1, napsin A, p63, and CK5/6 allowed an accurate classification of 30 of39
(77%) cases. Of 232 pairs of slides (biopsy and resection) stained with
immunohistochemical markers, 12 (5%) showed discrepancies in immunohistochemical 
staining between biopsies and their corresponding resections. Immunohistochemical
staining using a combination of TTF-1, napsin A, p63, and CK5/6 allows
subclassification of poorly differentiated NSCLCs on small lung biopsies in most 
cases. Discrepancies in immunohistochemical staining between biopsies and
resections are uncommon.

PMID: 21164283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Pathologe. 2011 Jul;32(4):349-51. doi: 10.1007/s00292-010-1414-y.

[TTF-1 (8G7G3/1) positive colon adenocarcinoma: diagnostic implications].

[Article in German]

Reis HG(1), Metz CH, Baba HA, Bornfeld N, Schmid KW, Metz KA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie und Neuropathologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122, Essen, Deutschland.
Henning.Reis@uk-essen.de

Immunohistochemical evaluation of primary and secondary (adeno-) carcinomas of
the lung often includes utilisation of two different clones (8G7G3/1 or SPT24) of
TTF-1 (thyroid transcription factor 1) antibodies. In a subgroup of
adenocarcinomas with a primary site other than the lung a positive reaction of
clone SPT24 and also of clone 8G7G3/1 is described. We report on a patient with
TTF-1 (clone 8G7G3/1) positive adenocarcinoma of the colon with metastases to the
eye and lung and discuss TTF-1 based diagnostic considerations.

PMID: 21161231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;17(4):690-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1892.
Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Both gene amplification and allelic loss occur at 14q13.3 in lung cancer.

Harris T(1), Pan Q, Sironi J, Lutz D, Tian J, Sapkar J, Perez-Soler R, Keller S, 
Locker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 15;17(4):638-9.

PURPOSE: Because loss of Nkx2-8 increases lung cancer in the mouse, we studied
suppressive mechanisms in human lung cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: NKX2-8 is located within 14q13.3, adjacent to its close
relative TTF1/NKX2-1. We first analyzed LOH of 14q13.3 in forty-five matched
human lung cancer and control specimens. DNA from tumors with LOH was then
analyzed with high-density single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. For
correlation with this genetic analysis, we quantified expression of Nkx2-8 and
TTF1 mRNA in tumors. Finally, suppressive function of Nkx2-8 was assessed via
colony formation assays in five lung cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: Thirteen of forty-five (29%) tumors had LOH. In six tumors, most
adenocarcinomas, LOH was caused by gene amplification. The 0.8-Mb common region
of amplification included MBIP, SFTA, TTF1, NKX2-8, and PAX9. In 4 squamous or
adenosquamous cancers, LOH was caused by deletion. In three other tumors, LOH
resulted from whole chromosome mechanisms (14(-), 14(+), or aneuploidy). The
1.2-Mb common region of deletion included MBIP, SFTA, TTF1, NKX2-8, PAX9,
SLC25A21, and MIPOL1. Most tumors had low expression of Nkx2-8. Nevertheless,
sequencing did not show NKX2-8 mutations that could explain the low expression.
TTF1 overexpression, in contrast, was common and usually independent of Nkx2-8
expression. Finally, stable transfection of Nkx2-8 selectively inhibited growth
of H522 lung cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: 14q13.3, which contains NKX2-8, is subject to both amplification and
deletion in lung cancer. Most tumors have low expression of Nkx2-8, and its
expression can inhibit growth of some lung cancer cells.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3041868
PMID: 21148747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Respir Res. 2010 Dec 9;11:175. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-11-175.

TTF-1 regulates a5 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits in proximal 
and distal lung epithelium.

Reynolds PR(1), Allison CH, Willnauer CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA. paul_reynolds@byu.edu

BACKGROUND: Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are ligand-gated ion
channels comprised of five similar subunits that influence signal transduction
and cell turnover. a5 is a structural subunit detected in many non-neuronal
tissues; however, its function during pulmonary development is unknown.
RESULTS: a5 was assessed by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR in mouse lungs from
embryonic day (E)13.5 to post-natal day (PN)20. From E13.5 to E18.5, a5
expression was primarily observed in primitive airway epithelial cells while
mesenchymal expression was faint and sporadic. a5 expression was detected
throughout the proximal lung at PN1 and extensively expressed in the peripheral
lung at PN4, an early stage of murine alveologenesis. An interesting shift
occurred wherein a5 expression was almost undetectable in the proximal lung from 
PN4-PN10, but significant localization was again observed at PN20.
Transcriptional control of a5 was determined by assessing the activity of
reporters containing 2.0-kb and 850-bp of the mouse a5 promoter. Because
perinatal expression of a5 was abundant in bronchiolar and alveolar epithelium,
we assessed transcriptional control of a5 in Beas2B cells, a human bronchiolar
epithelial cell line, and A-549 cells, an alveolar type II cell-like human
epithelial cell line. Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 (TTF-1), a key transcription
regulator of pulmonary morphogenesis, significantly increased a5 transcription by
acting on both the 2.0-kb and 850-bp a5 promoters. Site-directed mutagenesis
revealed that TTF-1 activated a5 transcription by binding specific TTF-1 response
elements. Exogenous TTF-1 also significantly induced a5 transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that a5 is specifically controlled in a
temporal and spatial manner during pulmonary morphogenesis. Ongoing research may 
demonstrate that precise regulation of a5 is important during normal
organogenesis and misexpression correlates with tobacco related lung disease.

PMCID: PMC3003237
PMID: 21143907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Sci. 2011 Jan 1;124(Pt 1):25-34. doi: 10.1242/jcs.070987. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

The fission yeast rDNA-binding protein Reb1 regulates G1 phase under nutritional 
stress.

Rodríguez-Sánchez L(1), Rodríguez-López M, García Z, Tenorio-Gómez M, Schvartzman
JB, Krimer DB, Hernández P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Proliferation and Development, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 
28040 Madrid, Spain.

Yeast Reb1 and its mammalian ortholog TTF1 are conserved Myb-type DNA-binding
proteins that bind to specific sites near the 3'-end of rRNA genes (rDNA). Here, 
they participate in the termination of transcription driven by RNA polymerase I
and block DNA replication forks approaching in the opposite direction. We found
that Schizosaccharomyces pombe Reb1 also upregulates transcription of the ste9(+)
gene that is required for nitrogen-starvation-induced growth arrest with a G1 DNA
content and sexual differentiation. Ste9 activates the anaphase-promoting complex
or cyclosome ('APC/C') in G1, targeting B-cyclin for proteasomal degradation in
response to nutritional stress. Reb1 binds in vivo and in vitro to a specific DNA
sequence at the promoter of ste9(+), similar to the sequence recognized in the
rDNA, and this binding is required for ste9(+) transcriptional activation and G1 
arrest. This suggests that Reb1 acts as a link between rDNA metabolism and cell
cycle control in response to nutritional stress. In agreement with this new role 
for Reb1 in the regulation of the G1-S transition, reb1<U+0394> and wee1(ts) mutations
are synthetically lethal owing to the inability of these cells to lengthen G1
before entering S phase. Similarly, reb1<U+0394> cdc10(ts) cells are unable to arrest in
G1 and die at the semi-permissive temperature.

PMID: 21118960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Lung Cancer. 2011 Jul;73(1):51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.10.018. Epub 2010
Dec 15.

Positive urinary cytology in patients with lung cancer in the absence of obvious 
urine tract metastases.

Voulgaris E(1), Pentheroudakis G, Pappa L, Bafa M, Goussia A, Dalezis P,
Tsombanidou C, Geromichalos G, Papageorgiou A, Koutsilieris M, Malamou-Mitsi V,
Pavlidis N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University Hospital, Ioannina,
Greece.

PURPOSE: To study the phenomenon of positive urine cytology in patients with lung
cancer in the absence of obvious urothelial metastases.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 150 patients with small (SCLC) and non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) of all stages and 3 control groups were prospectively studied.
Immunocytochemical study (cytokeratins 7-20, TTF1) in all positive urine
specimens and chemokine profile (CXCR4, CCL21) study of the primary tumor in
selected positive patients was performed. In experimental study, C57Bl/6 BALB/C
mice injected with LLC lung and 4T1 mammary cancer cells were used for the
detection of positive urine cytology.
RESULTS: 11% of patients with NSCLC, 7% of patients with SCLC and none of the
control group had positive urine cytology. In NSCLC, metastatic disease and high 
tumor burden positively correlated (p=0.01 and 0.03 respectively) with the
phenomenon. In SCLC, correlation with extensive disease and multiple metastatic
sites (p=0.02 and 0.04 respectively) was found. No correlation was found in
either group with: age, gender, histology, performance status, line of
chemotherapy, previous platinum-based chemotherapy, adrenal metastases, renal
function, abnormal urinary sediment, response to chemotherapy and overall
survival (p=0.9). Distinctive chemokine expression was identified in positive
patients studied and was not observed in negative patients (×2 p=0.008). In the
experimental study, only the LLC lung cancer cells were detected in the urine
cytology of mice.
CONCLUSION: This phenomenon, carrying undefined pathophysiological mechanisms,
seems to characterize only patients with metastatic/extensive disease and high
tumor burden. Further studies are needed to validate our preliminary chemokine
expression results.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21111510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Dec;34(12):1805-11. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181f7dae3.

Optimal immunohistochemical markers for distinguishing lung adenocarcinomas from 
squamous cell carcinomas in small tumor samples.

Terry J(1), Leung S, Laskin J, Leslie KO, Gown AM, Ionescu DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

The histologic subtype of non-small cell lung carcinoma is important in selecting
appropriate chemotherapy for patients with advanced disease. As many of these
patients are not operative candidates, they are treated medically after biopsy
for diagnosis. Inherent limitations of small biopsy samples can make
distinguishing poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) from squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) difficult. The value of histochemical and immunohistochemical
markers to help separate poorly differentiated ADC from SCC in resection
specimens is well established; however, the optimal use of markers in small
tissue samples has only recently been examined and the correlation of marker
expression in small tissue samples with histologic subtype determined on
resection specimens has not been well documented. We address this issue by
examining the expression of 9 markers (p63, TTF1, CK5/6, CK7, 34ßE12, Napsin A,
mucicarmine, NTRK1, and NTRK2) on 200 cases of ADC and 225 cases of SCC in tissue
microarray format to mimic small tissue specimens. The single best marker to
separate ADC from SCC is p63 (for SCC: sensitivity 84%, specificity 85%).
Logistic regression analysis identifies p63, TTF1, CK5/6, CK7, Napsin A, and
mucicarmine as the optimal panel to separate ADC from SCC. Reduction of the panel
to p63, TTF1, CK5/6, and CK7 is marginally less effective but may be the best
compromise when tissue is limited. We present an algorithm for the stepwise
application of p63, TTF1, CK5/6, CK7, Napsin A, and mucicarmine in situations in 
which separation of ADC from SCC in small specimens cannot be accomplished by
morphology alone.

PMID: 21107086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 16;10:113. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-113.

Epithelial N-cadherin and nuclear ß-catenin are up-regulated during early
development of human lung.

Kaarteenaho R(1), Lappi-Blanco E, Lehtonen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine/Respiratory
Research Unit, Centre of Excellence in Research, University of Oulu and Oulu
University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. riitta.kaarteenaho@oulu.fi

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to analyze the cell-specific expression of 
E- and N-cadherin and ß-catenin in developing human lung tissues from 12 to 40
weeks of gestation.
METHODS: Forty-seven cases of developing human lung including pseudoglandular,
canalicular, saccular and alveolar periods were analyzed by immunohistochemistry 
for E- and N-cadherin and ß-catenin and twenty-one cases were also investigated
by RT-PCR for E- and N-cadherin and ß-catenin. For identifying the lung cells,
the sections were also stained with antibodies against thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1) and caveolin-1. Normal adult lung tissue was used as a control. 
E-cadherin was strongly expressed in epithelium of bronchi and large bronchioles 
from week 12 onwards and it was also positive in alveoli in pretype II cells and 
type II cells. N-cadherin was present in most of the epithelial cells of bronchi 
and the largest bronchioles during the pseudo-glandular and canalicular periods. 
N-cadherin was not detected in epithelium of developing alveoli. ß-catenin was
strongly membrane-bound and positively expressed in bronchial epithelium from
week 12 to week 40; it showed nuclear positivity in both developing airway
epithelium and in the cells underneath the epithelium during pseudo-glandular
period and to a lesser degree also in the canalicular period. ß-catenin was
positive in pretype II cells as well as in type I and type II pneumocytes within 
alveoli. RT-PCR analyses revealed detectable amounts of RNAs of E- and N-cadherin
and ß-catenin in all cases studied. The amounts of RNAs were higher in early
stages of gestation.
CONCLUSIONS: E-cadherin is widely expressed in bronchial and alveolar epithelial 
cells. N-cadherin exhibit extensive epithelial positivity in bronchial epithelial
cells during early lung development. The presence of ß-catenin was observed in
several cell types with a distinct location in tissue and cells in various
gestational stages, indicating that it possesses several roles during lung
development. The expressions of protein and mRNAs of E- and N-cadherin and
ß-catenin were higher in early gestation compared to of the end. Moreover, the
expressions of these factors were higher during the lung development than in the 
adult human lung.

PMCID: PMC2995473
PMID: 21080917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Neonatology. 2011;99(3):231-40. doi: 10.1159/000317827. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Expression of Transcription Factor GATA-6 in Alveolar Epithelial Cells Is Linked 
to Neonatal Lung Disease.

Vähätalo R(1), Asikainen TM, Karikoski R, Kinnula VL, White CW, Andersson S,
Heikinheimo M, Myllärniemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Premature birth and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) are risk
factors for disturbed lung development and bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). The 
molecular mechanisms related to prematurity and BPD remain largely unknown.
Epithelial expression of the transcription factor GATA-6 has been implicated in
normal and abnormal murine lung development.
OBJECTIVES: The possible involvement of GATA-6 in the normal development and in
RDS and BPD was investigated in the human and baboon lung.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to study the expression of GATA-6 and
thyroid transcription factor 1 in lung specimens from different age groups of
human and baboon fetuses and newborns with lung disease. Furthermore, the
regulatory role of TGF-ß1 in GATA-6 expression was investigated in human
pulmonary epithelial cell lines using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GATA-6 expression increased in the developing human airway epithelium
along with advancing gestation, but diminished to negligible at birth. In RDS,
GATA-6 expression was enhanced at 5-7 days after birth, and decreased thereafter.
In BPD, the expression of GATA-6 in alveolar epithelial cells was low. These
results were confirmed and extended using an established baboon model of
prematurity. The in vitro experiments revealed that TGF-ß1 induces GATA-6 and
thyroid transcription factor 1 expression in lung epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the expression of GATA-6 at the early
stages of the preterm lung may be related to impaired postnatal alveolar
development.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2992637
PMID: 21071980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Bull Cancer. 2010 Nov;97(11):1323-35. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1211.

[Molecular characteristics of lung cancer].

[Article in French]

Bernaudin JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'histologie biologie tumorale, ER2 université
Pierre-et-Marie-Curie-Paris-VI, 75020 Paris, France.
jean-francois.bernaudin@tnn.aphp.fr

While no real improvement in the long term survival has been obtained in lung
cancer, during this decade a significant improvement in cancer control has been
obtained by biology driven targeted therapy as with anti EGFR tyrosine kinase.
Two phases can be described in the knowledge of lung cancer biology: a first
phase open in the 1980s describing the main molecular anomalies and impaired cell
control mechanisms, and a second phase starting in the 2004-2005 giving rise to
the therapeutic applications of this knowledge. A new molecular classification of
lung cancer, particularly adenocarcinomas will soon be proposed for therapeutic
application.

PMID: 21051316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Lung Cancer. 2011 Jun;72(3):309-15. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.09.013. Epub 2010
Oct 30.

Frequent ALK rearrangement and TTF-1/p63 co-expression in lung adenocarcinoma
with signet-ring cell component.

Yoshida A(1), Tsuta K, Watanabe S, Sekine I, Fukayama M, Tsuda H, Furuta K,
Shibata T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

Primary adenocarcinoma with signet-ring cell component (Ad-SRCC) of the lung has 
been well characterized clinicopathologically and histologically, but their
genetics has rarely been investigated. A recent report suggesting an association 
between Ad-SRCC and EML4-ALK fusion prompted us to undertake a histological,
immunohistochemical, and molecular analysis of 10 cases of primary Ad-SRCC
identified out of 699 lung adenocarcinomas (1.4%). Most of the Ad-SRCCs showed
characteristic architectural as well as cytological features including cohesive
clustering of signet-ring cells, a solid/acinar growth pattern, and alveolar
filling at the tumor periphery. Diffuse co-expression of TTF-1 and p63 was
observed in half of the Ad-SRCCs, and this immunoprofile has not been recognized 
previously. Four Ad-SRCCs (40%) harbored ALK translocations detected by
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. One new EML4-ALK fusion variant was
identified. One ALK-rearranged tumor showed focal squamous differentiation. None 
of the present Ad-SRCCs had EGFR or KRAS mutations, regardless of ALK status.
This study successfully utilized tumor histology alone to identify a subset of
adenocarcinomas showing a high rate of ALK translocation. The characteristic
histology, immunoprofile, frequent ALK translocation, and total lack of EGFR or
KRAS mutations, may suggest that Ad-SRCC forms a histologically/molecularly
coherent subgroup of adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Dev. 2010 Oct 15;24(20):2264-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.590910.

Interaction of noncoding RNA with the rDNA promoter mediates recruitment of
DNMT3b and silencing of rRNA genes.

Schmitz KM(1), Mayer C, Postepska A, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Noncoding RNAs are important components of regulatory networks controlling the
epigenetic state of chromatin. We analyzed the role of pRNA (promoter-associated 
RNA), a noncoding RNA that is complementary to the rDNA promoter, in mediating de
novo CpG methylation of rRNA genes (rDNA). We show that pRNA interacts with the
target site of the transcription factor TTF-I, forming a DNA:RNA triplex that is 
specifically recognized by the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3b. The results reveal a
compelling new mechanism of RNA-dependent DNA methylation, suggesting that
recruitment of DNMT3b by DNA:RNA triplexes may be a common and generally used
pathway in epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC2956204
PMID: 20952535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Oct;34(10):1504-13. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ef70b6.

Adult-type fibrosarcoma: A reevaluation of 163 putative cases diagnosed at a
single institution over a 48-year period.

Bahrami A(1), Folpe AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Adult-type fibrosarcoma (FS) was once considered the most common adult sarcoma,
but is now considered a diagnosis of exclusion. No recent series has critically
reevaluated putative FSs to estimate their true incidence. One hundred
ninety-five cases diagnosed as adult FS in somatic soft tissue were retrieved
from our institutional archives for the period 1960 to 2008. Thirty-two cases
with insufficient material were excluded. On the basis the morphology of the
final 163 cases, immunohistochemical studies (IHC) was conducted using some
combination of: wide-spectrum cytokeratin (CK), EMA, high molecular weight CK,
S100, Melan A, HMB-45, CD34, TLE1, CD31, HHV8, smooth muscle actin, desmin, ALK1,
CD99, Myo-D1, myogenin, c-kit, INI1, CD21, p63, calretinin, WT1, and TTF1.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis for SYT gene rearrangement was done
in 6 putative CK-negative synovial sarcomas (SS). Revised diagnoses were based on
clinical, morphologic, IHC, and molecular findings. The original group of
putative FS occurred in 84 males and 79 females (median 52.5<U+2009>y, range 2 to 99<U+2009>y),
and involved various anatomic sites. Only 26 cases met WHO criteria for FS,
including 2 postradiation FS. These occurred in 16 males and 10 females (median
50<U+2009>y, range 6 to 74<U+2009>y), and involved the lower extremities (12 cases), head/ neck
(5 cases), trunk (4 cases), upper extremities (3 case), and mediastinum/abdomen
(2 cases). Clinical follow-up information was available for 24 of 26 (92%) cases,
with a median of 5 years follow-up (range <1 to 35<U+2009>y). Twelve patients (50%) died
of locally aggressive and/or metastatic disease (median follow-up 1-year; range
<1 to 8<U+2009>y), 6 patients (25%) were alive without disease (median follow-up 11.5<U+2009>y;
range 2.5 to 35<U+2009>y), and 6 patients (25%) died of other causes (median follow-up
10<U+2009>y; range 9 to 18<U+2009>y) (). Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis was
positive for SYT gene rearrangement in all cases tested. Non-FS (137 cases) were 
reclassified as: undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (32 cases), SS (21 cases), 
solitary fibrous tumor (14 cases), myxofibrosarcoma (11 cases), malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor (8 cases), FS dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and 
desmoplastic melanoma (4 cases each), low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma, sarcomatoid 
carcinoma, desmoid-type fibromatosis, rhabdomyosarcoma, myofibroblastic sarcoma, 
spindle-cell liposarcoma (3 cases each), sclerosing epithelioid FS, fibroma-like 
epithelioid sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, cellular fibrous histiocytoma (2 cases
each), and others (17 cases). Using modern diagnostic criteria with ancillary IHC
and molecular genetics, we have been able to reclassify 84% of putative FS.
Exclusive of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, the distinction of which from 
FS is subjective, 64% of putative FS were reclassified, most commonly as
monophasic SS and solitary fibrous tumor. We conclude that true FS is exceedingly
rare, accounting for <1% of approximately 10,000 adult soft tissue sarcomas seen 
at our institution during this time period, and should be diagnosed with great
caution.

PMID: 20829680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 17;5(8):e12209. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012209.

The use of P63 immunohistochemistry for the identification of squamous cell
carcinoma of the lung.

Conde E(1), Angulo B, Redondo P, Toldos O, García-García E, Suárez-Gauthier A,
Rubio-Viqueira B, Marrón C, García-Luján R, Sánchez-Céspedes M, López-Encuentra
A, Paz-Ares L, López-Ríos F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Dianas Terapéuticas, Centro Integral Oncológico Clara Campal,
Hospital Universitario Madrid Sanchinarro, Universidad San Pablo-CEU, Madrid,
Spain.

INTRODUCTION: While some targeted agents should not be used in squamous cell
carcinomas (SCCs), other agents might preferably target SCCs. In a previous
microarray study, one of the top differentially expressed genes between
adenocarcinomas (ACs) and SCCs is P63. It is a well-known marker of squamous
differentiation, but surprisingly, its expression is not widely used for this
purpose. Our goals in this study were (1) to further confirm our microarray data,
(2) to analize the value of P63 immunohistochemistry (IHC) in reducing the number
of large cell carcinoma (LCC) diagnoses in surgical specimens, and (3) to
investigate the potential of P63 IHC to minimize the proportion of "carcinoma NOS
(not otherwise specified)" in a prospective series of small tumor samples.
METHODS: With these goals in mind, we studied (1) a tissue-microarray comprising 
33 ACs and 99 SCCs on which we performed P63 IHC, (2) a series of 20 surgically
resected LCCs studied for P63 and TTF-1 IHC, and (3) a prospective cohort of 66
small thoracic samples, including 32 carcinoma NOS, that were further classified 
by the result of P63 and TTF-1 IHC.
RESULTS: The results in the three independent cohorts were as follows: (1) P63
IHC was differentially expressed in SCCs when compared to ACs (p<0.0001); (2)
half of the 20 (50%) LCCs were positive for P63 and were reclassified as SCCs;
and (3) all P63 positive cases (34%) were diagnosed as SCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: P63 IHC is useful for the identification of lung SCCs.

PMCID: PMC2923180
PMID: 20808915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Surg Pathol Clin. 2010 Sep;3(3):495-513. doi: 10.1016/j.path.2010.06.009. Epub
2010 Oct 20.

New Entities and Diagnostic Challenges in Pediatric Lung Disease.

Dishop MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, B120, The Children's Hospital, University of
Colorado-Denver School of Medicine, 13123 East 16th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA. Electronic address: dishop.megan@tchden.org.

The differential diagnosis of diffuse lung disease in children differs
considerably from adults, and analysis of pediatric lung biopsies may prove
challenging for pathologists with more extensive exposure to adult lung biopsies.
Biopsy diagnosis of pediatric lung disease continues to evolve as new pathologic 
entities are recognized and new genetic determinants of disease are discovered.
This article describes the clinical characteristics, pathologic features, and
differential diagnosis of challenging and recently described entities in
pediatric lung disease. The specific entities discussed include alveolar
capillary dysplasia, genetic disorders of surfactant metabolism, pulmonary
interstitial glycogenosis, and neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia of infancy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26839222  [PubMed]


296. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2010 Sep 30;173(2):179-88. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2010.08.005. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Degree of endothelium injury promotes fibroelastogenesis in experimental acute
lung injury.

Chao MC(1), Garcia CS, de Oliveira MB, Santos RS, Lucas IH, Silva PL,
Vieira-Abreu A, de Castro-Faria-Neto HC, Parra-Cuentas ER, Capelozzi VL, Pelosi
P, Rocco PR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pulmonary Investigation, Carlos Chagas Filho Institute of
Biophysics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

We tested the hypothesis that at the early phase of acute lung injury (ALI) the
degree of endothelium injury may predict lung parenchyma remodelling. For this
purpose, two models of extrapulmonary ALI induced by Escherichia coli
lipopolysaccharide (ALI-LPS) or cecal ligation and puncture (ALI-CLP) were
developed in mice. At day 1, these models had similar degrees of lung mechanical 
compromise, epithelial damage, and intraperitoneal inflammation, but endothelial 
lesion was greater in ALI-CLP. A time course analysis revealed, at day 7: ALI-CLP
had higher degrees of epithelial lesion, denudation of basement membrane,
endothelial damage, elastic and collagen fibre content, neutrophils in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), peritoneal fluid and blood, levels of
interleukin-6, KC (murine analogue of IL-8), and transforming growth factor-ß in 
BALF. Conversely, the number of lung apoptotic cells was similar in both groups. 
In conclusion, the intensity of fibroelastogenesis was affected by endothelium
injury in addition to the maintenance of epithelial damage and intraperitoneal
inflammation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20708719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Virchows Arch. 2010 Oct;457(4):497-507. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0954-0. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

TTF1 expression in normal lung neuroendocrine cells and related tumors:
immunohistochemical study comparing two different monoclonal antibodies.

La Rosa S(1), Chiaravalli AM, Placidi C, Papanikolaou N, Cerati M, Capella C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, 21100 Varese, Italy.
anapat@ospedale.varese.it

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1) regulates lung morphogenesis and
differentiation, and its immunohistochemical expression is used for identifying
lung neoplasms. The 8G7G3/1 antibody has been used in previous studies, but a
different and more sensitive anti-TTF1 antibody, named SPT24, has become
commercially available. Since the immunohistochemical expression of TTF1 in
normal lung neuroendocrine (NE) cells has not been previously investigated and
its utility in the diagnosis of lung NE tumors is a controversial issue, we
studied the TTF1 expression in normal adult and fetal lungs, in 83 pulmonary NE
neoplasms, in 131 non-lung NE tumors and in 36 metastases from these neoplasms
using these two antibodies. A TTF1 immunoreactivity was demonstrated in normal
fetal and adult NE cells when using the SPT24 clone. Conversely, using the
8G7G3/1 antibody, only rare fetal neuroendocrine cells were TTF1 positive while
adult NE cells were negative. The SPT24 clone identified TTF1 expression in more 
carcinoids, most of them peripherally located, and poorly differentiated NE
carcinomas than the 8G7G3/1 clone. Non-pulmonary well-differentiated NE tumors
were negative for both antibodies. Among the 45 non-pulmonary poorly
differentiated NE carcinomas 11% were positive for 8G7G3/1 and 18% for SPT24.
TTF1 expression in metastases perfectly reflected that detected in the related
primary tumors. Our results indicate that the SPT24 antibody is more sensitive
than the 8G7G3/1 clone for labeling lung carcinoids and it appears particularly
useful in detecting peripheral neoplasms. In addition, the expression of TTF1 in 
normal NE cells suggests a possible role for the transcription factor in their
development and differentiation.

PMID: 20694477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;13(6):591-7. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2010.06.005.

[Retrospective study of clinicopathological characteristics in bronchopulmonary
carcinoid].

[Article in Chinese]

Liao H(1), Rao H, Zhang X, Lin Y, Jie M, Fu J, Long H, Rong T, Lin P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Cancer Center of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bronchopulmonary carcinoid (BPC) account for less than 
2% of all primary lung malignant tumors, but few related studies were reported.
The aim of this study is to analyze this rare disease's clinicopathological
characteristics.
METHODS: The clinical data of 28 patients with BPC in Cancer Center of Sun
Yat-sen University, from January 1994 to June 2009, were enrolled into
retrospective analysis. First, the corresponding paraffin blocks reexamined,
slice up and stained, multiple pathologists re-consulted, and its subsets
(typical carcinoid, TC; atypical carcinoid, AC) defined. Second, the clinical
characteristics and immunohistochemical markers and its relationship with
prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: First, the 5-year survival for overall and TC, AC was 56% and 70%, 41%
respectively in 28 cases. The markers CD99, Bcl-2 and Ki-67 expression correlated
significantly with the BPC subsets (P = 0.017, P = 0.043, and P = 0.033
respectively). Further univariate analysis revealed that advanced TNM staging (P 
= 0.037), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001) and Ki-67 nucleolus's positive
expression (P = 0.009) are poor prognostic factors. Second, the overall, TC, AC
5-year survival rate was 73%, 83%, 57% respectively in 20 cases underwent the
radically surgical resection. Further univariate analysis revealed that AC subset
(P = 0.013), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.004) and Ki-67 nucleolus's positive
expression (P = 0.006), advanced TNM staging (P = 0.047) are poor prognostic
factors in this 20 cases. Third, as univariate analysis, local recurrence and
metastasis (n = 4) correlate significantly with Ki-67 nucleolus's and Bcl-2
positive expression (P = 0.027, 0.045, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The prognosis of BPC was better than other types of primary lung
cancer. Ki-67, Bcl-2 high expression and advanced TNM staging are the poor
recurrence and prognostic factors of BPC. The radical surgery remains the
treatment of choice for resectable candidates in BPC as NSCLC.

PMID: 20681445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Rozhl Chir. 2010 May;89(5):310-4.

[Pneumosurgery in the management of colorectal carcinomas].

[Article in Czech]

Sobotka M(1), Horváth T, Mitás L, Bartonková H, Cíhalová M, Garajová B, Kocák I, 
Kocáková I, Spelda S, Vomela J.

Author information: 
(1)Chirurgická klinika Fakultní nemocnice Brno-Bohunice, Lékarská fakulta
Masarykovy univerzity. msobotka@fnbrno.cz

OBJECTIVE: Surgically solved lung involvement in patients after surgery of
colorectal cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Altogether 15 patients, 9 men (median age in the time of
lung diagnosis 67 years) and 6 women (median age 59 years) underwent classical
open pulmonary surgery during 2003-2008 years from the follow-up cohort of 836
persons after operation due to colorectal cancer in the time period of 1996-2008 
years. The indication for lung surgery: solitary pulmonary lesion. Procedures
distribution: pulmonary lobectomy 7, bilobectomy 2, segmentectomy 4, wedge
resection 2. The requirement of the European Society of Thoracic Surgeons (ESTS) 
guidelines of complete pulmonary resection has been met by 10 operations (66.7%) 
with lobe specific lymphadenectomy. Histopathology investigation: Formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded samples were investigated after hematoxylin-and-eosin staining,
supplemented in case of need by immunohistochemistry of CK7, CK20 and TTF1.
RESULTS: Eleven pulmonary metastases were found, in two cases with interlobar
lymfatics involvement. Two metachronous primary adenocarcinomas of the lung (ADL)
were diagnosed, one of them with metastases into hilar lymphatics. In remaining
two patients pulmonary chondrohamartoma was discovered.
CONCLUSION: Solitary pulmonary opacity in patient after colorectal surgery might 
not represent simple metastasis explicitly. Complete resection is needed.

PMID: 20666335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Breast. 2011 Feb;20(1):15-20. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2010.06.002. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

Prognostic and predictive value of TFF1 for adjuvant endocrine therapy in Chinese
women with early ER positive breast cancer: comparing aromatase inhibitors with
tamoxifen.

Zhou L(1), Yan T, Jiang Y, Di G, Shen Z, Shao Z, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Shanghai Cancer Hospital/Cancer Institute, Fudan
University; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
399 Ling-Ling Road, Shanghai, China.

Factors that predict in favor of an aromatase inhibitors (AIs) over tamoxifen
(TAM) in estrogen receptor (ER) breast cancer remains to be identified. We
compared progesterone receptor (PR) and trefoil factor 1 (TTF1) status (+ve
versus -ve) as predictive of superior effect of AI's over tamoxifen among a total
of 1973 Chinese women with early ER+ breast cancer. The expression of TFF1 was
independently associated with ER and PR. However, there was no correlation with
TFF1 and HER-2 expression. Treatment effect was more pronounced in the ER+/TFF1+ 
postmenopausal patients with a hazard ratio favoring AIs (HR = 0.397, 95%CI
0.183-0.860), but not in the PR positive cohorts (HR = 0.466, 95%CI 0.186-1.164).
We suggested that AIs was better than TAM especially in the postmenopausal
patients with ER+/TFF1+ breast cancer; however the clinical application of this
observation still requires further prospective studies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20619646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28604-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149658. Epub
2010 Jul 7.

CCCTC-binding factor acts upstream of FOXA1 and demarcates the genomic response
to estrogen.

Zhang Y(1), Liang J, Li Y, Xuan C, Wang F, Wang D, Shi L, Zhang D, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

Transcription activation by estrogen receptor (ER) is rapid and dynamic. How the 
prompt and precise ER response is established and maintained is still not fully
understood. Here, we report that two boundary elements surrounding the well
defined ERalpha target TFF1 locus are occupied by the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF). These elements are separated by 40 kb but cluster in the nuclear space
depending on CTCF but independent of estrogen and transcription. In contrast, in 
estrogen non-responsive breast cancer cells, the spatial proximity of these two
elements is lost and the entire locus instead displays a polycomb repressive
complex 2-controlled heterochromatin characteristic. We showed that CTCF acts
upstream of the "pioneer" factor FOXA1 in determining the genomic response to
estrogen. We propose that the CTCF-bound boundary elements demarcate active
versus inactive regions, building a framework of adjacent chromosome territory
that predisposes ERalpha-regulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC2937886
PMID: 20610384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Chin Med Assoc. 2010 Jun;73(6):327-30. doi: 10.1016/S1726-4901(10)70070-8.

Esophageal metastasis from occult lung cancer.

Hsu PK(1), Shai SE, Wang J, Hsu CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chutung Veterans Hospital, Hsinchu, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC. hsupokuei@yahoo.com.tw

A 66-year-old man with dysphagia was found to have a poorly differentiated
esophageal carcinoma by incision biopsy. Following esophagectomy, reconstruction 
with a gastric tube was performed. Pathological examination and
immunohisto-chemistry showed infiltration of adenocarcinoma cells with positive
thyroid transcription factor 1-staining in the submucosal layer, which indicated 
metastatic esophageal carcinoma. Although no pulmonary lesion could be visualized
by imaging or bronchoscopy, pulmonary origin was highly suspected as a result of 
positive thyroid transcription factor 1-staining. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first reported case of metastatic esophageal carcinoma from occult
lung cancer (AJCC TNM stage TX).

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20603092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Thyroid Res. 2010 Jun 9;3(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1756-6614-3-3.

Effect of thyroid statuses on sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) gene expression in
the extrathyroidal tissues in mice.

Harun-Or-Rashid M(1), Asai M, Sun XY, Hayashi Y, Sakamoto J, Murata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. masato-a@mbc.ocn.ne.jp.

BACKGROUND: Iodide that is essential for thyroid hormone synthesis is actively
transported into the thyroid follicular cells via sodium/iodide symporter (NIS)
protein in vertebrates. It is well known that NIS expression in thyroid is
regulated by the thyroid statuses mainly through thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH). Although NIS mRNA expressions in extrathyroidal tissues have been
qualitatively reported, their regulation by thyroid statuses has not been well
clarified.
METHODS: Male ICR mice aged four weeks were assigned into three groups (control, 
hypothyroid, and hyperthyroid). Hypothyroid group of mice were treated with 0.02%
methimazole in drinking water and hyperthyroid group of mice received
intraperitoneal injection (4 mug L-T4 twice a week) for four weeks. NIS mRNA
expression levels in the tissues were evaluated using Northern blot hybridization
and quantitative real-time RTPCR (qPCR). Additionally, end-point RTPCR for the
thyroid follicular cell-characteristic genes (TSH receptor, TSHR; thyroid
transcription factor-1, TTF1; and paired box gene 8, Pax8) was carried out.
RESULTS: By Northern blot analysis, NIS mRNA was detected in thyroid and stomach.
In addition to these organs, qPCR revealed the expression also in the
submandibular gland, colon, testis, and lung. Expression of NIS mRNA in thyroid
was significantly increased in hypothyroid and decreased in hyperthyroid group.
Trends of NIS mRNA expression in extrathyroidal tissues were not in line with
that in the thyroid gland in different thyroid statuses. Only in lung, NIS mRNA
was regulated by thyroid statuses but in opposite way compared to the manner in
the thyroid gland. There were no extrathyroidal tissues that expressed all three 
characteristic genes of thyroid follicular cells.
CONCLUSIONS: NIS mRNA expression in the thyroid gland was up-regulated in
hypothyroid mice and was down-regulated in hyperthyroid mice, suggesting that NIS
mRNA in the thyroid gland is regulated by thyroid statuses. In contrast, NIS mRNA
expression in extrathyroidal tissues was not altered by thyroid statuses although
it was widely expressed. Lack of responsiveness of NIS mRNA expressions in
extrathyroidal tissues reemphasizes additional functions of NIS protein in
extrathyroidal tissues other than iodide trapping.

PMCID: PMC2901223
PMID: 20529371  [PubMed]


304. Mol Cell. 2010 May 28;38(4):539-50. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.03.015.

The ARF tumor suppressor controls ribosome biogenesis by regulating the RNA
polymerase I transcription factor TTF-I.

Lessard F(1), Morin F, Ivanchuk S, Langlois F, Stefanovsky V, Rutka J, Moss T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Centre, Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry,
and Pathology of Laval University, CHUQ Research Centre, Québec, Québec, Canada.

The p14/p19(ARF) (ARF) product of the CDKN2A gene displays tumor suppressor
activity both in the presence and absence of p53/TP53. In p53-negative cells, ARF
arrests cell proliferation, at least in part, by suppressing ribosomal RNA
synthesis. We show that ARF does this by controlling the subnuclear localization 
of the RNA polymerase I transcription termination factor, TTF-I. TTF-I shuttles
between nucleoplasm and nucleolus with the aid of the chaperone NPM/B23 and a
nucleolar localization sequence within its N-terminal regulatory domain. ARF
inhibits nucleolar import of TTF-I by binding to this nucleolar localization
sequence, causing the accumulation of TTF-I in the nucleoplasm. Depletion of
TTF-I recapitulates the effects of ARF on ribosomal RNA synthesis and is rescued 
by the introduction of a TTF-I transgene. Thus, our data delineate the pathway by
which ARF regulates ribosomal RNA synthesis and provide a compelling explanation 
for the role of NPM.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 14;11:306. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-306.

Comparative genomics reveals a functional thyroid-specific element in the far
upstream region of the PAX8 gene.

Nitsch R(1), Di Dato V, di Gennaro A, de Cristofaro T, Abbondante S, De Felice M,
Zannini M, Di Lauro R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology G. Salvatore, National
Research Council, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms leading to a fully differentiated thyrocite 
are still object of intense study even if it is well known that thyroglobulin,
thyroperoxidase, NIS and TSHr are the marker genes of thyroid differentiation. It
is also well known that Pax8, TTF-1, Foxe1 and Hhex are the thyroid-enriched
transcription factors responsible for the expression of the above genes, thus are
responsible for the differentiated thyroid phenotype. In particular, the role of 
Pax8 in the fully developed thyroid gland was studied in depth and it was
established that it plays a key role in thyroid development and differentiation. 
However, to date the bases for the thyroid-enriched expression of this
transcription factor have not been unraveled yet. Here, we report the
identification and characterization of a functional thyroid-specific enhancer
element located far upstream of the Pax8 gene.
RESULTS: We hypothesized that regulatory cis-acting elements are conserved among 
mammalian genes. Comparison of a genomic region extending for about 100 kb at the
5'-flanking region of the mouse and human Pax8 gene revealed several conserved
regions that were tested for enhancer activity in thyroid and non-thyroid cells. 
Using this approach we identified one putative thyroid-specific regulatory
element located 84.6 kb upstream of the Pax8 transcription start site. The in
silico data were verified by promoter-reporter assays in thyroid and non-thyroid 
cells. Interestingly, the identified far upstream element manifested a very high 
transcriptional activity in the thyroid cell line PC Cl3, but showed no activity 
in HeLa cells. In addition, the data here reported indicate that the
thyroid-enriched transcription factor TTF-1 is able to bind in vitro and in vivo 
the Pax8 far upstream element, and is capable to activate transcription from it.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study reveal the presence of a thyroid-specific
regulatory element in the 5' upstream region of the Pax8 gene. The identification
of this regulatory element represents the first step in the investigation of
upstream regulatory mechanisms that control Pax8 transcription during thyroid
differentiation and are relevant to further studies on Pax8 as a candidate gene
for thyroid dysgenesis.

PMCID: PMC2996967
PMID: 20470391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Ann Pathol. 2010 Apr;30(2):139-42. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2010.01.004. Epub 2010
Apr 10.

[Lung metastases of epithelioid sarcoma revealed by bilateral spontaneous
pneumothorax: a pathological diagnosis].

[Article in French]

Barnoud R(1), Collardeau-Frachon S, de la Roche E, Vasiljevic A, Thomson V,
Ranchère D, Devouassoux G, Devouassoux-Shisheboran M.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, hôpital de la Croix-Rousse,
103, grande rue de la Croix-Rousse, 69317 Lyon cedex 04, France.
raphaelle.barnoud@chu-lyon

Spontaneous pneumothorax may be one of the presenting manifestation of metastatic
epithelioid sarcoma even if imaging does not show evident metastatic nodules. We 
report the case of a 24-year-old man presenting a bilateral spontaneous
pneumothorax in association with an epithelioid sarcoma developed in the right
foot. CT-scan revealed bilateral microcystic lesions with no evidence of
metastatic disease. A left thoracoscopy and a pleurodesis were performed.
Persistent air leakage led to a thoracotomy during which lung biopsies were
carried out. Histopathological examination of the pulmonary biopsies revealed
rare millimetric nodules, composed of very atypical epithelioid cells, growing
along alveolar walls reminiscent of a bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma. However,
these cells and primary neoplastic cells of the foot tumour were morphologically 
and immunohistochemically similar and the atypical pulmonary cells were TTF1
negative. All these constatations allowed a diagnosis of pulmonary metastases of 
the epithelioid sarcoma. This very unusual case underlines that sarcomatous
metastases may be a clinical and pathological pitfall.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20451074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Virchows Arch. 2010 Jun;456(6):661-70. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-0919-3. Epub 2010 
Apr 23.

Nonconventional papillary thyroid carcinomas with pleomorphic tumor giant cells: 
a diagnostic pitfall with anaplastic carcinoma.

Hommell-Fontaine J(1), Borda A, Ragage F, Berger N, Decaussin-Petrucci M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Hospices Civils de Lyon,
Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, Pierre Bénite, France.

The presence of pleomorphic tumor giant cells in thyroid carcinomas of follicular
cell origin is always worrisome for the pathologist as they first of all refer to
anaplastic carcinoma, one of the most aggressive human malignancies. However,
non-anaplastic pleomorphic giant cells are well described in other thyroid
diseases, most often benign. In this paper, we describe four cases of papillary
thyroid carcinoma displaying pleomorphic tumor giant cells with features that
differ from those of anaplastic carcinoma. Pleomorphic giant cells were admixed
with the underlying thyroid carcinoma and constituted from 5% to 25% of the
tumor. Cytologically, they had an abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with large and 
irregular nuclei. Compared to pleomorphic giant cells of anaplastic carcinoma,
they reproduced the growth pattern of the underlying carcinoma, had a low mitotic
index without necrosis or inflammation, and were reactive with thyroglobulin and 
thyroid-specific transcription factor-1 and strongly and diffusely positive for
cytokeratin AE1/AE3. After 16-84 months of follow-up, patients are relapse-free
and still alive. These cases show that pleomorphic tumor giant cells arising in
papillary thyroid carcinomas do not always represent dedifferentiation and
progression to anaplastic carcinoma. Distinction among these processes is
critical as their treatment and prognosis are very different.

PMID: 20414675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jun 30;322(1-2):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.03.009. 
Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Genetics and phenomics of hypothyroidism and thyroid dys- and agenesis due to
PAX8 and TTF1 mutations.

Montanelli L(1), Tonacchera M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Endocrinologia e Metabolismo, Centro Eccellenza AmbiSEN,
Università degli Studi di Pisa, Via Paradisa 2, 56124 Cisanello, Pisa, Italy.

Thyroid dysgenesis (TD) is the most common cause of congenital hypothyroidism
(CH), a relatively frequent endocrine disease in newborns (1 in 3000-4000 live
births). TD is a defect in the organogenesis of the gland resulting in
hypoplastic, ectopic or absent-thyroid gland. TD is usually sporadic but
mutations in transcription factors (PAX8, TTF1, FOXE1 and NKX2-5) involved in
thyroid development have been shown to cause a minority of cases transmitted as
Mendelian diseases. This review focuses on the genetics and phenomics of
hypothyroidism and TD due to PAX8 and TTF1 mutations.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 20302910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Pediatr Allergy Immunol Pulmonol. 2010 Mar;23(1):15-24.

Genetic Basis of Children's Interstitial Lung Disease.

Nogee LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine , Baltimore, Maryland.

Specific genetic causes for children's interstitial lung disease (chILD) have
been identified within the past decade. These include deletions of or mutations
in genes encoding proteins important in surfactant production and function (SP-B,
SP-C, and ABCA3), surfactant catabolism (GM-CSF receptor), as well as
transcription factors important for surfactant production (TTF1) or lung
development (Fox F1), with heterozygous deletions or loss-of-function mutations
of the latter resulting in alveolar capillary dysplasia (ACD) with misalignment
of the pulmonary veins. Familial pulmonary fibrosis in adults may result from
mutations in genes encoding components of telomerase and SP-A2. While not yet
reported in children, the expression of these genes in alveolar type II
epithelial cells supports a key role for the disruption of normal homeostasis in 
this cell type in the pathogenesis of interstitial lung disease. The
identification of specific genetic causes for chILD now allows for the
possibility of non-invasive diagnosis, and provides insight into basic cellular
mechanisms that may allow the development of novel therapies.

PMCID: PMC3207222
PMID: 22087432  [PubMed]


310. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Apr;34(4):525-32. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181d1d457.

An immunohistochemical study of cervical neuroendocrine carcinomas: Neoplasms
that are commonly TTF1 positive and which may express CK20 and P63.

McCluggage WG(1), Kennedy K, Busam KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast,
Northern Ireland. glenn.mccluggage@belfasttrust.hscni.net

Cervical small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (SCNEC) and large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) are uncommon but highly aggressive neoplasms.
From a diagnostic point of view, there may be problems both in distinguishing
these from other neoplasms and in confirming a cervical origin. This is important
as management is critically dependent on the correct histologic diagnosis. We
undertook a detailed immunohistochemical analysis of a relatively large series of
primary cervical SCNEC (n=13) and LCNEC (n=8). Cases were stained with AE1/3,
chromogranin, CD56, synaptophysin, PGP9.5, TTF1, p16, p63, CK7, CK20,
neurofilament, and CD99. CK20 and neurofilament staining was undertaken to
investigate whether some of these neoplasms might exhibit a Merkel cell
immunophenotype and CD99 staining to assess whether there is immunohistochemical 
overlap with neoplasms in the Ewing family of tumors (EFT). For all markers,
staining was classified as negative, 1+ (<10% cells immunoreactive), 2+ (10 to
50% cells immunoreactive), or 3+ (>50% cells immunoreactive). Eleven and 6 SCNEC 
and LCNEC, respectively were positive with AE1/3. Chromogranin, CD56,
synaptophysin, and PGP9.5 were positive in 11, 19, 19, and 9 cases, respectively.
Altogether 15 cases (71%) (11 SCNEC, 4 LCNEC) exhibited nuclear positivity, often
diffuse, with TTF1. All but 1 case was diffusely positive with p16. p63 was
positive in 9 cases, including 5 with diffuse nuclear immunoreactivity. Ten and 4
neoplasms were positive with CK7 and CK20, respectively. Neurofilament was
positive in 7 tumors. The 4 neoplasms that were CK20 positive were stained with
the monoclonal antibody CM2B4, generated against an antigenic epitope on the
Merkel cell polyomavirus T antigen; all were negative. CD99 was positive in 6
cases. In 2 cases, adjacent foci of adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) contained
scattered individual chromogranin positive cells, raising the possibility that
some cervical neuroendocrine carcinomas arise from neuroendocrine cells in AIS.
Four of 13 cases of pure AIS also contained scattered chromogranin positive
cells. Our results illustrate that a proportion of cervical neuroendocrine
carcinomas are negative with broad spectrum cytokeratins and some of the commonly
used neuroendocrine markers. TTF1 positivity is extremely common and may be a
useful marker of a neuroendocrine carcinoma. It is of no value in exclusion of a 
pulmonary primary. p16 is almost always positive in cervical neuroendocrine
carcinomas, possibly owing to an association with oncogenic human papillomavirus,
although other mechanisms of expression are also possible. Cervical
neuroendocrine carcinomas may be p63 positive, illustrating that this marker is
not specific for squamous differentiation. CK20 and neurofilament positivity in
some cervical neuroendocrine carcinomas is in keeping with a Merkel cell
immunophenotype, similar to that described in SCNECs in other organs. However,
the absence of staining with CM2B4 argues against a true Merkel cell tumor. CD99 
staining in a cervical neuroendocrine carcinoma should not result in misdiagnosis
as a neoplasm in the Ewing family of tumors.

PMID: 20182342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Lung Cancer. 2010 Oct;70(1):94-102. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.01.001. Epub 2010
Feb 1.

Activation status of receptor tyrosine kinase downstream pathways in primary lung
adenocarcinoma with reference of KRAS and EGFR mutations.

Hiramatsu M(1), Ninomiya H, Inamura K, Nomura K, Takeuchi K, Satoh Y, Okumura S, 
Nakagawa K, Yamori T, Matsuura M, Morikawa T, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research (JFCR), 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

The activation status of signal transduction pathways involving receptor tyrosine
kinases and its association with EGFR or KRAS mutations have been widely studied 
using cancer cell lines, although it is still uncertain in primary tumors. To
study the activation status of main components of growth factor-induced pathways,
phosphorylated Akt (pAkt), extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (pERK) 
and other downstream proteins were immunohistochemically examined using surgical 
samples of 193 primary lung adenocarcinomas. Also, thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1) expression and mutation status of EGFR and KRAS were examined. Advanced
tumor stages (p<0.001), negative TTF-1 expression (p<0.001) and Akt activation
(p=0.015) were independent and significant poor prognostic markers. Akt
activation related to advanced stage (p=0.021), invasiveness (p=0.004), and not
to mutations. TTF-1 expression associated with never-smoker (p=0.013), pre- or
minimally invasiveness (p<0.001) and EGFR mutations (p=0.017) as well as with
pERK (p=0.039) expression. EGFR mutations did not correlated with pAkt and pERK
expression, which was different from the results based on cultured cells, while
KRAS mutations were solely and significantly linked to ERK activation (p=0.009). 
In lung adenocarcinoma, tumors with TTF-1 expression have distinct
characteristics regarding mutations, signal protein activation and clinical
issues. Moreover, this property was revealed to be important in outcome
estimation at any tumor stage, whereas Akt activation is abnormally affected
according to the tumor stage regardless of their cell origin. The signal proteins
were differently related to mutation status from cultured cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20117855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2010 Mar;18(2):142-9. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181bdf4e7.

Comparison of thyroid transcription factor-1 expression by 2 monoclonal
antibodies in pulmonary and nonpulmonary primary tumors.

Matoso A(1), Singh K, Jacob R, Greaves WO, Tavares R, Noble L, Resnick MB,
Delellis RA, Wang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital and
Brown Medical School, Providence, RI 02903, USA. amatoso@lifespan.org

Comment in
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 Jul;19(4):384.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a transcription factor that plays a
role in the development and physiology of the thyroid and lungs. Expression of
TTF-1 is used as a marker of lung and thyroid clinically. Commercially available 
clones of TTF-1 monoclonal antibodies, 8G7G3/1 and SPT24, have been reported to
have different sensitivities for the detection of neoplasms of different origins.
Although they are used extensively in daily practice, a comprehensive comparative
study of these antibodies in a wide variety of neoplasms is lacking. We examined 
TTF-1 expression in primary tumors of the lung, prostrate, pancreas, stomach,
salivary glands, breast, bladder, colon, and squamous cell carcinoma of the head 
and neck and compared the results obtained with both TTF-1 clones. The SPT24
clone detected more primary lung tumors of all histologic subtypes. Importantly, 
the SPT24 clone detected a significantly higher number of squamous cell
carcinomas and carcinoid tumors of the lung. Among nonpulmonary primary tumors, a
significant number of invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (5.1%) was
TTF-1 positive. In addition, a small proportion of prostate (1.2%), stomach
(0.9%), salivary gland (1.8%), and colon (2.5%) carcinomas were positive with
both clones. Of note, both clones stained the same nonpulmonary tumors with
similar intensity and distribution. Carcinomas of the pancreas, breast, and
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck were negative with both clones. In 
summary, the SPT24 clone detected a higher number of pulmonary non-small cell
tumors of all histologic subtypes whereas both clones stained a similar
proportion of nonpulmonary tumors.

PMCID: PMC2828524
PMID: 19887917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2010 Mar;18(2):137-41. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181bec23b.

Immunohistochemical expression of estrogen receptor in adenocarcinomas of the
lung: the antibody factor.

Gomez-Fernandez C(1), Mejias A, Walker G, Nadji M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami, FL 33136, USA. cgomez3@med.miami.edu

BACKGROUND: Immunohistochemistry for estrogen receptor may be used to distinguish
metastatic breast cancers from adenocarcinomas of other sites, including those of
the lung. The estrogen receptor exists as 2 subtypes, alpha and beta. Estrogen
receptor alpha is the predominant subtype expressed by more than two-thirds of
human breast cancers. Adenocarcinomas of lung origin may also express estrogen
receptor, primarily the beta subtype. Human estrogen receptor alpha is highly
homologous to estrogen receptor beta and consequently, antibodies used to detect 
estrogen receptor alpha in breast carcinomas may detect estrogen receptor beta in
pulmonary adenocarcinomas. We investigated the immunohistochemical expression of 
estrogen receptor in proven primary lung adenocarcinomas using 3 anti-estrogen
receptor alpha antibodies: mouse monoclonal 1D5, 6F11, and rabbit monoclonal SP1.
DESIGN: Ninety-two pulmonary adenocarcinomas (53 women and 39 men) confirmed by
clinical presentation and positive immunohistochemistry for thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1) were included in this study. There were 19 incisional biopsies
and 73 excisional specimens. Immunohistochemistry for estrogen receptor using
antibodies 1D5, 6F11, and SP1 was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
tissue following antigen retrieval. Any nuclear reactivity for estrogen receptor 
was considered a positive result.
RESULT: Focal positive nuclear reaction for estrogen receptor was detected in 7
(7.6%) cases of primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma using antibody 1D5, 13 (14.1%)
using 6F11, and 25 (27.2%) using SP1. The differences in reactivity for estrogen 
receptor in pulmonary adenocarcinomas between SP1 and 1D5, and between SP1 and
6F11 were statistically significant (P<0.001). Positive cases showed only a focal
pattern of staining with each of the 3 antibodies. There was no significant
difference in reactivity for estrogen receptor in pulmonary adenocarcinomas of
men and women. Positive staining was highest in nonmucinous bronchioloalveolar
adenocarcinomas for all of the antibodies, and for SP1, variation by histologic
subtype was significant (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: SP1 has a significantly higher detection rate for the expression of 
estrogen receptor in pulmonary adenocarcinomas when compared with either 1D5 or
6F11. Caution should therefore be exercised in the use of this antibody alone in 
distinguishing a metastatic breast from a primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19875957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Rev Port Pneumol. 2009 Nov-Dec;15(6):1101-19.

Reclassifying bronchial-pulmonary carcinoma: differentiating histological type in
biopsies by immunohistochemistry.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Carvalho L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomia Patológica, Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal.
lcarvalho@huc.min-saude.pt

The current state of molecular knowledge on lung cancer demands a histological
classification which goes beyond small-cell and non-small-cell carcinoma to
provide support for tailored therapy in aiding in understanding of the drugs
currently available. As diagnosis and follow-up in the vast majority of lung
cancer cases is based on biopsies and cytology samples, Immunohistochemical
Bronchial Pulmonary Carcinoma Classification (IBPCC) is necessary to reveal the
raft of characteristics available. This provides morphological support for the
WHO's 1999/2004 classification, in addition to an understanding of
carcinogenesis. The immunohistochemical panel clarifies the main morphology and
cytology characteristics to maintain the leading histological types as squamous
cell carcinoma (high weight molecular cytokeratins/HWMC), adenosquamous carcinoma
(CK7, TTF1, HWMA), neuroendocrine carcinoma (Chrg, Syn, CD56, TTF1, Ki67),
adenocarcinoma (CK7, CK20, TTF1) and bring the polymorphic and pleomorphic
carcinomas under a single banner of pleomorphic carcinoma (Ck7, TTF1, HWMC, VMT, 
Desmin, Actin) which shelters large cell carcinomas and sarcomatoid carcinomas.
Lung cancer chemotherapy will still be based on platinum and gemcitabine for the 
near future and the IBPCC is a simple and efficient tool for streamlining the
registration of lung cancer histological characteristics in biopsies and other
reduced samples to support clinical evidence and trials.

PMID: 19859629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. APMIS. 2009 Oct;117(10):762-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2009.02529.x.

Secondary breast cancer: a 5-year population-based study with review of the
literature.

Klingen TA(1), Klaasen H, Aas H, Chen Y, Akslen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vestfold County Hospital, Halvdan Wilhelmsens Allè
17, Tønsberg, Norway. tor.klingen@siv.no

Secondary tumours in the breast are rare. Based on literature, an incidence of
0.4-2% is reported. In this population-based study, secondary breast tumours from
a 5-year period (2001-2005), not including metastasis from contralateral breast
carcinoma, were reviewed (Vestfold County, Norway). A total of 722 patients with 
breast malignancies were found in this population (89.3% from Vestfold County
Hospital). Ten of these, approximately 1.4%, were metastatic tumours,
representing four cutaneous melanomas, three pulmonary carcinomas and three
malignant lymphomas. The tumours were often solitary, palpable and close to the
skin. Radiologically, the lesions mostly resembled primary carcinomas by
mammography and ultrasound, which differs from other studies. Comparison with a
known primary tumour and use of immunohistochemical profiling is of crucial
importance. Melanoma markers (Melan-A, HMB-45, S-100 protein), lung cancer
markers (Cytokeratins, TTF1, Chromogranin, Synapthophysin) and lymphoid markers
(CD3, CD20) usually help to confirm a secondary breast tumour diagnosis. This
approach is especially indicated in diffusely growing tumours with lack of
glandular structure and high-grade cytological features, and staining for ER and 
GCDFP15 may be helpful. Thus, the diagnosis of a breast metastasis may be
suspected by careful mammography and ultrasound imaging, although some cases have
atypical radiological features, and histological examination might be necessary
to ensure a correct diagnosis and appropriate treatment.

PMID: 19775345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Lung Cancer. 2010 Jul;69(1):40-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.08.018. Epub 2009
Sep 10.

Pathological confirmation of primary lung cancer following breast cancer.

Tennis M(1), Singh B, Hjerpe A, Prochazka M, Czene K, Hall P, Shields PG.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
USA. Meredith.tennis@ucdenver.edu

PURPOSE: Studies have shown that women who survive breast cancer have an
increased risk of a future primary lung cancer, though many are based only on
data recorded in tumor registries and none have conducted pathological
confirmation. Previous studies and future use of large registries may be affected
by misdiagnosis.
METHODS: Pathological analysis was conducted on tumors from 110 women with breast
cancer followed by lung cancer using morphology, Estrogen Receptor-alpha (ER),
and Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 (TTF1). We developed an algorithm to classify 
lung tumors as unlikely lung cancer (score=1) to likely lung cancer (score=5).
RESULTS: Mean time to diagnosis of lung cancer after breast cancer was 13 years. 
76% of breast tumors and 20% of lung tumors were positive for ER and 51% of lung 
tumors were positive for TTF-1. 86% of the lung tumors were probable primaries,
7% were probable metastases from the breast, and 7% were of undetermined status. 
70% of probable metastases had a latency of longer than 10 years.
CONCLUSION: Prior studies identifying the association of breast cancer and breast
cancer treatments with lung cancer are likely to reflect true associations not
confounded by misdiagnosis, as evidenced by the low rate of misclassification
detected in this study. Analysis of the years of diagnosis suggests that latency 
may not be an accurate criterion for assignment of primary status, which could be
significant in a clinical setting. These data may also benefit future
retrospective studies using large registries.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2879479
PMID: 19747750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Endocr Pathol. 2009 Winter;20(4):235-42. doi: 10.1007/s12022-009-9087-x.

Tumor-to-tumor metastases to follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma:
histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular studies of two unusual cases.

Yu J(1), Nikiforova MN, Hodak SP, Yim JH, Cai G, Walls A, Nikiforov YE, Seethala 
RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15213, USA.

Tumor-to-tumor metastasis in thyroid neoplasms is exceedingly uncommon. Two
unusual cases of breast carcinoma and renal cell carcinoma metastatic to
follicular variant papillary carcinoma are reported. On histologic sections, the 
donor tumor cells infiltrated the substance of the recipient tumor and the
angiolymphatic channels, but the bulk of metastatic tumor was confined within the
thyroid carcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains as well as molecular studies
confirmed the origin of both donor tumors, as well as the diagnosis of follicular
variant of papillary carcinoma in the recipient tumors. Distinguishing between
two such tumor populations may be difficult when the donor tumor cells
morphologically resemble primary neoplasms of the recipient organ. A history of
previous malignancy and ancillary studies can be helpful in making this
distinction and rendering the correct diagnosis. A brief review of literature and
discussion of tumor-to-tumor metastasis in thyroid neoplasms is also presented.

PMID: 19707890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Adv Anat Pathol. 2009 Sep;16(5):283-9. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3181b50640.

Poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a cytologic-histologic review.

Bongiovanni M(1), Sadow PM, Faquin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologie Clinique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland.

The term poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC) was first proposed in the
1980s, but it was not definitively recognized as a distinct pathologic entity
until the most recent classification of endocrine tumors by the World Health
Organization in 2004. More recently, as a result of discussions in Turin, Italy, 
in 2006, diagnostic criteria were made more specific by a consensus of expert
thyroid pathologists. The histologic and cytologic aspects are detailed with
particular attention to key features helpful in the diagnosis of PDTC, both in
surgical pathology and in cytology-based studies. Histologically, insular, solid,
and/or trabecular architecture, along with at least one of the following:
convoluted nuclei, mitotic activity (>3/10 HPF), or tumor necrosis, are required 
for a diagnosis of PDTC. Cytologically, the combination of insular, solid, or
trabecular cytoarchitectural pattern, single cells, high nuclear to cytoplasmic
(N/C) ratio, and severe crowding are highly suggestive of PDTC. Most PDTCs are
immunohistochemically positive for thyroglobulin and thyroid transcription factor
1 (TTF-1), and a subset is also positive for p53. On the molecular level, ras
mutations are the most common finding. PDTCs are managed aggressively by total
thyroidectomy, I, and in some cases, external beam radiotherapy.

PMID: 19700938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Dec;17(6):505-11. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181a8e809.

GCDFP-15 positive and TTF-1 negative primary lung neoplasms: a tissue microarray 
study of 381 primary lung tumors.

Wang LJ(1), Greaves WO, Sabo E, Noble L, Tavares R, Ng T, DeLellis RA, Resnick
MB.

Author information: 
(1)Rhode Island Hospital, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA. lwang@lifespan.org

Gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP-15) is currently used as an
immunohistochemical marker of breast cancer, whereas thyroid transcription factor
(TTF-1) is commonly used as a marker of primary lung neoplasms. Traditionally, a 
GCDFP-15+/TTF-1- immunohistochemical profile in lung tumors has been considered
as highly suggestive of metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Here, we investigated
the expression of GCDFP-15 and TTF-1 on a tissue microarray consisting of 381
primary lung carcinomas. GCDFP-15 was expressed in normal bronchial submucosal
glands and bronchial epithelium, which were negative for TTF-1. Seventeen tumors 
(4.5%) were positive for GCDFP-15, including 11 of 186 (5.9%) adenocarcinomas, 1 
of 97 (1%) squamous cell carcinomas, 1 of 23 (4.3%) carcinoid tumors, 2 of 47
(4.3%) large cell carcinomas, and 2 of 17 (11.8%) adenosquamous carcinomas. Of
the 11 GCDFP-15 positive adenocarcinomas, 10 (91%) were TTF-1 negative. On whole 
sections, about half (55%) of GCDFP-15 positive cases were negative and one-third
(33%) revealed focal TTF1 staining in areas distinct from the tumor regions that 
expressed GCDFP-15. All GCDFP-15 positive tumors were negative for mammaglobin,
estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. Our study confirms that a small
subset of primary lung adenocarcinomas exhibits a GCDFP-15 positive phenotype.
Expression of TTF-1 in this group is not uniform and frequently negative in small
specimens. Thus a GCDFP-15 positive/TTF-1 negative phenotype may not be
indicative of metastatic breast carcinoma in every case. It is critical that
pathologists be aware of this phenotypic subset of lung adenocarcinomas,
especially when faced with small tissue or cytologic samples.

PMID: 19620839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Lung Cancer. 2010 May;68(2):185-91. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.05.021. Epub 2009
Jul 5.

Non-mucinous and mucinous subtypes of adenocarcinoma with bronchioloalveolar
carcinoma features differ by biomarker expression and in the response to
gefitinib.

Wislez M(1), Antoine M, Baudrin L, Poulot V, Neuville A, Pradere M, Longchampt E,
Isaac-Sibille S, Lebitasy MP, Cadranel J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pneumologie et de Réanimation, AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.
marie.wislez@tnn.aphp.fr

There is no optimal established therapy for treating advanced or recurrent
adenocarcinoma with bronchioloalveolar carcinoma features (ADC-BAC), and it
remains unclear whether chemotherapy achieves therapeutic results comparable to
those seen in the more common non-small lung carcinoma subtypes. In order to
improve the decisions made during the treatment of advanced ADC-BAC, we attempted
to better characterize the mucinous and non-mucinous ADC-BAC subtypes. Fifty
pathological samples were obtained from 62 patients included in a multicenter
prospective phase II trial (IFCT0401) conducted to evaluate gefitinib as a
first-line therapy for non-resectable ADC-BAC. These samples were centrally
reviewed and re-classified as non-mucinous (n=25) or mucinous (n=25) subtypes. We
demonstrated that demographic data, clinical characteristics and stage at
presentation (extrathoracic versus lung metastasis, as well as TNM staging) did
not distinguish between the two subtypes. In contrast, three biological markers
(PAS staining, TTF-1 expression and EGFR genomic gain combined with mutation
analysis) enabled us to independently segregate all but 2 of the 50 patients into
the mucinous and non-mucinous ADC-BAC subtypes. Finally, only mucinous tumors
appeared to be resistant to epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs). Additional prospective studies are required to better
approach therapeutic strategy in mucinous tumors, which are a distinct entity
from non-mucinous tumors.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19581016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Jun;135(6):606-10. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2009.51.

Cutaneous colocalized invasive poorly differentiated carcinoma and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma of the head and neck region: a
case report and review of the literature.

Peng Y(1), Wang HY, Molberg KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9073, USA.
Yan.Peng@utsouthwestern.edu

PMID: 19528411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Aug 15;180(4):326-38. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200812-1827OC. Epub 2009 Jun 4.

Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif is essential for normal
alveolarization in mice.

Mitani A(1), Nagase T, Fukuchi K, Aburatani H, Makita R, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

RATIONALE: Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) is assumed to
act as a coactivator of several transcription factors including smad2/3. In the
lung, surfactant protein C (Sftpc) is known to be a downstream target of thyroid 
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)-TAZ transcriptional coactivation.
OBJECTIVES: The lung phenotype of Taz-deficient mice was explored.
METHODS: Taz-deficient mice were analyzed pathologically and physiologically.
Next, we performed microarray analysis to determine the genes closely related to 
abnormal lung development. Finally, Taz-heterozygous mice were injected with
bleomycin.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Taz-deficient homozygotes showed abnormal
alveolarization during lung development, which caused in adult mice airspace
enlargement mimicking emphysema. There was no significant difference in the
expression of Sftpc between wild-type and Taz-deficient lungs. Instead,
microarray analysis identified some candidate downstream genes related to the
pathogenesis, including the connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf) gene, which is
required for normal lung development. In vitro studies showed that TAZ
up-regulated Ctgf expression not only by reinforcing transforming growth
factor-beta/smad signals, but also by interfering in the more proximal Ctgf
promoter region (from bp -123 to -76), defined as the TAZ response element.
Furthermore, Taz-heterozygous mice were resistant to bleomycin-induced lung
fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate the importance of TAZ in lung alveolarization
and its involvement in the pathogenesis of lung fibrosis.

PMID: 19498055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Pathol Res Pract. 2010 Apr 15;206(4):263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.05.003. Epub 
2009 Jun 3.

Thyroid carcinoma with papillary and squamous features: report of a case with
histogenetic considerations.

Rausch T(1), Benhattar J, Sutter M, Andrejevic-Blant S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology CHUV and University of Lausanne, CH-1011 Lausanne,
Switzerland.

We present a case of an 82-year-old female with a painless left latero-cervical
swelling, which increased in size over the course of 6 months, compressing
adjacent organs. The histopathological examination, following dissection of the
left thyroid lobe and ipsilateral cervical lymph nodes, yielded two intermingled 
morphologically distinct histotypes that included conventional papillary thyroid 
carcinoma (PTC) and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) with
cystic features. The clinical presentation, the immunophenotype, and the
genotype, especially of the malignant squamous component with partial expression 
of TTF1, marked expression of p63 and mutation of BRAF, were consistent with the 
diagnosis of a papillary thyroid carcinoma with squamous component. The
possibility of a squamous cell carcinoma of unknown origin metastasizing to a
primary papillary thyroid carcinoma cannot be completely ruled out. This
particular presentation of thyroid carcinoma carries a poor prognosis in 20% of
cases, with high recurrence rates and distant metastasis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19493635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2010 Feb;281(2):317-23. doi: 10.1007/s00404-009-1115-z. Epub
2009 May 15.

Five commonly used markers (p53, TTF1, CK7, CK20, and CK34betaE12) are of no use 
in distinguishing between primary endocervical and endometrial adenocarcinomas in
a tissue microarray extension study.

Han CP(1), Kok LF, Lee MY, Wu TS, Ruan A, Cheng YW, Wang PH, Koo CL, Tyan YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chung-Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. hanhaly@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The choice of appropriate therapeutic plans for primary endocervical 
adenocarcinomas (ECA) and endometrial adenocarcinomas (EMA) depends on the
tumor's site of origin. Some panels of antibodies help to distinguish primary ECA
from EMA. However, unexpected expressions of those markers often exist, which
causes this diagnostic dilemma to be still unresolved. In this study, we
investigate five commonly used monoclonal antibodies (p53, TTF1, CK7, CK20, and
CK34betaE12) to evaluate their potential use in distinguishing between these two 
gynecologic malignancies.
METHODS: A tissue microarray was constructed using paraffin-embedded,
formalin-fixed tissues from 35 hysterectomy specimens, including 14 ECA and 21
EMA. Utilizing the avidin-biotin (ABC) technique, tissue array sections were
immunostained with the five aforementioned commercially available antibodies.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) expressions of p53, TTF1, CK7, CK20, and
CK34betaE12 were all nonsignificant (P>0.05) in frequency differences between the
immunostaining results (positive vs. negative) in tumors from both the two
primary adenocarcinomas (ECA vs. EMA).
CONCLUSION: It is still uncertain which markers or panels would be the most
appropriate for making diagnoses; hence, exploration of other useful markers,
which make a definitive distinction between ECA and EMA merits further studies.
This study, however, uncovered that the five commonly used monoclonal antibodies 
(p53, TTF1, CK7, CK20, and CK34betaE12) are of no beneficial value in
distinguishing between primary ECA and EMA.

PMID: 19444461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):1032-43. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.60. Epub 2009 May
8.

A novel five-antibody immunohistochemical test for subclassification of lung
carcinoma.

Ring BZ(1), Seitz RS, Beck RA, Shasteen WJ, Soltermann A, Arbogast S, Robert F,
Schreeder MT, Ross DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, Applied Genomics Inc., Burlingame, CA 
94010, USA. bzring@applied-genomics.com

Malignant epithelial lung carcinoma can be subclassified by histology into
several tumor types, including adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. The
need for a uniform method of classifying lung carcinomas is growing as clinical
trials reveal treatment and side effect differences associated with histological 
subtypes. Diagnosis is primarily performed by morphological assessment. However, 
the increased use of needle biopsy has diminished the amount of tissue available 
for interpretation. These changes in how lung carcinomas are diagnosed and
treated suggest that the development of improved molecular-based classification
tools could improve patient management. We used a 551-patient surgical specimen
lung carcinoma retrospective cohort from a regional hospital to assess the
association of a large number of proteins with histological type by
immunohistochemistry. Five of these antibodies, targeting the proteins TRIM29,
CEACAM5, SLC7A5, MUC1, and CK5/6, were combined into one test using a weighted
algorithm trained to discriminate adenocarcinoma from squamous cell carcinoma.
Antibody-based classification on 600 muM tissue array cores with the
five-antibody test was compared to standard histological evaluation on surgical
specimens in three independent lung carcinoma cohorts (combined population of
1111 patients). In addition, the five-antibody test was tested against the
two-marker panel thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and TP63. Both the
five-antibody test and TTF-1/TP63 panel had similarly low misclassification rates
on the validation cohorts compared to morphological-based diagnosis (4.1 vs
3.5%). However the percentage of patients remaining unclassifiable by TTF-1/TP63 
(22%, 95% CI: 20-25%) was twice that of the five-antibody test (11%, 95% CI:
8-13%). The results of this study suggest the five-antibody test may have an
immediate function in the clinic for helping pathologists distinguish lung
carcinoma histological types. The results also suggest that if validated in
prospectively defined clinical trials this classifier might identify candidates
for targeted therapy that are overlooked with current diagnostic approaches.

PMID: 19430419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Reprod Toxicol. 2009 Apr;27(2):103-10. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2009.01.014. Epub 
2009 Feb 11.

Teratogen responsive signaling pathways in organogenesis stage mouse limbs.

Huang C(1), Hales BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Teratogen exposure activates damage response pathways during organogenesis that
determine the fate of the embryo. Cyclophosphamide, an alkylating agent, induces 
growth reduction defects in organogenesis stage mouse limbs. Here we identify
components of the signaling network triggered by in vitro exposure of CD-1 murine
limbs to 4-hydroperoxycyclophosphamide (4-OOHCPA), a preactivated analog of
cyclophosphamide. The predominant response was downregulation of gene expression;
many of the affected genes were transcription factors, transcription regulators, 
or oncogenes. Pathway analysis of the genes regulated by 4-OOHCPA exposure
revealed a novel damage response pathway in limbs comprised of basic
transcription factors, Hif1a, Ndn, Hes1 and Myog, transcription activators and
repressors, Egr1 and E2f1, intracellular transducers, effectors and modulators,
Bmpr1b and Pea15, and oncogenes and tumor suppressors, Hras1, Abl1, Smad1, and
Ttf1. Thus, teratogen exposure triggers both developmentally specific signaling
pathways and a general damage response. We hypothesize that hypoxia signaling
plays a central role in integrating these responses.

PMID: 19429390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Nig Q J Hosp Med. 2008 Oct-Dec;18(4):198-201.

Immunophenotypical categorization of omental and liver metastatic tumours in
Lagos, Nigeria.

Abdulkareem FB(1), Rotimi O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, P.M. B.
12003, Surulere, Lagos, Nigeria. biade64@yahoo.co.uk

INTRODUCTION: Immunohistochemistry(IHC), used routinely in developed countries to
identify primary sites of metastatic tumours has scarcely available I Nigeria
where majority of patients present with advanced metastases. This study was aimed
at evaluating the use of immunohistochemistry in differential diagnosis of
omental and liver metastases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Materials consisted of the formalin fixed paraffin
embedded blocks of omental and liver metastatic tumours diagnosed in Lagos
between January 1995 and February 2007. Ethical clearance was obtained and
sections were stained with CK 7, CK20, CA-125, ER, PSA, and TTF1 antibodies at
the research Laboratory of The Leeds General Infirmary, United Kingdom following 
standard procedure.
RESULTS: A total of 83 cases of omental (67) and liver (16) metastatic tumours
were identified representing 11.6% of all gastrointestinal (GIT) malignancies.
Immunostaining was carried out on 44 cases (53%) consisting of 32 (75%) of
omental and 11 (25%) of liver tumours; M: F of 1.4:1 and mean age of 43 years.
They were categorized as arising from the upper GIT (CK7 +/CK20-) in 17(38.6%),
lower GIT (CK20+/CK7-) in 16 (36.3%), gynaecological (CA-125+/ER+) in 4 (9.1%).
One case each was categorized as arising from the prostate (PSA+) and breast
(ER+) and lung (TTF-1+) while one with histological appearance of neuro-endocrine
was focally positive for both CK7 and CK20. Three liver metastases negative for
all the 6 antibodies could not be classified.
CONCLUSION: This study has further corroborated previous studies that
adenocarcinoma is the most common metastatic omental and liver metastases and the
common primary sites are within the gastrointestinal tract. Since many patients
in Africa present late with advanced metastases, immunohistochemistry is will be 
useful in identifying primary sites before initiating specific treatment.

PMID: 19391319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Pathologe. 2009 Sep;30(5):384-92. doi: 10.1007/s00292-009-1141-4.

[EGFR mutation analysis in non-small-cell lung cancer : Experience from routine
diagnostics].

[Article in German]

Tapia C(1), Savic S, Bihl M, Rufle A, Zlobec I, Terracciano L, Bubendorf L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsspital Basel, Schweiz.

BACKGROUND: Some patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) respond well to
therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Somatic mutation of the epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene is an important predictive marker for TKI
response.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed EGFR mutation analysis in 307 NSCLC (exon
18-21). The data were analyzed for associations with clinical-pathological
parameters.
RESULTS: Relevant EGFR mutations were found in 25/307 NSCLC (8.1%; 178 biopsies
and 129 cytologies). Most mutations were found in exon 19 (50%) followed by the
L858R point mutation in exon 21 (12.5%). EGFR mutations were significantly more
common in women than in men (16.8% vs. 2.7%; p<0.001) and in adenocarcinoma than 
in other carcinoma subtypes (11.4% vs. 3.8%; p=0.017). EGFR mutation was
associated with TTF-1 positivity (p<0.041). Almost all (96%) mutated NSCLC were
TTF-1 positive.
CONCLUSION: In Central Europe, the prevalence of relevant EGFR mutations in NSCLC
is <10% of patients with NSCLC. EGFR mutations are more common in women and TTF-1
positive adenocarcinomas. Mutation analysis can be performed both from biopsies
and cytologies.

PMID: 19357847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jun 15;18(12):2266-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp162. Epub 2009 Mar
31.

Five new TTF1/NKX2.1 mutations in brain-lung-thyroid syndrome: rescue by PAX8
synergism in one case.

Carré A(1), Szinnai G, Castanet M, Sura-Trueba S, Tron E, Broutin-L'Hermite I,
Barat P, Goizet C, Lacombe D, Moutard ML, Raybaud C, Raynaud-Ravni C, Romana S,
Ythier H, Léger J, Polak M.

Author information: 
(1)University Paris-Descartes, INSERM U845, 75270 Paris, France.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (NKX2-1/TITF1) mutations cause brain-lung-thyroid 
syndrome, characterized by congenital hypothyroidism (CH), infant respiratory
distress syndrome (IRDS) and benign hereditary chorea (BHC). The objectives of
the present study were (i) detection of NKX2-1 mutations in patients with CH
associated with pneumopathy and/or BHC, (ii) functional analysis of new mutations
in vitro and (iii) description of the phenotypic spectrum of brain-lung-thyroid
syndrome. We identified three new heterozygous missense mutations (L176V, P202L, 
Q210P), a splice site mutation (376-2A-->G), and one deletion of NKX2-1 at 14q13.
Functional analysis of the three missense mutations revealed loss of
transactivation capacity on the human thyroglobulin enhancer/promoter.
Interestingly, we showed that deficient transcriptional activity of NKX2-1-P202L 
was completely rescued by cotransfected PAX8-WT, whereas the synergistic effect
was abolished by L176V and Q210P. The clinical spectrum of 6 own and 40 published
patients with NKX2-1 mutations ranged from the complete triad of
brain-lung-thyroid syndrome (50%), brain and thyroid disease (30%), to isolated
BHC (13%). Thyroid morphology was normal (55%) and compensated hypothyroidism
occurred in 61%. Lung disease occurred in 54% of patients (IRDS at term 76%;
recurrent pulmonary infections 24%). On follow-up, 20% developed severe chronic
interstitial lung disease, and 16% died. In conclusion, we describe five new
NKX2.1 mutations with, for the first time, complete rescue by PAX8 of the
deficient transactivating capacity in one case. Additionally, our review shows
that the majority of affected patients display neurological and/or thyroidal
problems and that, although less frequent, lung disease is responsible for a
considerable mortality.

PMID: 19336474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Thorac Oncol. 2009 Apr;4(4):540-2. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e31819c8556.

Metastases to breast from primary lung cancer.

Babu KS(1), Roberts F, Bryden F, McCafferty A, Downer P, Hansell DT, Jones R,
Milroy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Stobhill Hospital, UK.
sureshbabu97@gmail.com

Metastatic disease to the breast from extra mammary sites is uncommon and has an 
incidence of 0.5 to 3%. It is important to make an accurate diagnosis as this has
an impact on the therapeutic planning and management. Clinically, it can be
difficult to differentiate between primary breast cancer and a metastatic
disease. An incorrect diagnosis can lead to unnecessary surgical interventions.
Immunohistochemistry has a significant role in identifying the primary origin of 
tumor and has to be considered in the presence of unusual cytologic patterns. We 
report three cases of metastatic disease to breast from primary lung tumors. The 
cases demonstrate the difficulties encountered in the diagnosis and the impact on
the management of these patients.

PMID: 19333072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Dermatopathol. 2009 Apr;31(2):166-9. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e31818eba4c.

Cutaneous metastasis from large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the urinary
bladder expressing CK20 and TTF-1.

Lee WJ(1), Kim CH, Chang SE, Lee MW, Choi JH, Moon KC, Koh JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) of the urinary bladder is very rare. 
Immunohistochemical and biochemical examinations have shown that neuroendocrine
carcinomas (NECs) have features of neuroendocrine and epithelial differentiation.
We describe the first case of cutaneous metastasis from LCNEC of the urinary
bladder. The patient had been treated with partial cystectomy and chemotherapy
for LCNEC of the urinary bladder, but a year later, he visited our clinic with a 
reddish mass on his scalp that was diagnosed as a cutaneous metastasis from
LCNEC. The tumor cells were positive for the neuroendocrine markers, cytokeratin 
(CK) 20 and thyroid transcription factor-1. Most NECs, except for Merkel cell
carcinomas, do not express CK20, whereas most urothelial carcinomas do express
CK20. These results suggest that a histogenetic link may exist between NEC of the
urinary bladder and urothelial carcinoma.

PMID: 19318803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;69(7):2783-91. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3490. Epub
2009 Mar 17.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 inhibits transforming growth factor-beta-mediated 
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Saito RA(1), Watabe T, Horiguchi K, Kohyama T, Saitoh M, Nagase T, Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is expressed in lung cancer, but its
functional roles remain unexplored. TTF-1 gene amplification has been discovered 
in a part of lung adenocarcinomas, and its action as a lineage-specific oncogene 
is highlighted. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial event for
cancer cells to acquire invasive and metastatic phenotypes and can be elicited by
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition 
(MET) is the inverse process of EMT; however, signals that induce MET are largely
unknown. Here, we report a novel functional aspect of TTF-1 that inhibits
TGF-beta-mediated EMT and restores epithelial phenotype in lung adenocarcinoma
cells. This effect was accompanied by down-regulation of TGF-beta target genes,
including presumed regulators of EMT, such as Snail and Slug. Moreover, silencing
of TTF-1 enhanced TGF-beta-mediated EMT. Thus, TTF-1 can exert a
tumor-suppressive effect with abrogation of cellular response to TGF-beta and
attenuated invasive capacity. We further revealed that TTF-1 down-regulates
TGF-beta2 production in A549 cells and that TGF-beta conversely decreases
endogenous TTF-1 expression, suggesting that enhancement of autocrine TGF-beta
signaling accelerates the decrease of TTF-1 expression and vice versa. These
findings delineate potential links between TTF-1 and TGF-beta signaling in lung
cancer progression through regulation of EMT and MET and suggest that modulation 
of TTF-1 expression can be a novel therapeutic strategy for treatment of lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19293183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mod Pathol. 2009 May;22(5):709-17. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.30. Epub 2009 Mar 
13.

Desmocollin-3: a new marker of squamous differentiation in undifferentiated
large-cell carcinoma of the lung.

Monica V(1), Ceppi P, Righi L, Tavaglione V, Volante M, Pelosi G, Scagliotti GV, 
Papotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, San Luigi Hospital, University
of Turin, Torino, Italy.

Lung cancer classification in small-cell and non-small-cell types was recently
challenged by data on the differential efficacy of new cytotoxic agents in
specific histotypes. An accurate histotype definition has therefore gained
interest in both preoperative and surgical materials, but is a hard task
especially in undifferentiated large-cell tumors lacking morphological signs of
squamous or glandular differentiation. The responsiveness of these latter
subtypes to new drugs apparently more selective for adenocarcinomas or squamous
carcinomas is not fully understood, also due to the heterogeneity of diagnostic
criteria for this tumor entity. Current immunohistochemical markers are not fully
specific and new molecules are to be explored. On the basis of gene expression
profiling data, reporting a remarkable differential expression of desmocollin-3
(a protein localized in desmosomal junctions of stratified epithelial) between
adeno- and squamous cancers, we immunostained 62 cases of resected
undifferentiated large-cell lung carcinomas for desmocollin-3 (and for TTF-1, p63
and mucin stain), to test its ability to identify a (residual) squamous
phenotype, if present. Desmocollin-3 was expressed in almost half of the
undifferentiated large-cell cancers and was mutually exclusive with TTF-1
(positive in 39%; the remaining 18 % of cases was double negative). Special
large-cell carcinoma variants expressed desmocollin-3 in 6 of 6 basaloid, 7 of 12
clear-cell types, again mutually exclusive with TTF-1 expression. None of seven
sarcomatoid carcinomas reacted for either marker. In 31 cytological samples
diagnosed as 'non-small-cell lung carcinoma', desmocollin-3 was again mutually
exclusive with TTF-1 and stained all squamous carcinomas, 1 of 19 adenocarcinoma 
only, and 50% of large-cell carcinoma (all histologically confirmed). This
combined morphophenotypic approach may represent a valid adjunct (for both
surgical and cytological samples) in the selection of patients with lung cancer
to medical treatments tailored according to different efficacy in different lung 
carcinomas of the squamous, adeno- and large-cell types.

PMID: 19287461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5312-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900827106. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

Characterizing the developmental pathways TTF-1, NKX2-8, and PAX9 in lung cancer.

Hsu DS(1), Acharya CR, Balakumaran BS, Riedel RF, Kim MK, Stevenson M, Tuchman S,
Mukherjee S, Barry W, Dressman HK, Nevins JR, Powers S, Mu D, Potti A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Department of Medicine, and
Institute for Statistics and Decision Sciences, Duke University, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 30;108(35):14705.

We investigated the clinical implications of lung developmental transcription
factors (TTF-1, NKX2-8, and PAX9) that we recently discovered as cooperating
oncogenes activated by way of gene amplification at chromosome 14q13 in lung
cancer. Using stable transfectants of human bronchial epithelial cells, RNA
expression profiles (signatures) representing activation of the biological
pathways defined by each of the 3 genes were determined and used to risk stratify
a non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) clinical data set consisting of 91 early
stage tumors. Coactivation of the TTF-1 and NKX2-8 pathways identified a cluster 
of patients with poor survival, representing approximately 20% of patients with
early stage NSCLC, whereas activation of individual pathways did not reveal
significant prognostic power. Importantly, the poor prognosis associated with
coactivation of TTF-1 and NKX2-8 was validated in 2 other independent clinical
data sets. Furthermore, lung cancer cell lines showing coactivation of the TTF-1 
and NKX2-8 pathways were shown to exhibit resistance to cisplatin, the standard
of care for the treatment of NSCLC. This suggests that the cohort of patients
with coactivation of TTF-1 and NKX2-8 pathways appears to be resistant to
standard cisplatin therapy, suggesting the need for alternative therapies in this
cohort of high-risk patients.

PMCID: PMC2664027
PMID: 19279207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):503-13. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21867.

FRS2alpha is required for the separation, migration, and survival of
pharyngeal-endoderm derived organs including thyroid, ultimobranchial body,
parathyroid, and thymus.

Kameda Y(1), Ito M, Nishimaki T, Gotoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The docking protein FRS2alpha plays an important role in fibroblast growth factor
(FGF)-induced intracellular signal transduction by linking FGF receptors (FGFRs) 
to a variety of intracellular signaling pathways. In FRS2alpha(2F/2F) mutant mice
at embryonic day (E)18.5, in which the Shp2-binding sites of FRS2alpha were
disrupted, the thyroid glands were aplastic or hypoplastic. C cells were absent
or present in low numbers and rarely formed a compact mass of cells. Parathyroid 
glands were mostly connected to thymus tissues. At E10.5, the formations of
pharyngeal pouches and thyroid primordium were normally initiated in the mutant
mice. At E11.5 to E12.5, the thyroid primordium of wild-type embryos was located 
close to the aortic sac, and the epithelial buds of pharyngeal-derived organs,
including the parathyroid gland, thymus and ultimobranchial body, were separated 
from the epithelium and began to migrate to their final destinations. In the
FRS2alpha(2F/2F) mutants, however, the thyroid primordium became hypoplastic and 
the pharyngeal-derived organ primordia remained affiliated with the pharyngeal
epithelium. At these stages, organ-specific differentiation markers (i.e.,
Nkx2-1/TTF1 for the thyroid lobe and ultimobranchial body; Pax8 for the thyroid
lobe; parathormone (PTH), chromogranin A, P75(NTR), and S100 protein for the
parathyroid gland; and p63 for the thymus) were normally expressed in the mutant 
tissues. Thus, the separation, migration, and survival of the pharyngeal organs
were impaired in the FRS2alpha(2F/2F) mutants.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19235715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mod Pathol. 2009 Apr;22(4):508-15. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.2. Epub 2009 Feb
20.

EML4-ALK lung cancers are characterized by rare other mutations, a TTF-1 cell
lineage, an acinar histology, and young onset.

Inamura K(1), Takeuchi K, Togashi Y, Hatano S, Ninomiya H, Motoi N, Mun MY, Sakao
Y, Okumura S, Nakagawa K, Soda M, Choi YL, Mano H, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

A subset of lung cancers harbors a small inversion within chromosome 2p, giving
rise to a transforming fusion gene, EML4-ALK (echinoderm microtubule-associated
protein-like 4 gene and the anaplastic lymphoma kinase gene), which encodes an
activated tyrosine kinase. We have earlier examined the presence of EML4-ALK by
multiplex reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in 363 specimens of
lung cancer, identifying 11 adenocarcinoma cases featuring the fusion gene. In
this study, we clinicopathologically examined the characteristics of the
EML4-ALK-positive cases, including the mutation status of EGFR, KRAS, and TP53,
and whether they were of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) cell lineage or
not. Of 11 patients, 4 (36%) with EML4-ALK-positive lung adenocarcinomas who were
below 50 years of age were affected by these diseases, as compared with 12 of 242
patients (5.0%) with EML4-ALK-negative lung adenocarcinomas (P=0.00038).
EML4-ALK-positive lung adenocarcinomas were characterized by less-differentiated 
grade (P=0.0082) and acinar-predominant structure (P<0.0001) in histology.
Furthermore, the presence of EML4-ALK appears to be mutually exclusive for EGFR
and KRAS mutations (P=0.00018), whereas coexisting with TP53 mutations at a low
frequency (1/11=9.1%), and correlating with non- or light smoking (P=0.040), in
line with the TTF-1 immunoreactivity. Thus, EML4-ALK-positive tumors may form a
distinct entity among lung adenocarcinomas, characterized by young onset, acinar 
histology, no or rare mutations in EGFR, KRAS, and TP53, and a TTF-1 cell
lineage, all in agreement with the prevalence in non- or light smokers.

PMID: 19234440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Diagn Cytopathol. 2009 May;37(5):381-7. doi: 10.1002/dc.21027.

Cytology of metastatic cervical squamous cell carcinoma in pleural fluid: report 
of a case confirmed by human papillomavirus typing.

Gamez RG(1), Jessurun J, Berger MJ, Pambuccian SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Cervical squamous cell carcinomas are rarely the cause of malignant effusions.
Their identification can be relatively easy when keratinizing atypical squamous
cells are present, but may be very difficult when only nonkeratinizing malignant 
cells are present. We present the case of a 47-year-old woman who presented with 
a large left pleural effusion after having recently completed chemoradiation
therapy for stage IIB cervical squamous cell carcinoma. Cytologic examination of 
the fluid showed a uniform population of single atypical cells with finely
vacuolated cytoplasm, ectoendoplasmic demarcation, cell-in-cell arrangements, and
short rows of cells with intervening "windows," all features reminiscent of
mesothelial cells. No keratinization or three-dimensional cell clusters were
identified. A panel of immunohistochemical stains was performed on the cell block
material, and the atypical cells were positive for cytokeratin 5/6, p63, and p16 
but not for cytokeratin 7, calretinin, WT1, or Ber-EP4 or TTF1. These findings
were consistent with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. HPV DNA determination
and typing by PCR confirmed the presence of HPV16 in an aliquot of pleural fluid.
This is to our knowledge the first reported case of pleural fluid involved by
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma where HPV DNA testing was used to confirm the 
origin of the metastasis. Despite its rarity, metastatic nonkeratinizing squamous
cell carcinoma should be considered when a single cell population of large
atypical cells is found in effusions. Immunoperoxidase stains and HPV testing can
be performed to establish the diagnosis and confirm the origin from a cervical
primary.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19217045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nat Genet. 2009 Apr;41(4):460-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.339. Epub 2009 Feb 6.

Common variants on 9q22.33 and 14q13.3 predispose to thyroid cancer in European
populations.

Gudmundsson J(1), Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF, Jonasson JG, Sigurdsson A,
Bergthorsson JT, He H, Blondal T, Geller F, Jakobsdottir M, Magnusdottir DN,
Matthiasdottir S, Stacey SN, Skarphedinsson OB, Helgadottir H, Li W, Nagy R,
Aguillo E, Faure E, Prats E, Saez B, Martinez M, Eyjolfsson GI, Bjornsdottir US, 
Holm H, Kristjansson K, Frigge ML, Kristvinsson H, Gulcher JR, Jonsson T, Rafnar 
T, Hjartarsson H, Mayordomo JI, de la Chapelle A, Hrafnkelsson J,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Sturlugata 8, Reykjavik, Iceland.
julius.gudmundsson@decode.is

In order to search for sequence variants conferring risk of thyroid cancer we
conducted a genome-wide association study in 192 and 37,196 Icelandic cases and
controls, respectively, followed by a replication study in individuals of
European descent. Here we show that two common variants, located on 9q22.33 and
14q13.3, are associated with the disease. Overall, the strongest association
signals were observed for rs965513 on 9q22.33 (OR = 1.75; P = 1.7 x 10(-27)) and 
rs944289 on 14q13.3 (OR = 1.37; P = 2.0 x 10(-9)). The gene nearest to the
9q22.33 locus is FOXE1 (TTF2) and NKX2-1 (TTF1) is among the genes located at the
14q13.3 locus. Both variants contribute to an increased risk of both papillary
and follicular thyroid cancer. Approximately 3.7% of individuals are homozygous
for both variants, and their estimated risk of thyroid cancer is 5.7-fold greater
than that of noncarriers. In a study on a large sample set from the general
population, both risk alleles are associated with low concentrations of thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH), and the 9q22.33 allele is associated with low
concentration of thyroxin (T(4)) and high concentration of triiodothyronine
(T(3)).

PMCID: PMC3664837
PMID: 19198613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2008;68(5):369-74. doi: 10.1080/00365510701767862.

Circulating serum trefoil factors increase dramatically during pregnancy.

Samson MH(1), Vestergaard EM, Milman N, Poulsen SS, Nexo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark. mhsam@as.aaa.dk

OBJECTIVE: Trefoil factors (TFF1-3) are 7-12 kDa peptides secreted by mucosal
surfaces, with changing levels of expression reflected in serum concentrations.
The genes for the peptides are located on chromosome 21, the chromosome
duplicated in trisomy 21. We studied the levels of circulating TFFs in pregnant
women carrying trisomy 21 foetuses and in women with normal pregnancies,
throughout pregnancy and postpartum.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Employing ELISA methods, serum collected at gestational
weeks (GW) 18, 32, 39 and 8 weeks postpartum from women carrying normal foetuses 
(n=141) was analysed for TFFs. In addition, serum collected at GW 6-14 (median = 
10) from women carrying trisomy 21 foetuses (n=48) or healthy foetuses (n=46) was
analysed.
RESULTS: Peaking at 39 GW, concentrations of TFF2 and TFF3 were 3.5 and 47 times 
higher, respectively, than postpartum. Postpartum levels were comparable to
concentrations previously measured in nonpregnant women. TFF1 concentrations rose
throughout pregnancy and postpartum, being 1.5 times higher postpartum compared
to 18 GW. No differences in the levels of TFFs were observed between women
carrying trisomy 21 and those with healthy foetuses. To our knowledge,
circulating TFF3 has never been reported to reach the levels observed here. Also,
the pattern of increase is unusual, as previous reports have shown parallel
increases in TFF1 and TFF3 with no alterations in TFF2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that circulating TFFs are not candidate
markers of trisomy 21 in first-trimester pregnancies, but raise intriguing
questions concerning the origin of TFFs produced during pregnancy and their
physiological function.

PMID: 19172695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Diagn Cytopathol. 2009 Mar;37(3):178-83. doi: 10.1002/dc.20975.

Value of P63 and CK5/6 in distinguishing squamous cell carcinoma from
adenocarcinoma in lung fine-needle aspiration specimens.

Khayyata S(1), Yun S, Pasha T, Jian B, McGrath C, Yu G, Gupta P, Baloch Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The current FDA-approved standard of care for nonsmall cell lung cancer is
Carboplastin/Taxol/Avastin based upon an impressive survival benefit; however,
patients with squamous carcinoma (SQCC) cannot receive Avastin because of a 30%
mortality rate due to fatal hemoptysis. In this study we evaluated the role of
cytomorphology and immunohistochemistry in differentiating SQCC from
adenocarcinoma (ADC) in lung FNA specimens. The case cohort included 53 FNA cases
of nonsmall cell lung carcinoma with surgical pathology follow-up. All FNA
specimens were reviewed independently by a panel of cytopathologists to
differentiate between SQCC and ADC. The cell block material was available in 23
cases (11 ADC and 12 SQCC) to perform immunohistochemical stains for TTF-1, CK7, 
CK20, P63, and CK5/6. On surgical resection, 35/53 (66%) cases were diagnosed as 
ADC and 18/53 (34%) as SQCC. The number of cases classified correctly on the
basis of cytomorphology was 66% for ADC and 53% for SQCC (combined accuracy 60%).
By immunohistochemical staining, 14/23 (61%) cases expressed TTF-1. Nine cases
were TTF-1 negative; eight of the TTF-1 negative cases (89%) were SQCC.
Twenty-three cases expressed CK7 (87%); one ADC case (4%) showed focal CK20
positivity. Both P63 and CK5/6 expression was seen in 9/12 (75%) SQCC cases; none
of the ADC cases showed this dual expression. Cytomorphology alone may not be
able to stratify all cases of nonsmall cell lung carcinoma into ADC and SQCC in
FNA specimens. The immune-panel of TTF-1, CK7, CK20, P63, and CK5/6 is useful in 
differentiating SQCC from ADC.

PMID: 19170169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2009 Feb;44(2):167-75. doi: 10.1002/ppul.20970.

Familial interstitial disease with I73T mutation: A mid- and long-term study.

Abou Taam R(1), Jaubert F, Emond S, Le Bourgeois M, Epaud R, Karila C, Feldmann
D, Scheinmann P, de Blic J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France. rola.aboutaam@nck.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVES: To describe the long-term course and the management in children of
chronic interstitial lung disease associated with I73T mutation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical, radiological, and histological data from one
family including five children and two adults were analyzed retrospectively for
three patients and prospectively for the others.
RESULTS: Mean age of onset of respiratory symptoms for children was 6 months
(2-15 months). The follow up was 14 months to 15 years (mean 55 months). The
children were treated by intravenous high dose methylprednisolone pulses (6-15,
mean 12). Four received oral prednisolone (mean 16 months) and
hydroxychloroquine, one of these had additional mycophenolate mofetil. One adult 
with mild respiratory symptoms in infancy and another who was symptom free were
also diagnosed. Both of them received no treatment. BAL fluids were obtained in
all children: pro-SPC and SPB were positive in all. Lung biopsies were performed 
in two children respectively at 7 months, showing interstitial pneumonia features
with endoluminal macrophage and type II alveolar cells hyperplasia, and at 33
months, showing subpleural microbullae, areas of interstitial pneumonia and type 
II alveolar cells hyperplasia. Immunohistochemistry showed for both an increased 
SPB and TTF1 staining in type II cells nuclei and a faint staining for pro-SPC
and for ABCA3. Genetic diagnosis obviated the need for biopsy in other cases. The
clinical status progressively improved and oxygen supplementation could be
stopped after 3-14 months (mean 9 months). The CT scans initially showed ground
glass opacities, then reduction in the ground glass pattern associated with
clinical improvement and development of cysts.
CONCLUSION: This kindred illustrates the variability of respiratory involvement
and prognosis. It confirms the value of genetic screening for surfactant protein 
genes mutations.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19148933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 May;17(3):233-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181917af0.

Characterization and applications of a newly developed rabbit monoclonal antibody
to cytokeratin 7 (CK7) for immunohistochemistry.

Qi W(1), Chu J, Zhou D, Tacha D.

Author information: 
(1)Biocare Medical, LLC, Concord, CA 94520, USA. wqi@biocare.net

Erratum in
    Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Oct;17(5):464.

In this paper, we describe the development of a novel rabbit monoclonal
cytokeratin 7 (CK7) antibody. CK7 is widely used in immunohistochemical tests
that are commonly performed in histopathology laboratories. Rabbits were
immunized with a peptide corresponding to C-terminus of CK7. Recombinant
monoclonal antibodies were developed using proprietary technology. Antibodies
were screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay against CK7 peptide, and the
specificity of the antibody was verified by Western blotting on Hela cell lysates
and by immunohistochemical staining on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
sections. One clone, designated as BC1 was selected and tested on a variety of
human tissues. Its reactivity was tested and compared with a well-characterized
mouse monoclonal CK7 antibody OV-TL 12/30 on lung, breast, ovarian, and colon
cancers, and on a variety of normal tissues. The staining patterns and
specificity were concordant with mouse monoclonal OV-TL 12/30. The BC1 clone,
however, showed superior staining to OV-TL 12/30 in terms of intensity and
staining of debris. CK7 combined with CK20 or CDX2 and TTF1 is a common panel
used in histopathology laboratories in discrimination between primary
adenocarcinomas and metastatic lung adenocarcinomas from colonic origin. We then 
developed a 4-step double stain (multiplex) assay by combining CDX-2 with CK7 in 
an antibody cocktail and tested the efficacy on lung, breast, and colon cancers. 
Results showed that this novel antibody can be used as a single component and/or 
in combination with CDX2 and TTF1 in applications for diagnostic pathology.

PMID: 19098679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;27(3):662-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0313.

Regulation of surfactant protein B gene expression in bone marrow-derived cells.

Field-Corbett C(1), English K, O'Dea S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Biology Department, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Ireland.

While investigating the differentiation potential of bone marrow-derived cells,
we previously demonstrated upregulated expression of the lung-related surfactant 
protein B (SP-B) gene in hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) when they were
cocultured with macerated lung tissue. During coculture, HPCs differentiated
toward a dendritic-like myeloid cell phenotype (hematopoietic progenitor
cell-derived dendritic-like cells [HPC-DCs]). However, immature dendritic cells
(iDCs) cocultured under identical conditions did not express SP-B mRNA before or 
after coculture. We have now further examined the regulation of SP-B expression
in HPC-DCs and iDCs. Of the transcription factors involved in SP-B gene
expression, neither cell type expressed TTF-1, HNF3alpha, or HNF3beta, but both
cell types expressed Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 binding to the SP-B promoter was
investigated in these cells. Three novel Sp1 binding motifs were identified in
the mouse SP-B promoter. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, it was demonstrated
that Sp1 was bound to all three sites in HPC-DCs after coculture with lung
tissue, but not in iDCs. We hypothesized that although genes from multiple
lineages may be active in HPCs, gene silencing events, such as methylation, may
subsequently occur to suppress expression of these genes in more mature myeloid
cells, such as iDCs. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
resulted in expression of the SP-B gene in iDCs. These data indicate that
tissue-specific transcription factors are not required to express the
lung-related gene SP-B in hematopoietic progenitor cells. Furthermore, silencing 
events, such as methylation, may occur to suppress lung-related gene expression
as progenitor cells become committed toward more mature hematopoietic cell
phenotypes.

PMID: 19096034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Diagn Cytopathol. 2009 Feb;37(2):146-9. doi: 10.1002/dc.20937.

Cytomorphology of primary signet ring-cell carcinoma of the lung.

Jin N, Nguyen C, Shuja S, Makary R, Wolfson D.

PMID: 19072982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Surg Pathol. 2009 Apr;33(4):626-32. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31818d7d8b.

Immunohistochemical staining for CDX-2, PDX-1, NESP-55, and TTF-1 can help
distinguish gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors from pancreatic endocrine and
pulmonary carcinoid tumors.

Srivastava A(1), Hornick JL.

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center Lebanon, NH, USA.

Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (WDNET) of the gastrointestinal tract, 
pancreas, and lung are histologically similar. Thus, predicting the site of
origin of a metastasis is not possible on morphologic grounds. Prior
immunohistochemical studies of WDNET have yielded conflicting results, and
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor-1 (PDX-1) has not previously been
evaluated in this context. We therefore analyzed the expression of CDX-2, PDX-1, 
TTF-1, and neuroendocrine secretory protein-55 (NESP-55), a recently described
member of the chromogranin family, in primary and metastatic WDNET. In total, 64 
gastrointestinal carcinoids (5 stomach; 5 duodenum; 31 ileum; 11 appendix; and 12
rectum); 39 pancreatic endocrine tumors (PET); and 20 pulmonary carcinoid tumors 
were studied. PET were positive for NESP-55 (16/39) and PDX-1 (11/39); 3/31 also 
showed heterogeneous positivity for CDX-2. Ileal carcinoids were exclusively
positive for CDX-2 (30/31) and negative for all other markers. Appendiceal
carcinoids were uniformly positive for CDX-2 (11/11). All rectal carcinoids were 
negative for CDX-2 and TTF-1; 2/12 were positive for PDX-1, and 1/12 for NESP-55.
The gastric and duodenal carcinoids were only positive for PDX-1 (7/10). TTF-1
positivity was confined to pulmonary carcinoids (7/20); 1/20 was positive for
NESP-55; and all were negative for CDX-2 and PDX-1. NESP-55 and PDX-1 positivity,
in the presence of negative CDX-2 and TTF-1, was 97% specific for PET. The
sensitivity and specificity of CDX-2 positivity for predicting an ileal primary, 
when PDX-1, NESP-55, and TTF-1 were negative, was 97% and 91%, respectively.
TTF-1 positivity was confined to pulmonary carcinoids in our study but was
present in only about a third of cases. A panel of these 4 markers may be useful 
in predicting the primary site of metastatic WDNET.

PMID: 19065104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jan 10;27(2):271-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.17.0043. Epub 2008
Dec 8.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 is an independent prognostic factor for patients
with stage I lung adenocarcinoma.

Anagnostou VK(1), Syrigos KN, Bepler G, Homer RJ, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8023, USA.

PURPOSE: Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) is a transcription factor that
regulates the expression of multiple genes involved in lung development. It is
preferentially expressed in adenocarcinomas of the lung and has been investigated
as a potential prognostic parameter in patients with lung cancer, with
conflicting results. We quantitatively assessed TTF1 protein expression in two
large and independent data sets to investigate the impact of TTF1 nuclear
expression on patient survival.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Automated quantitative analysis, a fluorescent-based method
for analysis of in situ protein expression, was used to assess a series of cell
lines to find the threshold of detection of TTF1 expression. Then two independent
cohorts (176 and 237 cases, respectively) were measured by the same technique,
and TTF1 expression was correlated with survival.
RESULTS: Tumors expressed TTF1 in 45% and 58% of the cases in each cohort. TTF1
was consistently expressed in adenocarcinomas (n = 61 and 73; Spearman rho =
0.313 and 0.4 for the first and second set, respectively; P < .0001) independent 
of their differentiation and stage. Survival analysis showed that patients with
stage I adenocarcinoma with TTF1 expression had a longer median overall survival 
than those without expression (n = 43, 44.3 v 26.2 months, P = .05 for the first 
cohort; n = 87; 49.7 v 38.5 months, P = .03 for the second cohort) Multivariate
analysis revealed an independent lower risk of death for patients with stage I
adenocarcinoma with TTF1-expressing tumors (hazard ratio = 0.479, 95% CI, 0.235
to 0.977; P = .043).
CONCLUSION: TTF1 expression defines a subgroup of patients with a favorable
outcome and may be useful for prognostic stratification of patients with stage I 
lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19064983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 1;14(23):7832-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0565.

Elevated phospho-S6 expression is associated with metastasis in adenocarcinoma of
the lung.

McDonald JM(1), Pelloski CE, Ledoux A, Sun M, Raso G, Komaki R, Wistuba II,
Bekele BN, Aldape K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: The primary objective of this study was to determine whether markers of 
differentiation and activation of the Akt pathway are associated with metastasis 
in adenocarcinoma of the lung.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Paired primary and metastatic tumor samples were obtained
from 41 patients who had undergone resection of both primary lung adenocarcinoma 
and brain metastatic lesions. Paired samples were compared for relative
expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and E-cadherin as potential 
markers of differentiation. Activation of the Akt pathway was assessed by
expression of p-Akt and p-S6. Biomarkers that showed relative discordance in
expression between the matched pairs were then assessed in a cohort of 77 primary
lung adenocarcinomas. Validation was done in an independent cohort of 82 primary 
lung adenocarcinomas.
RESULTS: Among the 41 matched pairs, E-cadherin (23 discordant pairs) and TTF-1
(18 discordant pairs) were overexpressed in primary tumors (20 of 23 and 15 of
18, respectively). In contrast, p-S6 overexpression was significantly associated 
with metastatic tumors (20 of 21 discordant pairs). The expression of E-cadherin,
p-S6, and TTF-1 was evaluated in 77 primary lung adenocarcinomas, in which high
p-S6 expression was associated with shorter time to metastasis. The association
of p-S6 with metastasis was then validated in an independent set of 82 tumors. In
multivariable analysis, p-S6 expression was a negative independent predictor of
metastasis-free survival after adjustment for tumor stage.
CONCLUSIONS: The biomarker p-S6 is overexpressed in metastatic tumors. In primary
tumors, higher p-S6 expression is associated with shorter metastatic-free
survival. This biomarker has the potential for risk stratification in future
clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC2614348
PMID: 19047111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Jan 15;315(2):162-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.10.016. Epub
2008 Oct 28.

TAZ is a coactivator for Pax8 and TTF-1, two transcription factors involved in
thyroid differentiation.

Di Palma T(1), D'Andrea B, Liguori GL, Liguoro A, de Cristofaro T, Del Prete D,
Pappalardo A, Mascia A, Zannini M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia e Oncologia Sperimentale G. Salvatore-CNR and Dpt. 
Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Universita' di Napoli Federico II,
Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy.

Pax8 and TTF-1 are transcription factors involved in the morphogenesis of the
thyroid gland and in the transcriptional regulation of thyroid-specific genes.
Both proteins are expressed in few tissues but their simultaneous presence occurs
only in the thyroid where they interact physically and functionally allowing the 
regulation of genes that are markers of the thyroid differentiated phenotype. TAZ
is a transcriptional coactivator that regulates the activity of several
transcription factors therefore playing a central role in tissue-specific
transcription. The recently demonstrated physical and functional interaction
between TAZ and TTF-1 in the lung raised the question of whether TAZ could be an 
important regulatory molecule also in the thyroid. In this study, we demonstrate 
the presence of TAZ in thyroid cells and the existence of an important
cooperation between TAZ and the transcription factors Pax8 and TTF-1 in the
modulation of thyroid gene expression. In addition, we reveal that the three
proteins are co-expressed in the nucleus of differentiated thyroid cells and that
TAZ interacts with both Pax8 and TTF-1, in vitro and in vivo. More importantly,
we show that this interaction leads to a significant enhancement of the
transcriptional activity of Pax8 and TTF-1 on the thyroglobulin promoter thus
suggesting a role of TAZ in the control of genes involved in thyroid development 
and differentiation.

PMID: 19010321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Vopr Onkol. 2008;54(4):417-33.

[The significance of immunohistochemistry in the investigation of liver
neoplasms: differential diagnosis, prognostic markers].

[Article in Russian]

Pozharisskii KM, Granov DA, Ten VP, Kubaibergenova AG, Leenman EE, Rasskazov AI.

The immunohistochemical investigation used 55 primary hepatic tumors
(hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)--32, cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC)--23). Wide
panels of such antibodies as hepatocytic marker (Hep Par--1) CK-8, CK-19,
polyclonal CEA, CD10, alpha-fetoprotein, TTF-1 as well as proliferative features 
of HCC (Ki-67) including regulators of stage-to-stage transition through mitoses 
of tumor cells (cyclin-D1 and A, genes p53 and RB), unrestricted tumor cell
mitosis (telomerases), and intercellular adhesion marker (beta-catenin) were
employed for differential diagnosis of neoplasia. The most efficient marker HCC
was Hep Par--l (sensitivity--100%, specificity--92%) while the sensitivity of CCC
(CK-19) was 83% and specificity--78%. Of particular importance for
differentiation between HCC and CCC were the nature of microcirculatory flow
identifiable with the aid of CD31 and presence of pseudocapsule in HCC detected
by means of calponin. CEA and CD10 played a part too while the remaining markers 
were either expressed very seldom (alpha-fetoprotein) or absent (TTF-1). Most
nuclear antigens (Ki-67, cyclin-A, p53 and RB) were intensely expressed in
poorly-differentiated HCC cells. Cyclin-D1 and mutated suppressor-gene p53
expression involved lowered overall and relapse-free survival.

PMID: 18942395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Pathol. 2009 Jan;217(1):65-72. doi: 10.1002/path.2443.

TTF1 expression in non-small cell lung carcinoma: association with TTF1 gene
amplification and improved survival.

Perner S(1), Wagner PL, Soltermann A, LaFargue C, Tischler V, Weir BA, Weder W,
Meyerson M, Giordano TJ, Moch H, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA.

Acquired chromosomal aberrations play an important role in tumour development and
progression. Such genetic alterations occur in a significant proportion of
non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLCs) and include amplification of 14q13.3,
which contains the TTF1 gene. We asked whether TTF1 amplification is associated
with increased TTF1 protein expression in NSCLCs, and whether TTF1 is associated 
with clinicopathological features, including patient survival. We used a FISH
assay and quantitative immunohistochemical staining to interrogate a
population-based cohort of 538 NSCLCs from Swiss patients for TTF1 amplification 
and protein expression. We found TTF1 amplification in approximately 13% of
adenocarcinomas (ACs) and in approximately 9% of squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) 
and TTF1 amplification was associated with increased TTF1 protein expression.
High-level TTF1 expression was significantly associated with smaller tumour size,
female gender and longer overall survival only among ACs (median survival 82
versus 28 months; p = 0.002). On multivariate analysis, high TTF1 expression was 
an independent predictor of favourable prognosis in patients with AC [hazard
ratio, 0.56 (95% CI 0.38-0.83); p = 0.008]. We conclude that TTF1 amplification
is a mechanism of high-level TTF1 expression in a subset of NSCLCs. When
expressed at high levels, this routinely used diagnostic marker is also an
independent biomarker of favourable prognosis in AC.

PMID: 18932182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Acta Cytol. 2008 Sep-Oct;52(5):627-30.

Pilomatricoma mimicking small round cell tumor on fine needle aspiration
cytology: a case report.

Thapliyal N(1), Joshi U, Vaibhav G, Sayana A, Srivastava AK, Jha RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uttaranchal Forest Hospital Trust Medical College,
Haldwani, Uttaranchal, India.

BACKGROUND: Pilomatricoma, a benign skin adnexal tumor, frequently leads to false
positive diagnosis cytologically. We report a rapidly growing nodular swelling
misdiagnosed as round cell tumor cytologically and found to be pilomatricoma
histopathologically.
CASE: A 32-year-old man presented with a rapidly growing, mobile nodule on his
left arm for 4 months with fixed, shiny overlying skin. Fine needle aspiration
cytology (FNAC) sample was cellular, showing round to ovoid cells dispersed or in
clusters with occasionally rosette-like appearance. Cells displayed round,
granular nuclei, single to multiple small nucleoli, absent to scant cytoplasm, a 
moderate amount of granular cytoplasm and apoptotic and mitotic figures in
places. Nuclear moldings were encountered occasionally. Cytologically the
diagnosis of blue round cell tumor was made. Histopathologic examination showed
islands of basaloid cells with scant cytoplasm and shadow cells and occasional
giant cells. The diagnosis was pilomatricoma bistopathologically. Rapidly
growing, early lesions of pilomatricoma are predominantly composed of basaloid
cells and mostly devoid of other diagnostic clues, leading to a false impression 
of malignancy. To avoid misdiagnosis, all skin-based nodules should undergo
extensive cytologic sampling from diferent sites. Pilomatricoma should be
considered in diferential diagnosis when primitive-appearing cells are aspirated,
especially in rapidly growing early lesions.

PMID: 18833830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Arch Pediatr. 2008 Oct;15(10):1560-7. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2008.07.016. Epub
2008 Sep 19.

[Lung diseases associated with inherited disorders of surfactant metabolism].

[Article in French]

Epaud R(1), Feldmann D, Guillot L, Clément A.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumologie pédiatrique, hôpital Armand-Trousseau, AP-HP, université
Pierre-et-Marie-Curie Paris-6, 75571 Paris, France. ralph.epaud@trs.aphp.fr

Lung diseases associated with surfactant-metabolism disorders are a heterogeneous
group of rare diseases. Intra-alveolar accumulation of protein related to
surfactant dysfunction leads to cough, hypoxemia, and radiological-diffuse
infiltration. Inherited deficiency of pulmonary surfactant protein B (SP-B) was
initially described in infants who develop respiratory failure at birth. More
recently, mutations in other constitutive surfactant proteins, such as surfactant
protein C or implied in its metabolism, such as ATP-binding cassette, subfamily
A, member 3 (ABCA3) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) were identified in
newborns with respiratory distress as well as in children with
chronic-infiltrative pneumonia. The aim of this review is therefore to summarize 
the current state of our knowledge in this area.

PMID: 18804975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Lung Cancer. 2009 Apr;64(1):105-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2008.07.017. Epub 2008 
Sep 17.

Prognostic relevance of TTF-1 and MMP-9 expression in advanced lung
adenocarcinoma.

Martins SJ(1), Takagaki TY, Silva AG, Gallo CP, Silva FB, Capelozzi VL.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Av. Dr. Enéas
de Carvalho Aguiar 255, 05403-000 São Paulo, Brazil. sjmartins@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: The thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a tissue-specific
transcription factor that could play an important role in cell differentiation
and morphogenesis of lung tumors. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is a
protease commonly expressed in non-small cell lung cancer, conferring angiogenic 
and metastatic potential.
METHODS: We assessed TTF-1 and MMP-9 tumor expression by immunohistochemistry in 
51 patients with lung adenocarcinoma, stage IIIB or IV, treated with platinum
regimens. A bicategorical prognostic model was obtained using the Kaplan-Meier
method, Cox regression, and conjunctive consolidation.
RESULTS: The median expression of TTF-1 was 30.0% (range: 0-85.9%). All tumors
expressed MMP-9 (median: 78.7%; range: 15.2-96.1%). Median survival was 41.6
weeks, with estimated 1- and 2-year survival rates of 45.0% and 22.0%,
respectively. Poor performance status (Karnofsky scale) - hazards ratio (HR):
1.03, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.01-1.06; low TTF-1 expression (<40%) - HR: 
4.00, 95% CI: 1.75-9.09; and high MMP-9 expression (> or =80%) - HR: 2.82, 95%
CI: 1.30-6.08 were independent prognostic factors. Patients could be stratified
in three death risk groups according to markers expression: low risk (high TTF-1 
and low MMP-9; median survival: 127.6 weeks), intermediate risk (low TTF-1 or
high MMP-9; median survival: 39.0 weeks); and high risk (low TTF-1 and high
MMP-9; median survival: 16.4 weeks).
CONCLUSION: TTF-1 and MMP-9 tumor expression as detected by immunohistochemistry 
may allow identification of different, clinically meaningful, prognostic groups
of advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients treated with platinum regimens.

PMID: 18801593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(22):6844-57. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01235-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
15.

Mechanistic insights into replication termination as revealed by investigations
of the Reb1-Ter3 complex of Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Biswas S(1), Bastia D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 174 Ashley Ave., Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Relatively little is known about the interaction of eukaryotic replication
terminator proteins with the cognate termini and the replication termination
mechanism. Here, we report a biochemical analysis of the interaction of the Reb1 
terminator protein of Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which binds to the Ter3 site
present in the nontranscribed spacers of ribosomal DNA, located in chromosome
III. We show that Reb1 is a dimeric protein and that the N-terminal dimerization 
domain of the protein is dispensable for replication termination. Unlike its
mammalian counterpart Ttf1, Reb1 did not need an accessory protein to bind to
Ter3. The two myb/SANT domains and an adjacent, N-terminal 154-amino-acid-long
segment (called the myb-associated domain) were both necessary and sufficient for
optimal DNA binding in vitro and fork arrest in vivo. The protein and its binding
site Ter3 were unable to arrest forks initiated in vivo from ars of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae in the cell milieu of the latter despite the facts that the protein
retained the proper affinity of binding, was located in vivo at the Ter site, and
apparently was not displaced by the "sweepase" Rrm3. These observations suggest
that replication fork arrest is not an intrinsic property of the Reb1-Ter3
complex.

PMCID: PMC2573303
PMID: 18794373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Hum Pathol. 2009 Mar;40(3):418-24. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.05.020. Epub 2008 
Sep 11.

Adult extrarenal Wilms tumor of the uterus with teratoid features.

García-Galvis OF(1), Stolnicu S, Muñoz E, Aneiros-Fernández J, Alaggio R, Nogales
FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Granada 18012, Spain.

The present article reports for the first time a case of an extrarenal teratoid
Wilms tumor in the uterus of a 62-year-old woman. It had triphasic histology with
epithelial areas composed of metanephric tubules harboring glomerular structures,
adamantine patterns, neural type rosettes, blastema, and a primitive, myxoid type
stroma. Abundant heterologous elements such as cartilage, striated muscle,
squamous epithelium, and an alpha fetoprotein and TTF1-positive early endodermal 
epithelium were also present. Immunohistochemistry in Wilms tumor areas showed
positivity for markers also indicative of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal
tumors such as neuron-specific enolase, CD99, and CD56. However, nuclear
positivity for Wilms tumor antigen together with the presence of glomeruli and
the absence of endometrioid tumor areas and the organoid arrangement of tissues
excluded peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors, carcinosarcoma, and
teratoma, respectively. Although the diagnosis of female genital tract Wilms
tumors is difficult in cases where glomerular structures are lacking, it should
be considered because these neoplasms have a better therapeutic response than
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors and carcinosarcoma.

PMID: 18789483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. APMIS. 2008 Jun;116(6):526-9.

If it's not CK5/6 positive, TTF-1 negative it's not a squamous cell carcinoma of 
lung.

Downey P(1), Cummins R, Moran M, Gulmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Novel targeted treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) requires accurate 
classification of NSCLC as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (AC).
This study details the CK5/6 and TTF-1 immunoprofile of surgical resections of 45
NSCLCs (24 ACs and 21 SCCs) in tissue microarrays. All SCCs were CK5/6 positive, 
TTF-1 negative. 20 of 24 adenocarcinomas had the reverse pattern. In conclusion, 
all SCCs in this study were CK5/6 positive and TTF-1 negative, and therefore
tumours that do not display this phenotype are unlikely to be SCCs. CK5/6 and
TTF-1 is therefore a practical panel for the distinction between pulmonary SCC
from AC in routine histopathology practice.

PMID: 18754327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Stem Cells. 2008 Nov;26(11):2902-11. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0090. Epub 2008 
Aug 21.

Human amniotic fluid stem cells can integrate and differentiate into epithelial
lung lineages.

Carraro G(1), Perin L, Sedrakyan S, Giuliani S, Tiozzo C, Lee J, Turcatel G, De
Langhe SP, Driscoll B, Bellusci S, Minoo P, Atala A, De Filippo RE, Warburton D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Regenerative Medicine and Surgery Program, Saban
Research Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine and 
School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California 90027, USA.

A new source of stem cells has recently been isolated from amniotic fluid; these 
amniotic fluid stem cells have significant potential for regenerative medicine.
These cells are multipotent, showing the ability to differentiate into cell types
from each embryonic germ layer. We investigated the ability of human amniotic
fluid stem cells (hAFSC) to integrate into murine lung and to differentiate into 
pulmonary lineages after injury. Using microinjection into cultured mouse
embryonic lungs, hAFSC can integrate into the epithelium and express the early
human differentiation marker thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1). In adult nude
mice, following hyperoxia injury, tail vein-injected hAFSC localized in the
distal lung and expressed both TTF1 and the type II pneumocyte marker surfactant 
protein C. Specific damage of Clara cells through naphthalene injury produced
integration and differentiation of hAFSC at the bronchioalveolar and bronchial
positions with expression of the specific Clara cell 10-kDa protein. These
results illustrate the plasticity of hAFSC to respond in different ways to
different types of lung damage by expressing specific alveolar versus bronchiolar
epithelial cell lineage markers, depending on the type of injury to recipient
lung. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this
article.

PMCID: PMC3174105
PMID: 18719226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Diagn Pathol. 2008 Aug 12;3:35. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-3-35.

TKTL1 is overexpressed in a large portion of non-small cell lung cancer
specimens.

Schultz H(1), Kähler D, Branscheid D, Vollmer E, Zabel P, Goldmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Parkallee 3a,
Borstel, Germany. hschultz@fz-borstel.de

In several tumors the transketolase activity, controlled inter alia by enzymes of
the pentose phosphate pathway which is an alternative, energy generating
reaction-cascade to glycolysis, has been correlated with proliferation. The
increase of thiamine-dependent transketolase enzyme reactions is induced
especially through upregulated transketolase-like enzyme 1 (TKTL1)-activity; that
shows TKTL1 to be a causative enzyme for tumors enhanced, anaerobic glucose
degradation. We investigated TKTL1-expression in 88 human, formalin-fixed
non-small cell lung cancer tissues and 24 carcinomas of the breast by
immunohistochemical stainings applying a 0 to 3 staining-score system (3 =
strongest expression). For means of validation we additionally stained 40 NSCLC
fixed and paraffin-embedded utilizing the HOPE-technique; showing comparable
results to the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens (not shown). Potential
correlations with age, sex, TNM-classification parameters and tumor grading as
well as tumor transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and surfactant protein A (SPA)
expression were investigated. 40.9% of the analyzed lung tumors expressed TKTL1
weakly (Score 1), 38.6% moderately (score 2) and 17.1% strongly (score 3). 3
tumors were diagnosed TKTL1-negative (3.4%; score 0). All breast cancer specimen 
stainings were positive and scored 1: 32%; scored 2: 36%; scored 3: 32%. Alveolar
macrophages and Alveolar Epithelial Cells Type II were also found to be
TKTL1-positive.None of the listed clinical parameters could be found to show a
significant correlation to TKTL1 signal appearance. Although we describe the
expression of TKTL1 in lung cancers, we need to state that up till now there is
no scientific indication for any treatment regimens based upon these findings.

PMCID: PMC2526982
PMID: 18700018  [PubMed]


359. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2008 Aug;12(4):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2007.11.001.
Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Cdx2, cytokeratin 20, thyroid transcription factor 1, and prostate-specific
antigen expression in unusual subtypes of prostate cancer.

Leite KR(1), Mitteldorf CA, Srougi M, Dall'oglio MF, Antunes AA, Pontes J Jr,
Camara-Lopes LH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical and Molecular Pathology, Hospital Sirio Libanes, São
Paulo 01308-050, Brazil. katiaramos@uol.com.br

There are some unusual histologic variants of prostate carcinoma, including
mucinous, signet-ring cells, and ductal carcinomas that can metastasize in a
problematic way and simulate lung, colorectal, or bladder primaries. Currently,
antibodies that are organ-specific have been used in the routine surgical
pathology practice. Our aim is to study the profile of expression of Cdx2,
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) in prostate
cancer with unusual histologic finding. Twenty-nine prostate adenocarcinomas with
unusual histologic findings were submitted to immunohistochemistry with
prostate-specific antigen (PSA), CK20, Cdx2, and TTF1 antibodies. There were 7
mucinous, 5 ductal, 2 signet-ring cells, and 15 usual acinar adenocarcinomas with
focal mucinous differentiation. To compare the results with usual acinar
adenocarcinomas, we studied 10 primary and their respective lymph node metastases
in a tissue microarray, 2 unusual metastatic adenocarcinomas, and 6 usual acinar 
high-grade carcinomas. For tumors with special histologic finding, Cdx2 was
expressed by 9 (31.0%) mucinous, signet-cell, or with focal mucinous
differentiation. Thyroid transcription factor 1 was moderately positive in
mucinous differentiation areas of 2 (6.9%) adenocarcinomas. Cytokeratin 20 was
expressed by 9 (31.0%) tumors, among them, 3 ductal adenocarcinomas.
Prostate-specific antigen was positive in 28 (96.6%) cases and negative in 1
ductal adenocarcinoma. There was only 1 worrisome ductal adenocarcinoma that was 
strongly CK20 positive and PSA negative. Almost one third of mucinous prostate
carcinomas express Cdx2. Cytokeratin 20 can be positive also in one third of
prostate carcinomas, especially the ductal type. Pathologist should be alert when
evaluating immunohistochemical profiles of unusual histologic findings of
prostate cancer, mostly in distant sites.

PMID: 18620992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mod Pathol. 2008 Nov;21(11):1357-62. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.118. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

MASH1: a useful marker in differentiating pulmonary small cell carcinoma from
Merkel cell carcinoma.

Ralston J(1), Chiriboga L, Nonaka D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016, USA.

Merkel cell carcinoma is the cutaneous counterpart of small cell carcinoma, and
the most important differential diagnosis is cutaneous metastasis of small cell
carcinoma of the lung. There have been a handful of studies reporting on the
utility of a variety of immunohistochemical markers that distinguish between the 
two entities. Achaete-scute complex-like 1 (MASH1, ASCL1) is important in the
development of the brain and the diffuse neuroendocrine system including
pulmonary neuroendocrine cells. A recent study, using a cDNA array, identified
Mash1 as one of the best classifier genes to differentiate pulmonary small cell
carcinoma from Merkel cell carcinoma. We immunohistochemically applied this
finding to the diagnostic setting. A total of 30 cases of Merkel cell carcinoma
and 59 cases of small cell carcinoma of the lung were immunostained with
anti-MASH1 and TTF-1 antibodies. Of 59 small cell carcinomas, 49 (83%) expressed 
MASH1 in nuclear staining whereas out of 59 small cell carcinomas, 43 (73%)
expressed TTF-1 in nuclear staining. MASH1 was completely negative in all 30
Merkel cell carcinomas whereas TTF-1 expression was seen in 1 of the 30 Merkel
cell carcinomas (3%). MASH1 is a useful adjunct marker for differentiating small 
cell carcinoma of the lung from Merkel cell carcinoma.

PMID: 18587322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Ann Pathol. 2008 Feb;28(1):2-8. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2008.01.001. Epub 2008 May 
16.

[Atypical carcinoid of the arytenoid: report of six cases].

[Article in French]

Oukabli M(1), Blechet C, Harket A, Gaillard F, Garand G, Fetissof F.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, hôpital militaire
d'instruction Mohamed-V, Hay Riad, Rabat, Maroc. oukablimohamed@yahoo.fr

In order to illustrate the clinical and histological presentations of laryngeal
atypical carcinoids and their potential course, we report six cases. We evaluated
the factors predictive of local recurrence and metastatic diffusion. For each
case, we noted the mitotic index, the quality of the resection, the limits of the
tumor and the presence of necrosis. An immunohistochemical study was carried out 
with a series of antibodies (cytokeratins; D(2)40; CD31; MIB1; P53; P16;
TTF1...). The clinical presentation we observed was quite similar to that
reported in the literature. These tumors are CK7+, CK8+, CK19+, CK5-6-, CK14- and
CK20-. P16 is constantly positive. Only the mitotic index and the lymphatic
presence of embolus were correlated with the time course. The tumor is more
aggressive when the mitotic index is high and an unfavorable course is observed
when there are lymphatic emboli or when the Ki67 index is higher than 5%.

PMID: 18538708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Radiother. 2008 Sep;12(5):352-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canrad.2008.04.003. Epub
2008 Jun 3.

[Merkel cell carcinoma: outcome and role of radiotherapy].

[Article in French]

Salvador Alonso R(1), Lahbabi I, Ben Hassel M, Boisselier P, Chaari N, Lesimple
T, Chevrier S, de Crevoisier R.

Author information: 
(1)Département de radiothérapie, centre Eugène-Marquis, avenue
Bataille-Flandres-Dunkerque, 35042 Rennes, France.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) are rare neuroendocrine malignant tumor of the skin, 
occurring in elderly patients. It affects primarily the sun-exposed areas of the 
skin, with approximately 50% of all tumors occurring in the face and neck and 40%
in the extremities. Immunohistochemical markers (CK20+, CK7- and TTF1-) are used 
to distinguish between MCC and other tumors. MCC have a tendency to rapid local
progression, frequent spread to regional lymph nodes and distant metastases. Due 
to the rarity of the disease, the optimal treatment has not been fully defined.
Localized stages (stages I and II) are treated by surgical excision of the
primary tumor (with 2 to 3 cm margin) and lymphadenectomy in case of
node-positive disease, followed by external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) to a total
dose of 50 to 60Gy in the tumor bed. Adjuvant EBRT has been shown to decrease
markedly locoregional recurrences and to increase survival in recent studies.
Treatment of lymph nodes area is more controversial. Chemotherapy is recommended 
only for metastatic disease.

PMID: 18511325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Oncol Rep. 2008 Jun;19(6):1405-11.

Decreased expression of the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor in
poorly-differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid.

Matsumoto H(1), Sakamoto A, Fujiwara M, Yano Y, Shishido-Hara Y, Fujioka Y, Kamma
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Poorly-differentiated carcinomas (PDCs) occupy an intermediate position between
differentiated (follicular and papillary) and undifferentiated carcinomas (UDCs) 
based on morphology and behavior. However, its definition remains unclear,
especially in the differentiation of thyroid function. To characterize the
hormonal differentiation of PDCs, in addition to the morphological definition, we
immunohistochemically investigated the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor
(TSHR) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) as regulators of thyroid
hormonal function and differentiation. We comparatively studied their expression 
in 15 papillary carcinoma (PTC), 8 PDC and 8 UDC cases and further analyzed their
correlation to proliferation activity as estimated by the MIB-1 index. All cases 
of PTC and PDC expressed the TSHR, whereas all cases of UDC did not. Notably,
most of the PDCs showed more decreased and heterogeneous expression in the
poorly-differentiated component than in the well-differentiated one within the
same case. Examining the heterogeneous areas in PDC, we found an inverse
relationship between TSHR expression and the MIB-1 index, that is, decreased TSHR
expression was correlated to high proliferation. Unexpectedly, TTF-1 expression
was observed in almost all of the PTC and PDC cases and in half of the UDC cases;
therefore, it was not useful to distinguish PDC from PTC or UDC. In conclusion,
we demonstrated that TSHR expression was decreased in PDCs despite conserved
TTF-1 expression and that it correlated to the proliferative activity in PDCs.

PMID: 18497944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. World J Surg Oncol. 2008 May 20;6:54. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-6-54.

An unusual case of low-grade tubulopapillary adenocarcinoma of the sinonasal
tract.

Bansal A(1), Pradeep KE, Gumparthy KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Wirral Hospitals NHS Trust, Upton, Wirral, CH49 
5PE, UK. ask4ashish@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Low-grade papillary adenocarcinomas of the sinonasal tract are rare
neoplasms. Over recent years, little doubt remains that this tumour represents a 
separate entity based on morphology, ultrastructural features and behaviour. We
outline a case of this rare entity displaying a not hitherto described
immunophenotype.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 32 year old man presented recurrent epistaxis was evaluated 
with endoscopy which revealed a well circumscribed pedunculated mass lesion in
left nares. The mass was arising from the nasal septum which was excised along
with the mass. The biopsy revealed low-grade, non-intestinal type sinonasal
tubulopapillary adenocarcinoma.
CONCLUSION: TTF-1 immunoreactivity in absence of thyroid or pulmonary primary in 
the present case remains an enigma. However, this raises the possibility of the
utility of this antibody to predict a better clinical outcome in the subset of
low grade non-intestinal sinonasal adenocarcinoma. More cases of similar
morphological appearance may need to be examined for TTF-1 immunoreactivity and
clinically followed up to establish this theory.

PMCID: PMC2426684
PMID: 18492272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2008 Nov;18(6):441-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-263X.2008.00915.x.
Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Deletion of PAX9 and oligodontia: a third family and review of the literature.

Guala A(1), Falco V, Breedveld G, De Filippi P, Danesino C.

Author information: 
(1)SOC Pediatria, Ospedale Castelli, Verbania, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to report a family affected by benign
hereditary chorea in which a large deletion including TTF1, PAX9, and other genes
was identified and results in oligodontia.
METHODS: Clinical and radiological studies of the two affected members (mother
and daughter) were used to describe the oligodontia present in both of them.
RESULTS: The missing teeth in both patients are described in detail, and these
data are compared with the dental anomalies observed in the only two other
families with deletions of PAX9 and with the data available for 12 previously
reported families carrying different types of PAX9 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a clinical relevance for recognizing such families, and
offering available therapies since childhood is stressed. Some genotype-phenotype
correlations between PAX9 mutations and dental anomalies can be drawn.

PMID: 18445003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Diagn Cytopathol. 2008 May;36(5):333-7. doi: 10.1002/dc.20810.

Cytology of metastatic thymic well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma
(thymic carcinoid) in pleural fluid: report of a case.

Cameron SE(1), Alsharif M, McKeon D, Pambuccian SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Thymic carcinoid tumors (well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas) are
uncommon anterior mediastinal neoplasms. These tumors are frequently accompanied 
by other endocrinopathies as part of a multiple endocrine neoplasia type I
syndrome (MEN type I) and by paraneoplastic Cushing's syndrome and have a poor
prognosis. We present the case of a 24-year-old man who presented for follow-up
of thymic carcinoid with extensive bony metastases. He had recently completed
radiotherapy to lesions involving his skull and mandible. An ultrasound-guided
left-sided diagnostic and therapeutic thoracentesis was performed yielding 1 l of
cloudy yellow fluid. The cytologic fluid preparations consisted of large
"cannonballs" and atypical cell groups with salt and pepper nuclear chromatin. A 
panel of immunohistochemical stains were performed on the cell block material,
and the atypical cells were positive for cytokeratin, synaptophysin, and
chromogranin, but not for TTF1. These findings were consistent with metastatic
well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (carcinoid tumor). This is the first
reported case of a carcinoid tumor manifesting as large, spherical, smoothly
contoured cell aggregates ("cannonballs") in a pleural fluid. Despite its rarity,
a metastatic carcinoid tumor should be considered when "cannonballs" are found in
effusions.

PMID: 18418883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Lung Cancer. 2008 Oct;62(1):35-44. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2008.02.003. Epub 2008 
Mar 19.

EGFR, TTF-1 and Mdm2 expression in stage III non-small cell lung cancer: a
positive association.

Berghmans T(1), Mascaux C, Haller A, Meert AP, Van Houtte P, Sculier JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Unit and Thoracic Oncology, Institut Jules
Bordet, ULB (Université Libre de Bruxelles), Bruxelles, Belgium.
thierry.berghmans@bordet.be

New biological factors have not been extensively studied in stage III NSCLC as
yet. The aim of this retrospective study was to assess the association between
the expression and the prognostic role on survival of four biological markers in 
stage III NSCLC. Clinical characteristics were retrieved from the patients
charts. EGF-R, Mdm2, p53 and TTF-1 expressions were evaluated by
immunohistochemistry by three independent observers. Cox multivariate model was
used to assess the impact of clinical and biological factors on patients'
survival. A total of 84 stage III NSCLC patients, treated between 03/1987 and
08/2003, were included in the study. There was a statistically significant
association between the expression of TTF-1 and EGFR (p=0.01) or TTF-1 and Mdm2
(p=0.04). Positive expressions for EGFR or TTF-1 were almost mutually exclusive. 
The status EGFR+/TTF-1--was mainly found in squamous cell carcinoma (18 among
19tumours). In multivariate analysis, only treatment with curative intent was
independently associated with better survival (p=0.0004). In stage III NSCLC,
there was a significant association between TTF-1 and EGFR or TTF-1 and Mdm2. The
status EGFR+/TTF-1--was associated with squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 18355939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. EMBO J. 2008 Apr 23;27(8):1255-65. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.57. Epub 2008 Mar 20.

Epigenetic regulation of TTF-I-mediated promoter-terminator interactions of rRNA 
genes.

Németh A(1), Guibert S, Tiwari VK, Ohlsson R, Längst G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry III, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Ribosomal RNA synthesis is the eukaryotic cell's main transcriptional activity,
but little is known about the chromatin domain organization and epigenetics of
actively transcribed rRNA genes. Here, we show epigenetic and spatial
organization of mouse rRNA genes at the molecular level. TTF-I-binding sites
subdivide the rRNA transcription unit into functional chromatin domains and
sharply delimit transcription factor occupancy. H2A.Z-containing nucleosomes
occupy the spacer promoter next to a newly characterized TTF-I-binding site. The 
spacer and the promoter proximal TTF-I-binding sites demarcate the enhancer. DNA 
from both the enhancer and the coding region is hypomethylated in actively
transcribed repeats. 3C analysis revealed an interaction between promoter and
terminator regions, which brings the beginning and end of active rRNA genes into 
close contact. Reporter assays show that TTF-I mediates this interaction, thereby
linking topology and epigenetic regulation of the rRNA genes.

PMCID: PMC2367401
PMID: 18354495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Neoplasia. 2008 Mar;10(3):298-302.

EML4-ALK fusion lung cancer: a rare acquired event.

Perner S(1), Wagner PL, Demichelis F, Mehra R, Lafargue CJ, Moss BJ, Arbogast S, 
Soltermann A, Weder W, Giordano TJ, Beer DG, Rickman DS, Chinnaiyan AM, Moch H,
Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA.

A recurrent gene fusion between EML4 and ALK in 6.7% of non-small cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) and NKX2-1 (TTF1, TITF1) high-level amplifications in 12% of
adenocarcinomas of the lung were independently reported recently. Because the
EML4-ALK fusion was only shown by a reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction approach, we developed fluorescent in situ hybridization assays to
interrogate more than 600 NSCLCs using break-apart probes for EML4 and ALK. We
found that EML4-ALK fusions occur in less than 3% of NSCLC samples and that EML4 
and/or ALK amplifications also occur. We also observed that, in most cases in
which an EML4/ALK alteration is detected, not all of the tumor cells harbor the
lesion. By using a detailed multi-fluorescent in situ hybridization probe assay
and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we have evidence that other,
more common mechanisms besides gene inversion exist including the possibility of 
other fusion partners for ALK and EML4. Furthermore, we confirmed the NKX2-1
high-level amplification in a significant subset of NSCLC and found this
amplification to be mutually exclusive to ALK and EML4 rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC2259458
PMID: 18320074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Mar;32(3):420-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318158a397.

Islet 1 (Isl1) expression is a reliable marker for pancreatic endocrine tumors
and their metastases.

Schmitt AM(1), Riniker F, Anlauf M, Schmid S, Soltermann A, Moch H, Heitz PU,
Klöppel G, Komminoth P, Perren A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. Anja.Schmitt@triemli.stzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Tracing the origin of a metastasis of a neuroendocrine carcinoma is a
challenge. The transcription factors Cdx2 and TTF1 have been found to be helpful 
in identifying well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors of gastrointestinal and 
pulmonary origin, respectively. So far, such a marker is lacking for pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PETs) and metastases thereof. Islet1 (Isl1) is a
transcription factor expressed in pancreatic islet cells. The aim of this study
was (1) to test the specificity and sensitivity of Isl1 as a marker of PETs, and 
(2) to test the specificity and sensitivity of a panel of markers, including
Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1, for the localization of the primary.
DESIGN: One hundred eighty-eight primary gastroenteropancreatic and pulmonary
endocrine tumors and 49 metastases thereof were examined. Immunohistochemistry
using antibodies directed against Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1 was performed and the
staining results were scored semiquantitatively.
RESULTS: Isl1 proved to be a highly specific marker for pancreatic endocrine
tumors. In 84 primary PET its specificity was 78.4% (sensitivity 74.3%) and in 18
metastases of PET the specificity reached 100% (sensitivity 77.8%). Strong Cdx2
staining showed a specificity for gastrointestinal origin of 83.9% (sensitivity
82%) in primary tumors and of 100% (sensitivity 40%) in metastases. Including
weakly positive tumors lead to a decreased specificity but an increased
sensitivity. TTF1 expression was detected in 2 PET and 1 ileal primary tumor only
and was absent in all metastases of gastroenteropancreatic endocrine tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Isl1 is a reliable marker of pancreatic endocrine tumors and
metastases thereof. It shows a comparable sensitivity and specificity as Cdx2 as 
a marker of ileal and appendiceal neuroendocrine tumors and their metastases.
TTF1 is very rarely expressed in well-differentiated gastroentero-PETs.
Therefore, the panel of Isl1, Cdx2, and TTF1 seems useful for examining
metastases of well-differentiated endocrine carcinomas of unknown origin.

PMID: 18300808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mod Pathol. 2008 Apr;21(4):485-90. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.4. Epub 2008 Feb
1.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 expression in ovarian epithelial neoplasms.

Kubba LA(1), McCluggage WG, Liu J, Malpica A, Euscher ED, Silva EG, Deavers MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) protein expression is widely used in the
diagnosis of lung and thyroid carcinomas. Although there have been reports of
TTF-1 immunoreactivity in tumors other than those originating in the lung or the 
thyroid, the expression of this marker has been studied in only a limited number 
of ovarian neoplasms. Our study examines the incidence of TTF-1 expression in a
variety of ovarian epithelial neoplasms. Tissue microarrays of 138 ovarian serous
carcinomas, 65 endometrioid adenocarcinomas, 35 mucinous adenocarcinomas, 30
mucinous neoplasms of low malignant potential, and 10 clear cell carcinomas were 
stained with anti-TTF1-antibody. In addition, whole tissue sections of 19 serous 
carcinomas, 5 endometrioid adenocarcinomas, 7 mucinous adenocarcinomas, and 3
clear cell carcinomas were stained. In the tissue microarrays, TTF-1 nuclear
expression was demonstrated in 2 of 65 (3%) of the endometrioid adenocarcinomas; 
no nuclear immunoreactivity was identified in the remaining ovarian neoplasms. In
the whole tissue sections, TTF-1 nuclear staining was present in 7 of 19 (37%)
serous carcinomas, 1 of 5 (20%) endometrioid adenocarcinomas, and 1 of 3 (33%)
clear cell carcinomas. In most of the positive cases, staining was focal, but in 
one endometrioid adenocarcinoma in the tissue microarray and in one serous and
one clear cell carcinoma in the whole tissue sections, there was diffuse
positivity. Overall, there was nuclear staining in 0.7% of tumors in the tissue
microarray and 26% in the whole tissue sections. Although TTF-1 nuclear
expression is generally considered to be a relatively specific marker for lung
and thyroid neoplasms, the occasional immunoreactivity of ovarian carcinomas
should be considered in the evaluation of neoplasms of unknown primary origin. It
should also be taken into consideration when evaluating adenocarcinomas involving
the lung in patients with a history of a gynecologic malignancy.

PMID: 18246044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Pathologe. 2008 Feb;29(1):53-60. doi: 10.1007/s00292-007-0957-z.

[Primary neuroendocrine carcinoma of the liver. From carcinoid tumor to
small-cell hepatic carcinoma: case reports and review of the literature].

[Article in German]

Balta Z(1), Sauerbruch T, Hirner A, Büttner R, Fischer HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinik Bonn. baltazeynep@hotmail.com

Primary hepatic neuroendocrine tumors are rare neoplasms. While primary hepatic
carcinoid tumors (PHCT) are well-differentiated tumors, primary hepatic
small-cell carcinomas (PHSCC) represent the poorly differentiated end of the
spectrum of neuroendocrine carcinomas. The first patient, suffering from PHCT,
has had a follow-up for 32 years and is still alive. Within this time, the tumor 
relapsed 4 times with unchanged histology and immunohistochemistry features. The 
second patient suffered from small-cell carcinoma of the liver. There were no
risk factors for a hepatocellular carcinoma. An extensive preoperative and
postoperative diagnostic investigation could rule out an extrahepatic primary
site. Immunohistochemically the tumor was negative for Hepar-1, AFP, TTF1 and
CDX2 but reacted positively with CD56 and sporadically with the keratins 8, 18
and 20. A neuroendocrine PHSCC was diagnosed. After neoadjuvant cytostatic
treatment the carcinoma was completely extirpated and 18 months after treatment
the patient is healthy.PHCT and PHSCC have to be clearly separated from
hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinomas. Exclusion of an extrahepatic
primary site requires an accurate and synoptic analysis of clinical, radiologic
and pathologic findings. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice.

PMID: 18210116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Surg Pathol. 2008 Jan;16(1):59-61. doi: 10.1177/1066896907307232.

Metastatic carcinoma within a foreign-body reaction to vegetable matter: a
pseudo-pseudomalignancy.

Reese JM(1), Phillips D, Brown JA, Papadimitriou JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21201, USA.

PMID: 18203786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 10;8:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-2.

FGF10 maintains distal lung bud epithelium and excessive signaling leads to
progenitor state arrest, distalization, and goblet cell metaplasia.

Nyeng P(1), Norgaard GA, Kobberup S, Jensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Lerner Research Institute, Stem Cell Biology and 
Regenerative Medicine, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland Ohio, USA. nyengp@ccf.org

BACKGROUND: Interaction with the surrounding mesenchyme is necessary for
development of endodermal organs, and Fibroblast growth factors have recently
emerged as mesenchymal-expressed morphogens that direct endodermal morphogenesis.
The fibroblast growth factor 10 (Fgf10) null mouse is characterized by the
absence of lung bud development. Previous studies have shown that this
requirement for Fgf10 is due in part to its role as a chemotactic factor during
branching morphogenesis. In other endodermal organs Fgf10 also plays a role in
regulating differentiation.
RESULTS: Through gain-of-function analysis, we here find that FGF10 inhibits
differentiation of the lung epithelium and promotes distalization of the
embryonic lung. Ectopic expression of FGF10 in the lung epithelium caused
impaired lung development and perinatal lethality in a transgenic mouse model.
Lung lobes were enlarged due to increased interlobular distance and hyperplasia
of the airway epithelium. Differentiation of bronchial and alveolar cell lineages
was inhibited. The transgenic epithelium consisted predominantly of proliferating
progenitor-like cells expressing Pro-surfactant protein C, TTF1, PEA3 and
Clusterin similarly to immature distal tip cells. Strikingly, goblet cells
developed within this arrested epithelium leading to goblet cell hyperplasia.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that FGF10 inhibits terminal differentiation in the
embryonic lung and maintains the distal epithelium, and that excessive levels of 
FGF10 leads to metaplastic differentiation of goblet cells similar to that seen
in chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2263027
PMID: 18186922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;14(1):149-54. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1631.

Bronchopulmonary carcinoid: phenotype and long-term outcome in a
single-institution series of Italian patients.

Rugge M(1), Fassan M, Clemente R, Rizzardi G, Giacomelli L, Pennelli G, Mescoli
C, Segat D, Rea F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences and Special Therapies, University of
Padova, Italy. massimo.rugge@unipd.it

PURPOSE: The histologic distinction between low-grade typical and
intermediate-grade atypical bronchopulmonary carcinoids basically lies on
cellular differentiation, mitotic activity, and presence of "neoplastic"
necrosis; at single patient level, however, none of these features enables a
reliable prediction of the clinicopathologic outcome.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The long-term postsurgical outcome of a single-institution
series of 67 radically treated bronchopulmonary carcinoids was correlated with
the tumor phenotype assessed by combining conventional histology with a panel of 
immunohistochemical markers exploring cell differentiation (chromogranin, NSE,
TTF1), cell turnover (Mib1), and apoptosis (Bcl2, Bax).
RESULTS: Fifty-eight (86.6%) carcinoids were assessed as low-grade typical and
nine (13.4%) were assessed as intermediate-grade atypical. The mean follow-up was
of 85.13 months (range, 28-168; median, 82.0). All cases expressed neuroendocrine
markers, whereas TTF1 was never expressed. At univariate analysis, tumor
recurrence (n = 6) correlated significantly with the carcinoid histotype (P =
0.002) and with each of the following variables: tumor location (P = 0.01),
mitotic index (P = 0.003), necrosis (P = 0.002), tumor vascular invasion (P =
0.0001), Mib1 expression (P = 0.005), Bcl2 expression (P = 0.024), and
synchronous node metastasis (P = 0.028). The best cutoffs for Mib1 and Bcl2
expression (calculated by receiver operating characteristic curves)
discriminating recurrent versus nonrecurrent tumors were 5.4% for Mib1 and 2.0%
for Bcl2 (Mib1: sensitivity, 83%; specificity, 97%; area under curve, 0.844 +/-
0.14; Bcl2: sensitivity, 83%; specificity, 65%; area under curve, 0.769 +/-
0.12). By stratifying the patients according to the obtained cutoffs, significant
differences emerged in the patients' disease-free survival (log-rank test: Mib1, 
P = 0.0001; Bcl2, P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Mib1 and Bcl2 significantly discriminate between recurrent versus
nonrecurrent tumors, producing a biologically plausible, diagnostically suitable 
immunohistochemical pattern.

PMID: 18172265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2007 Dec;15(4):415-20.

The diagnostic value of TTF-1, CK 5/6, and p63 immunostaining in classification
of lung carcinomas.

Kargi A(1), Gurel D, Tuna B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University,
Inciralti, Izmir, Turkey. aydanur.kargi@deu.edu.tr

This study was aimed to evaluate the utility of a panel of antibodies, consisting
of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), p63, and cytokeratins (CK) 5/6 for
distinguishing between small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) and nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma, as well as for identifying glandular or squamous differentiation in
small tissues obtained by bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopic biopsies of 77 lung
carcinoma cases with easily recognizable morphologic features were included in
this study. All the cases were immunohistochemically stained for p63, CK5/6
[indicators of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)] and TTF-1 [indicator of SCLC and
adenocarcinoma (AC)]. Although, 28 SCLC displayed TTF-1 positive, p63 negative
immunoprofile, most of the SCC (32/39) had the opposite immunoprofile. All of the
10 ACs were negative for p63 and most of them (8/10) were negative for CK5/6. p63
and CK 5/6 seem to be useful for differentiating AC and SCLC from SCC with 100%
specificity and 82% sensitivity, 89% specificity and 79% sensitivity,
respectively. It seems that to achieve histologic typing of lung cancer as
accurate as possible, TTF-1 in combination with p63 and CK 5/6 might be useful
components of immunohistochemical analysis of poorly differentiated lung
carcinomas in biopsy tissues.

PMID: 18091384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2007 Dec;15(4):407-14.

Diagnostic value of CDX-2 and TTF-1 expressions in separating metastatic
neuroendocrine neoplasms of unknown origin.

Lin X(1), Saad RS, Luckasevic TM, Silverman JF, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Allegheny General Hospital, 320 East North Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA. xlin4@excite.com

Histomorphologic features and routine endocrine immunohistochemical (IHC) markers
do not differentiate neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) in relation to their location, 
making it difficult to establish the site of origin of a metastatic neoplasm.
Site-specific markers would be useful, particularly when examining small
biopsies. CDX-2 and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) are transcription
factors that have been recently proposed as IHC markers of intestinal and
pulmonary adenocarcinomas, respectively. However, their expression in NETs has
not been widely studied. The objective of this study is to evaluate the
expression of TTF-1 and CDX-2 in NETs and their potential usefulness in
distinguishing gastrointestinal and pulmonary NETs from other sites. We performed
an IHC study on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections from 155 primary NETs,
including 60 pulmonary, 60 gastrointestinal, 30 pancreatic, and 5 NETs from other
sites. In addition, we evaluated 13 metastatic NETs, including 11 cases of
gastrointestinal and 2 of pulmonary origin. In this study, CDX-2 was expressed in
28/60 (47%) of gastrointestinal NETs with the following results: 11/11 (100%)
appendiceal, 12/14 (86%) small intestinal, 3/4 (75%) colonic, 2/11 (18%) rectal, 
and 0/20 (0%) gastric. TTF-1 was expressed in pulmonary carcinoid tumors in 13/30
(43%) and in 27/30 (90%) pulmonary small cell carcinomas. NETs of other origins
(pancreas, skin, ovary, and thymus) were negative for both TTF-1 and CDX-2.
Metastatic neuroendocrine neoplasms of intestinal origin were positive for CDX-2 
and negative for TTF-1. In conclusion, CDX-2 expression is highly specific in
identifying NETs of intestinal origin and TTF-1 expression is helpful in
identifying NETs of pulmonary origin, which can be quite useful in the diagnosis 
of metastatic NETs of unknown origin.

PMID: 18091383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Pathol Int. 2008 Jan;58(1):31-7.

Immunohistochemical expression of TTF-1 in various cytological subtypes of
primary lung adenocarcinoma, with special reference to intratumoral
heterogeneity.

Maeshima AM(1), Omatsu M, Tsuta K, Asamura H, Matsuno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

The immunohistochemical expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) was 
investigated in various cytological subtypes of primary lung adenocarcinoma, with
special reference to intratumoral heterogeneity. Three groups were categorized
according to cytological subtype: group A, adenocarcinomas with either a Clara
cell and/or type II epithelial cell component (Clara/type II) or a mixed
Clara/type II and bronchial surface epithelial cell component (BSE) (mCB), in
addition to other components; group B, adenocarcinomas with components including 
either BSE, a goblet cell component (GOB) or a mixed BSE and GOB component (mBG),
and lacking Clara/type II or mCB; group C, adenocarcinomas with only a poorly
differentiated component (POR). In group A all Clara/type II, mCB, BSE and the
majority of POR were TTF-1 positive. In group B the majority of BSE, POR and all 
GOB were TTF-1 negative. BSE and POR in both groups had a different phenotype,
possibly reflecting their different natural history. In group C 80% of cases were
TTF-1 positive, suggesting that the majority were derived from group A tumors.

PMID: 18067638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Int J Dev Biol. 2008;52(1):55-62.

TTF-1/NKX2.1 up-regulates the in vivo transcription of nestin.

Pelizzoli R(1), Tacchetti C, Luzzi P, Strangio A, Bellese G, Zappia E, Guazzi S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Genova, Department of Experimental Medicine, MicroSCoBiO
Research Center, Genova, Italy.

TTF-1/NKX2.1, also known as T/EBP, is a homeodomain-containing gene involved in
the organogenesis of the thyroid gland, lung and ventral forebrain. We have
already reported that in 3T3 cells, TTF-1/NKX2.1 up-regulates the transcription
of nestin, an intermediate filament protein expressed in multipotent
neuroepithelial cells, by direct DNA-binding to a HRE/CRE-like site (NestBS)
within a CNS-specific enhancer. Here, we demonstrate that TTF-1/NKX2.1 is
co-expressed with nestin in the embryonal forebrain. We also performed a
transgenic mouse embryo analysis in which NestBS was replaced by the canonical
TTF-1/NKX2.1 consensus DNA-binding site (as identified in many thyroid- and
lung-specific genes and very divergent from NestBS) or a random mutation. We
observed beta-galactosidase expression in forebrain regions where TTF-1/NKX2.1 is
expressed in wild-type embryos, and -to a minor extent- in rostralmost
telencephalic regions and thalamus, whereas no beta-galactosidase expression was 
detected in forebrains of embryos bearing the random mutation. These data show
that TTF-1/NKX2.1 regulates the transcription of the nestin gene in vivo through 
the NestBS site, suggesting that nestin might be at least one of the effectors of
TTF-1/NKX2.1 during forebrain development. Finally, we have shown that the
transactivating effect of TTF-1/NKX2.1 on the CNS-specific enhancer is unaffected
by Retinoic Acid Receptor-alpha.

PMID: 18033672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008 May;68(5):828-35. Epub 2007 Nov 2.

Identification and characterization of four PAX8 rare sequence variants (p.T225M,
p.L233L, p.G336S and p.A439A) in patients with congenital hypothyroidism and
dysgenetic thyroid glands.

Esperante SA(1), Rivolta CM, Miravalle L, Herzovich V, Iorcansky S, Baralle M,
Targovnik HM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Cátedra de Genética y Biología Molecular,
Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

CONTEXT: Thyroid dysgenesis may be associated with mutations in the paired box
transcription factor 8 (PAX8) gene and is characterized by congenital
hypothyroidism transmitted in an autosomal dominant mode.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to identify new mutations in the PAX8 gene.
Sixty congenital hypothyroidism-affected individuals with dysgenetic (agenesis,
ectopia and hypoplasia) and eutopic thyroid glands were studied.
METHODS: The 12 exons of the PAX8 gene along with their exon-intron boundaries
were amplified from genomic DNA and a mutational screening was performed by
single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) followed by direct sequencing of
samples with abnormal migration patterns. The PAX8 mutations were functionally
characterized by transient transfection experiments.
RESULTS: Molecular analysis of the PAX8 gene indicated that four affected
individuals had four sequence differences: three novel variations [c.699C>T
(p.L233L), c.1006G>A (p.G336S) and c.1317A>G (p.A439A)] and one recently reported
[c.674C>T (p.T225M)], whereas the 56 remaining patients showed only wild-type
alleles of PAX8. p.T225M, p.L233L and p.G336S variants were not detected in 530
chromosomes from 265 subjects randomly selected from the general population,
whereas the p.A439A variant was identified in only one of the 530 chromosomes
analysed. Functional analysis of the nonsynonymous substitutions showed that the 
p.T225M and p.G336S proteins had not lost their ability to bind a specific DNA
sequence and to activate the transcription of the thyroglobulin (TG) promoter in 
synergy with thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1).
CONCLUSIONS: We report the occurrence of two nonsynonymous substitutions, one
recently reported (p.T225M) and one novel (p.G336S), and two novel synonymous
substitutions (p.L233L and p.A439A) in the PAX8 gene. p.T225M and p.G336S are
rare sequence variants or may act by inhibiting an unknown particular function.
Our study also confirms the very low prevalence of PAX8 mutations in thyroid
dysgenesis.

PMID: 17980011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Nov;131(11):1686-90.

Utility of tissue-specific transcription factors thyroid transcription factor 1
and Cdx2 in determining the primary site of metastatic adenocarcinomas to the
brain.

Strickland-Marmol LB(1), Khoor A, Livingston SK, Rojiani A.

Author information: 
(1)University of South Florida Department of Pathology, 12901 Bruce B. Downs
Blvd, MDC Box 11, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. Leah.Strickland-Marmol@med.va.gov

CONTEXT: Brain metastases of adenocarcinoma of unknown primary pose a diagnostic 
dilemma to the surgical pathologist. Although the most common source in these
cases is the lung, determining a primary source is difficult on routinely stained
slides. Immunohistochemical stain panels including differential cytokeratins,
hormone receptors, and breast-specific proteins are commonly used in these cases.
Recently, attention has turned to tissue-specific transcription factors, such as 
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and Cdx2, in the appraisal of metastatic
adenocarcinomas.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the previously unpublished immunohistochemical
expression of the relatively new tissue-specific transcription factor Cdx2 in
metastatic adenocarcinomas to the brain.
DESIGN: We reviewed the surgical pathology files of the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Fla, and retrieved 38 consecutive cases of 
metastatic adenocarcinoma (22 pulmonary, 10 breast, 6 gastrointestinal [2
esophagus/gastroesophageal junction, 4 colorectal]) to the brain with
confirmation of the primary site by chart review and histologic evaluation.
Sections were immunohistochemically stained with antibodies to TTF-1, Cdx2, and
cytokeratins 7 and 20 by standard methods.
RESULTS: Specificities and positive predictive values for Cdx2 and TTF-1 equaled 
100% for metastatic gastrointestinal and pulmonary adenocarcinomas, respectively.
The negative predictive value of Cdx2 was also very high at 97%.
CONCLUSIONS: Cdx2 is a specific and valuable tool for the surgical pathologist
when faced with the common problem of metastatic adenocarcinoma of unknown
primary. In conjunction with TTF-1, cytokeratin 7, and cytokeratin 20, Cdx2 can
accurately differentiate the most common sources of metastatic adenocarcinoma to 
the brain.

PMID: 17979487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 16;104(42):16663-8. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Oncogenic cooperation and coamplification of developmental transcription factor
genes in lung cancer.

Kendall J(1), Liu Q, Bakleh A, Krasnitz A, Nguyen KC, Lakshmi B, Gerald WL,
Powers S, Mu D.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 26;105(8):E12.

We used high-resolution array analysis to discover a recurrent lung cancer
amplicon located at 14q13.3. Low-level gain of this region was detected in 15% of
lung cancer samples, and high-level amplification was detected in an additional
4% of samples. High-level focal amplification appears to be specific to lung
cancers, because it was not detected in >500 samples of other tumor types.
Mapping of the commonly amplified region revealed there are three genes in the
core region, all of which encode transcription factors with either established
lung developmental function (TTF1/NKX2-1, NKX2-8) or potential lung developmental
function (PAX9). All three genes were overexpressed to varying degrees in
amplified samples, although TTF1/NKX2-1 was not expressed in the squamous cancer 
subtype, consistent with previous reports. Remarkably, overexpression of any
pairwise combination of these genes showed pronounced synergy in promoting the
proliferation of immortalized human lung epithelial cells. Analysis of human lung
cancer cell lines by both RNAi and ectopic overexpression further substantiates
an oncogenic role for these transcription factors. These results, taken together 
with previous reports of oncogenic alterations of transcription factors involved 
in lung development (p63, CEBPA), suggest genetic alterations that directly
interfere with transcriptional networks normally regulating lung development may 
be a more common feature of lung cancer than previously realized.

PMCID: PMC2034240
PMID: 17925434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Breast J. 2007 Sep-Oct;13(5):529-30.

Mammary small-cell carcinoma with dimorphic phenotype.

Zhang W(1), Hoda SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA. wzhang@nyp.org

PMID: 17760681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Histopathology. 2007 Sep;51(3):405-7.

Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the uterine cervix exhibiting TTF1
immunoreactivity.

McCluggage WG, Sargent A, Bailey A, Wilson GE.

PMID: 17727482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007 Dec;26(3-4):605-10.

Regulation of cancer-related gene expression by galectin-3 and the molecular
mechanism of its nuclear import pathway.

Nakahara S(1), Raz A.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Progression and Metastasis Program, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne
State University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Galectin-3 (Gal-3), a member of the beta-galactoside-binding gene family,
distributes inside and outside the cell and has pleiotropic biological functions 
such as cell growth, cell adhesion, cell-cell interaction, and mRNA processing in
a specific situation. In particular, Gal-3 in the nucleus plays a pivotal role in
the regulation of cancer-related gene expression, including cyclin D1, TTF-1 and 
MUC2, presumably associated with tumor progression. Therefore, to understand the 
mechanism of nuclear import of Gal-3 is very significant and might be developed
to the new approach for the cancer treatment. In this review, we focus on the
role of Gal-3 in the nucleus and the molecular mechanism of nuclear import
pathways of Gal-3, providing the hints for the inhibition of Gal-3 function.

PMCID: PMC3613988
PMID: 17726578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2007 May;36(5):292-6.

[Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia of lung: clinicopathologic study of 8 cases and
review of literature].

[Article in Chinese]

Huo Z(1), Liu HR, Wan JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical features of
atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) of lung.
METHODS: Eight cases of AAH of lung were studied by light microscopy and
immunohistochemical staining for p16, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1),
Ki-67, p53, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and c-erbB-2.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 52 years. The male-to-female ratio was 
1:3. Two patients were chronic smokers. The clinical symptoms were relatively
non-specific. Three patients had past history of non-pulmonary tumors, while 4
patients had lung adenocarcinoma. CT scan revealed solitary or multifocal
hyperdense opacities. Histologically, the lesions ranged from 1 mm to 6 mm in
size. Two cases were solitary and 6 cases were multifocal. All were of high-grade
lesions. Associated low-grade component was noted in 3 cases. There was no
evidence of local recurrence or disease progression in the 7 patients with
post-operative follow-up information available (mean duration of follow up = 23
months). Four patients had received chemotherapy as well. Immunohistochemical
study showed variable positivity for p16 (5/8), TTF-1 (5/8), Ki-67 (with
proliferation index ranging from 1% to 10%), p53 (1/8) and EGFR (1/8). The
staining for c-erbB-2 was negative (0/8). Four cases of AAH were associated with 
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. The adenocarcinoma cells were diffusely positive for
TTF-1 (4/4), variably positive for p16 (2/4), Ki-67 (with proliferation index
ranging from 2% to 40%), p53 (1/4) and EGFR (3/4), and negative for c-erbB-2
(0/4).
CONCLUSIONS: AAH of lung is associated with pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Diagnosis
of AAH requires correlation with CT findings and pathologic examination.

PMID: 17706134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Jul;131(7):1027-32.

Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma: a review of current concepts and evolving issues.

Yousem SA(1), Beasley MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Oct;132(10):1548.

CONTEXT: The concept of bronchioloalveolar carcinoma underwent considerable
refinement between the publications of the 1981 and 1999 World Health
Organization classifications of lung tumors. Both pathologic and clinical aspects
of this carcinoma are the subject of considerable interest.
OBJECTIVE: To review and summarize the evolution of the current concept of
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma and evolving issues that are under further
investigation.
DATA SOURCES: Pertinent peer-reviewed literature emphasizing historical
classification and evolution as well as current and evolving concepts.
CONCLUSIONS: Small, solitary, nonmucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinomas are
associated with a markedly better prognosis compared with conventional invasive
adenocarcinomas. Such tumors may be cured by surgical resection and may be more
responsive to epidermal growth factor receptor-targeted therapy. The prognosis
and staging of multifocal disease remain unresolved, as does the question of
whether a small amount of invasion adversely affects prognosis. Mucinous
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma appears to be a markedly different entity than the
nonmucinous subtype.

PMID: 17616987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cancer Invest. 2007 Jun;25(4):232-9.

Impact of PET-FDG in the diagnosis and therapeutic care of patients presenting
with metastases of unknown primary.

Garin E(1), Prigent-Lejeune F, Lesimple T, Barge ML, Rousseau C, Devillers A,
Bouriel C, Habiba MT, Bernard AM, Bridji B, Resche I.

Author information: 
(1)UPRES EA 3890/Department of Medical Imagery, Centre Eugène Marquis, Rennes,
France. etienne.garin@univ-rennesl.fr

We carried out a study to evaluate the contribution of positron emission
tomography with (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (PET-FDG) in the diagnosis and
therapeutic care of patients presenting with metastases of unknown primary.
PET-FDG was prospectively performed in 51 patients. The PET-FDG data were
confirmed histologically or by a follow-up on average at 13 months. PET-FDG
identified the primary in 24 percent of cases, and detected the presence of
additional metastases in 41 percent of cases. PET-FDG led to a therapeutic
modification for 12 patients (24 percent). Furthermore, the therapeutic impact
seems more marked in localized forms than in the multifocal. This broad
exploratory study confirms the important role of PET-FDG in the diagnosis and
therapeutic management of patients with metastases of unknown primary.

PMID: 17612933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2007 Jul;23(7):325-31.

Use of caveolin-1, thyroid transcription factor-1, and cytokeratins 7 and 20 in
discriminating between primary and secondary pulmonary adenocarcinoma from breast
or colonic origin.

Tsao SC(1), Su YC, Wang SL, Chai CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

The objectives of this study were firstly to compare the immunostaining patterns 
of antibodies against caveolin-1, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1),
cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and cytokeratin 20 (CK20) in primary and secondary pulmonary 
adenocarcinomas of breast or colonic origin, and secondly, to investigate their
use alone and in combination, in distinguishing between primary and secondary
lung adenocarcinomas from breast or colonic origin. Of the 49 lung adenocarcinoma
specimens that were enrolled in this study, 30 were primary pulmonary
adenocarcinomas, and 19 (9, breast origin; 10, colonic origin) were metastatic
pulmonary carcinomas. Immunohistochemical staining was used to detect the
expression of caveolin-1, TTF-1, CK7, and CK20. Primary pulmonary adenocarcinoma 
most often had the CK7-positive/CK20-negative immunohistochemical phenotype and
was either TTF-1 positive or caveolin-1 negative. Secondary pulmonary
adenocarcinoma of breast origin most often had the CK7-positive/CK20-negative
immunohistochemical phenotype and was either TTF-1 negative or caveolin-1
positive, while secondary pulmonary adenocarcinoma of colonic origin most often
had the CK20-positive/CK7-negative immunohistochemical phenotype and was either
TTF-1 negative or caveolin-1 positive. The results suggest that caveolin-1,
TTF-1, or CK7/CK20 alone did not distinguish reliably between primary and
secondary pulmonary adenocarcinomas originating from breast or colon. The use of 
a panel of antibodies that includes TTF-1, caveolin-1, and CK7/CK20 may have
higher sensitivity in discriminating between primary adenocarcinomas and
metastatic lung adenocarcinomas from breast or colonic origin.

PMID: 17606426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Virchows Arch. 2007 Jul;451(1):109-11. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

TTF-1 staining in glioblastoma multiforme.

Galloway M, Sim R.

Comment on
    Virchows Arch. 2006 Nov;449(5):603-5.

PMID: 17562073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):237-47. Epub 2007 May 3.

Fgf10 dosage is critical for the amplification of epithelial cell progenitors and
for the formation of multiple mesenchymal lineages during lung development.

Ramasamy SK(1), Mailleux AA, Gupte VV, Mata F, Sala FG, Veltmaat JM, Del Moral
PM, De Langhe S, Parsa S, Kelly LK, Kelly R, Shia W, Keshet E, Minoo P, Warburton
D, Bellusci S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Saban Research Institute of Childrens Hospital 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

The key role played by Fgf10 during early lung development is clearly illustrated
in Fgf10 knockout mice, which exhibit lung agenesis. However, Fgf10 is
continuously expressed throughout lung development suggesting extended as well as
additional roles for FGF10 at later stages of lung organogenesis. We previously
reported that the enhancer trap Mlcv1v-nLacZ-24 transgenic mouse strain functions
as a reporter for Fgf10 expression and displays decreased endogenous Fgf10
expression. In this paper, we have generated an allelic series to determine the
impact of Fgf10 dosage on lung development. We report that 80% of the newborn
Fgf10 hypomorphic mice die within 24 h of birth due to respiratory failure. These
mutant mouse lungs display severe hypoplasia, dilation of the distal airways and 
large hemorrhagic areas. Epithelial differentiation and proliferation studies
indicate a specific decrease in TTF1 and SP-B expressing cells correlating with
reduced epithelial cell proliferation and associated with a decrease in
activation of the canonical Wnt signaling in the epithelium. Analysis of vascular
development shows a reduction in PECAM expression at E14.5, which is associated
with a simplification of the vascular tree at E18.5. We also show a decrease in
alpha-SMA expression in the respiratory airway suggesting defective smooth muscle
cell formation. At the molecular level, these defects are associated with
decrease in Vegfa and Pdgfa expression likely resulting from the decrease of the 
epithelial/mesenchymal ratio in the Fgf10 hypomorphic lungs. Thus, our results
indicate that FGF10 plays a pivotal role in maintaining epithelial progenitor
cell proliferation as well as coordinating alveolar smooth muscle cell formation 
and vascular development.

PMCID: PMC3714306
PMID: 17560563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2007;75(1):57-69.

[A comparative evaluation of immunohistochemical markers for the differential
diagnosis between malignant mesothelioma, non-small cell carcinoma involving the 
pleura, and benign reactive mesothelial cell proliferation].

[Article in Polish]

Szczepulska-Wójcik E(1), Langfort R, Roszkowski-Sliz K.

Author information: 
(1)Zaklad Patomorfologii Instytutu Gruzlicy i Chorób Pluc w Warszawie.
e.szczepulska@igichp.edu.pl

INTRODUCTION: Histopathological diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma (MM) and
differentiating it from tumors infiltrating the pleura is very difficult.
Distinguishing benign reactive mesothelial cell proliferation from MM also
presents problems. The objective of this study was to evaluate the significance
of selected immunohistochemical stains in differentiating MM from non-small cell 
lung cancers infiltrating the pleura and from benign reactive mesothelial cell
proliferation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The material encompassed 86 cases of MM, 54 cases of NSCLC 
infiltrating the pleura, and 43 cases of benign reactive mesothelial cell
proliferation. The MM cases were reclassified according to the WHO criteria
(2004): epithelioid, 61 cases (71%), including well-differentiated papillomatous,
3 cases; sarcomatous, 6 cases (6.8%); fibrous, 4 cases (4.7%); biphasic, 15 cases
(17.5%). A panel of immunohistochemical stains was used in this study. It
included broad-spectrum antibodies to cytokeratins (CKAE1/AE3, CKMNF116),
vimentin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), mesothelial cells (HBME1, CK5/6,
calretinin), adenocarcinoma cells (BerEp4, B72.3, CEA, TTF1), antibodies enabling
the assessment of proliferation (Mib1) and cell-cycle regulating proteins (p53).
RESULTS: Coexpression of cytokeratins and vimentin was found in 63.9% of MM cases
and cell-membrane reactions with EMA were seen in 58.9%. Positive staining for
HBME1, CK5/6, calretinin, BerEp4, B72.3, CEA and p53 was obtained in 76.7%,
51.2%, 66.7%, 1.2%, 6.2%, 1.2% and 51% of the cases, respectively. None of the MM
cases stained for TTF1. MM by WHO subgroups: Coexpression of cytokeratins and
vimentin occurred in 55.7% cases of epithelioid MM, 93.3% of biphasic MM, 66.6%
of sarcomatous MM, and in 100% of fibrous MM cases. Positive staining for HBME1, 
CK5/6, and calretinin was seen only in the epithelioid and mixed subtypes of MM; 
the respective percentages of positive reactions were: HBME1, 90.2% and 73.3%;
CK5/6 58.2% and 53.3%; calretinin, 72% and 75%. Non-small cell lung cancers
infiltrating the pleura: Coexpression of cytokeratin and vimentin was found in
17.6% of the cases, positive staining of membranes for EMA, in 13% cases.
Positive staining for HBME1 was observed in 22.6% of the cases, for CK5/6, in
9.3%, for calretinin, in 2%, for BerEp4, in 72.2%, for B72.3, in 64.1%, for CEA, 
in 58.5%, and for TTF1, in 43.8%. Benign reactive mesothelial cell proliferation:
Protein p53 was present in 9.3% of cases, whereas no positive staining for EMA
was found. Differentiation of MM from non-small cell carcinomas: Among the
antibodies used in the study, anti-HBME1 had the highest sensitivity (76.7%) but 
lowest specificity (77.4%). Staining for calretinin showed high specificity
(99.8%), as did CEA and TTF1 (98.8% and 100%), with moderate sensitivity (66.7%, 
58.5% and 43.8%, respectively). BerEp4 showed the highest sensitivity (72.2%) and
specificity (98.8%).
CONCLUSION: In diagnosing mesothelioma it is necessary to use a panel of
immunohistochemical stains, which should contain antibodies to markers for
adenocarcinoma and mesothelioma. Due to the high costs of such a study, a
two-stage method is advantageous. The best combination of sensitivity and
specificity was found for BerEp4, CEA, and TTF1 and for calretinin and HBME1. In 
the diagnosis of spindle-cell pleural tumors and the fibrous form of MM and
benign reactive mesothelial cell proliferation , markers of mesothelial cells are
noncontributory. Immunohistochemical staining fails to identify a reactive
process, but a diffuse, positive stain for EMA and the presence of protein p53
support the diagnosis of MM.

PMID: 17541913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007 Jun;31(6):902-6.

Intrahepatic clear cell cholangiocarcinoma: immunohistochemical aspects in a very
rare type of cholangiocarcinoma.

Haas S(1), Gütgemann I, Wolff M, Fischer HP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty of the University of Bonn, FRG.
Susanne.Haas@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Clear cell cholangiocarcinoma is a very unusual variant of peripheral bile duct
carcinoma. We present 3 cases on which we performed a broad spectrum of
immunohistochemical analysis. The tumors showed a glandular and trabecular growth
pattern with abundant desmoplastic stroma and clear cell change of about 80% of
the tumor cells. Positive expression of CK7 indicated a cholangiocellular origin.
A primary hepatocellular carcinoma and metastatic clear cell tumors of the
kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and the thyroid gland were excluded by absence of
CK20, CD10, HepPar1, and TTF1. No mucin could be detected within the cytoplasm of
the clear cells. Electronmicroscopy revealed only a few glycogen granula, but
numerous cytoplasmic lipoid vacuoles as a possible explanation for the clear cell
phenotype. All 3 tumors exhibited positive expression of CD56 (NCAM) in a
significant amount of the clear cells. Beside the clear cell component, one tumor
also showed an adenocarcinomalike and a well-differentiated tubular component.
CD56 expression was detected in all 3 tumor areas. This report of 3 cases
demonstrates that clear cell cholangiocarcinomas are not only of unusual
histomorphology. They also show CD56 expression which is a very uncommon finding 
for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. As CD56 expression is also found in
reactive bile ducts and bile duct adenomas, one may speculate that these rare
neoplasms may originate from reactive bile ducts or cholangiomatous lesions.

PMID: 17527078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Diagn Cytopathol. 2007 Jun;35(6):370-5.

WT1, monoclonal CEA, TTF1, and CA125 antibodies in the differential diagnosis of 
lung, breast, and ovarian adenocarcinomas in serous effusions.

Zhu W(1), Michael CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Hospitals, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-0054, USA.

The distinction between metastatic adenocarcinomas of lung (LAC), breast (BAC),
and ovary (OAC) in serous effusions can be very difficult since they all can
present as tight cell clusters. This is particularly challenging when the
malignant effusion is the patient's initial presentation or when the patient has 
a history of more than one primary. The aim of this study is to evaluate the
usefulness of WT1, monoclonal CEA (mCEA), TTF1, and CA125 antibodies in the
differential diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinoma from the lung, breast and
ovary in serous effusions. Forty-six samples of serous effusions with their
corresponding cell blocks were retrieved from our hospital computer system,
including 13 BACs, 13 LACs, and 20 OACs. The diagnoses were confirmed by the
surgical resection. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded cell block sections were
immunostained for WT1, mCEA, TTF1, and CA125. Two observers blindly reviewed the 
immunostained slides without knowledge of the previous clinical or histologic
diagnoses. The staining intensity was graded semiquantitatively as negative, 0;
weak, 1+; moderate, 2+; and strong, 3+. The percentage of positively staining
cells was estimated. The distribution patterns of reactivity for WT1 and TTF1
were recorded as nuclear, and mCEA and CA125 as membranous stain. Metastatic OACs
showed positive immunoreactivity to WT1 in 19/20 (95%) cases, CA125 in 20/20
(100%), and all showed negative reaction for both mCEA (0/20, 0%) and TTF1 (0/20,
0%). BAC showed positive reaction in 6/13 (46%) cases to CA125 and mCEA. Staining
pattern was diffuse for CA125 and focal for mCEA. Only 2/13 (15%) were positive
for WT1, while all of 13 BAC cases (0/13, 0%) were negative for TTF1. LAC showed 
positive immunoreactivity for TTF1 in 9/13 (69%) with a characteristic nuclear
staining pattern, but only 3/13 (23%) were focally stained for WT1. In addition, 
8/13 (62%) of LAC cases were positive for both CA125 and mCEA. Our results
demonstrate that the WT1 stain is specific for metastatic carcinoma of ovarian
primary, showing a high sensitivity. In addition, CA125 stain is very sensitive
for OACs, but could be positive in about a half of LAC and BAC cases. An
immunostaining pattern of positive mCEA as well as negative WT1 rules out OACs,
raising the possibility of LACs and BACs. A positive TTF1 staining supports the
diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma originating from lung rather than breast, while
a negative TTF1 favors the diagnosis of a breast primary. Immunohistochemical
studies with WT1, TTF1, and mCEA antibodies are useful in the differential
diagnosis of metastatic adenocarcinomas of lung, breast, and ovary.

PMID: 17497661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Pathol Int. 2007 May;57(5):296-8.

Follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma with unusual late metastasis to
the mandible and the scapula.

Liu L, Venkataraman G, Salhadar A.

PMID: 17493179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Cutan Pathol. 2007 May;34(5):410-4.

Primary cutaneous neuroendocrine cell carcinoma (Merkel cell carcinoma) with
prominent microcystic features, mimicking eccrine carcinoma.

Li N(1), Wolgamot G, Argenyi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA.

Although primary cutaneous neuroendocrine cell carcinoma [Merkel cell carcinoma
(MCC)] may show divergent features, including microcystic ('tubuloglandular'),
squamous, eccrine and rhabdomyoblastic, a diffuse microcystic pattern is
exceedingly rare. In this study, we present two cases of MCC with prominent
microcystic features, which precluded a definitive diagnosis in the initial punch
biopsy. Both patients were middle-aged men with a history of rapidly growing
plaques of the back or posterior neck. Punch biopsies from both patients revealed
an infiltrating neoplasm with prominent microcystic features that mimick
tubuloglandular structures, lined by hyperchromatic basaloid cells, which were
strongly positive for chromogranin and BerEP4, variably positive for CK7 and
CK5/6 and negative for CK20, synaptophysin, S-100, epithelial membrane antigen
(EMA), gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15), estrogen/progesterone
receptors (ER/PR), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA). The re-excision specimens showed a multifocal intra-epidermal
component in one case and typical finely stippled nuclear chromatin in both
cases. Although the lack of CK20 staining is unusual, the histologic
characteristics along with the remaining immunohistochemical studies favor the
diagnosis of a primary cutaneous neuroendocrine cell carcinoma over the variants 
of eccrine carcinoma or basal cell carcinoma with neuroendocrine differentiation.
Our cases illustrate that prominent microcystic features, mimicking glandular
differentiation, may occur in MCC and pose a diagnostic challenge in small biopsy
specimens.

PMID: 17448197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007 Jul;67(1):34-40. Epub 2007 Apr 15.

Genetic analysis of the PAX8 gene in children with congenital hypothyroidism and 
dysgenetic or eutopic thyroid glands: identification of a novel sequence variant.

Tonacchera M(1), Banco ME, Montanelli L, Di Cosmo C, Agretti P, De Marco G,
Ferrarini E, Ordookhani A, Perri A, Chiovato L, Santini F, Vitti P, Pinchera A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Endocrinologia e Metabolismo, Centro di Eccellenza AmbiSEN,
Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy. mtonacchera@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To analyse the coding region of PAX8 in individuals with congenital
(CH) or post neonatal hypothyroidism due to dysgenetic (TD) or eutopic thyroid
glands.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Forty-three children with CH and TD (13 agenesis, 23
ectopia, and seven hypoplasia), one subject with post neonatal onset of
hypothyroidism and thyroid ectopia, 15 children with CH and eutopic thyroid
glands and six euthyroid adults with thyroid hemiagenesis were enrolled as cases,
along with 120 healthy individuals as controls.
MEASUREMENTS: Exons 2-8 of the PAX8 were directly sequenced. HeLa and HEK293
cells were transfected with PAX8 wild-type (PAX8-WT), mutant PAX8, p300, thyroid 
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and thyroglobulin promoter pGL3 (TG prom-pGL3).
Synergism of TTF-1 with PAX8-WT vs. mutant and activity of PAX8-WT vs. mutant in 
accompaniment with p300 on TG prom-pGL3 were also assessed. The luminescence
produced by PAX8-WT and mutant PAX8 was measured.
RESULTS: Among patients and controls only a 15-year-old girl with thyroid ectopia
showed a heterozygous transition of cytosine to thymine at position 674 in exon
6, which changed a conserved threonine at position 225 to methionine
(PAX8-T225M). Her father and sister harboured PAX8-T225M without abnormal thyroid
phenotypes. PAX8-T225M and PAX8-WT similarly increased luciferase activity and
had a similar synergistic effect with TTF-1. At 500 ng p300, however, PAX8-T225M 
could not significantly increase TG promoter activity when compared to PAX8-T225M
alone, while PAX8-WT +500 ng p300 induction was significantly higher than PAX8-WT
alone (P < 0.001). Cotransfection of TTF-1 together with PAX8-T225M resulted in
rescuing of the lack of synergism with p300.
CONCLUSIONS: PAX8 mutations in congenital hypothyroidism due to dysgenetic or
orthotopic thyroid glands are rare. PAX8-T225M is probably a rare variant.

PMID: 17437516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):978-88. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

SPDEF regulates goblet cell hyperplasia in the airway epithelium.

Park KS(1), Korfhagen TR, Bruno MD, Kitzmiller JA, Wan H, Wert SE, Khurana
Hershey GK, Chen G, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Goblet cell hyperplasia and mucous hypersecretion contribute to the pathogenesis 
of chronic pulmonary diseases including cystic fibrosis, asthma, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In the present work, mouse SAM pointed
domain-containing ETS transcription factor (SPDEF) mRNA and protein were detected
in subsets of epithelial cells lining the trachea, bronchi, and tracheal glands. 
SPDEF interacted with the C-terminal domain of thyroid transcription factor 1,
activating transcription of genes expressed selectively in airway epithelial
cells, including Sftpa, Scgb1a1, Foxj1, and Sox17. Expression of Spdef in the
respiratory epithelium of adult transgenic mice caused goblet cell hyperplasia,
inducing both acidic and neutral mucins in vivo, and stainined for both acidic
and neutral mucins in vivo. SPDEF expression was increased at sites of goblet
cell hyperplasia caused by IL-13 and dust mite allergen in a process that was
dependent upon STAT-6. SPDEF was induced following intratracheal allergen
exposure and after Th2 cytokine stimulation and was sufficient to cause goblet
cell differentiation of Clara cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1810569
PMID: 17347682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):405-10.

Impaired alveolar epithelial cell differentiation in the hypoplastic lung in
nitrofen-induced congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Takayasu H(1), Nakazawa N, Montedonico S, Sugimoto K, Sato H, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, University 
College Dublin, Dublin 12, Ireland.

Pulmonary hypoplasia is the principal cause of morbidity and mortality in infants
with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Still, relatively little is known
about the mechanisms causing lung hypoplasia associated with CDH. The
differentiation from alveolar epithelial cells type II (AECs-II) into alveolar
epithelial cells type I (AECs-I) is one of the key processes in lung development 
in late gestation. It is well known that increased lung expansion promotes
differentiation into AECs-I phenotype, whereas reduced lung expansion promotes
AECs-II phenotype. The recent availability of cell-specific molecule markers for 
AECs-I and AECs-II has provided an opportunity to study the various
characteristics of these two cell types. To test the hypothesis that the
differentiation of AECs-II to AECs-I is impaired in the CDH hypoplastic lung, we 
investigated molecular markers for AECs-I [ICAM-1, T1alpha, aquaporin 5 (AQP5)]
and molecular markers for AECs-II [thyroid transcription factor-1 (Ttf-1),
surfactant protein (SP)-B and C] in the nitrofen-induced CDH lung. Fetal rat
lungs of normal (n = 7) and nitrofen-treated (n = 14) dams were harvested on
embryonic day 21. The expression of the ICAM1, T1alpha, AQP5, SP-B, C and Ttf-1
was analyzed in each lung by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Immunohistochemical studies were performed to evaluate the protein
expression level of ICAM1 and Ttf1. Expression levels of ICAM-1, T1alpha and AQP5
were significantly reduced (P < 0.05) in the lungs from nitrofen-treated CDH
animals compared to normal controls. ICAM-1 and AQP5 immunohistochemistry showed 
a diffuse pattern of expression in the alveolar cells in normal lungs. By
contrast, the ICAM-1 and AQP5 positive cells were markedly reduced in hypoplastic
lungs with CDH. On the other hand, the expression levels of Ttf-1, SP-B and C
were significantly (P < 0.05) increased in the lungs from nitrofen-treated CDH
animals compared to normal controls. The population of Ttf-1 positive cells was
slightly increased in the lungs from nitrofen-treated animals in
immunohistochemical study. Our results demonstrate that there is significant
reduction in the proportion of AECs-I and increase in the proportion of AECs-II
in the hypoplastic lung in the nitrofen-induced CDH. This data provides the first
evidence to support the hypothesis that AEC differentiation is impaired in CDH
hypoplastic lung.

PMID: 17245593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Jan;6(1):244-52.

Pulmonary adenocarcinoma-targeted gene therapy by a cancer- and tissue-specific
promoter system.

Fukazawa T(1), Maeda Y, Durbin ML, Nakai T, Matsuoka J, Tanaka H, Naomoto Y,
Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine
and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. FukazawaT@aol.com

Gene therapy is one of the approaches used to treat lung cancer. The benefit of
cancer gene therapy is that different types of tumors can be selectively targeted
by tumor-specific expression of therapeutic genes that include an apoptosis gene 
to destroy the tumor. Previously, we described a promoter (TTS promoter) that we 
designed that is specifically targeted to lung cancer cells but not to other
types of cancer or normal cells including stem cells. In this pursuit, we further
characterize the specificity of the TTS promoter in four types of lung cancer
cells (squamous cell lung carcinoma, pulmonary adenocarcinoma, small-cell lung
carcinoma, large-cell lung carcinoma). The TTS promoter is highly active only in 
pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells but not in the other three types of lung cancer
cells. The specificity seems to be derived from transcription factor thyroid
transcription factor 1-associating cofactors that affect human surfactant protein
A1 promoter activity in pulmonary adenocarcinoma. We inserted the proapoptotic
gene Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) into the TTS promoter (TTS/Bax). The
TTS/Bax selectively causes BAX expression and cell death in pulmonary
adenocarcinoma but not in other cells. Cell death caused by the BAX expression
was also observed in pulmonary adenocarcinoma that is resistant to the anticancer
drug gefitinib (epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor). BAX 
expression and cell death can be suppressed by dexamethasone (a glucocorticoid)
treatment through negative glucocorticoid elements in the TTS promoter. Here we
report a drug-controllable TTS/Bax system targeting pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 17237283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):559-64. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

5-Bromodeoxyuridine induced differentiation of a human small cell lung cancer
cell line is associated with alteration of gene expression.

Chen Y(1), Pacyna-Gengelbach M, Deutschmann N, Ye F, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Medical School, University Hospital Charité,
Humboldt-University, Schumannstr 20-21, D-10098 Berlin, Germany.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) appears to arise from neuroendocrine cells with the
potential to differentiate into a variety of lung epithelial cell lineages. In
order to investigate molecular events underlying the cell type transition in
SCLC, we treated a SCLC cell line H526 with a differentiation inducing agent
5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). The treatment led to a dramatic conversion from
suspension cells to adherent cells exhibiting an epithelioid phenotype, which
remarkably reduced the ability of colony formation in soft agar and suppressed
the tumor growth rate in nude mice. The phenotypic transition was consistent with
upregulation of surfactant protein C (SFTPC), thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF-1), Connexin 26 (Cx26), insulin-like growth factor binding protein-related
protein 1 (IGFBP-rP1), as well as homeobox genes LAGY, PITX1, and HOXB2. Our data
suggest that BrdU induced cell differentiation could be linked to the development
of a less aggressively phenotype in small cell lung cancer.

PMID: 17196172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Neurosci. 2006 Dec 20;26(51):13167-79.

Deletion of the Ttf1 gene in differentiated neurons disrupts female reproduction 
without impairing basal ganglia function.

Mastronardi C(1), Smiley GG, Raber J, Kusakabe T, Kawaguchi A, Matagne V, Dietzel
A, Heger S, Mungenast AE, Cabrera R, Kimura S, Ojeda SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center/Oregon
Health & Science University, Beaverton, Oregon 97006, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) [also known as Nkx2.1 (related to the NK-2 
class of homeobox genes) and T/ebp (thyroid-specific enhancer-binding protein)], 
a homeodomain gene required for basal forebrain morphogenesis, remains expressed 
in the hypothalamus after birth, suggesting a role in neuroendocrine function.
Here, we show an involvement of TTF1 in the control of mammalian puberty and
adult reproductive function. Gene expression profiling of the nonhuman primate
hypothalamus revealed that TTF1 expression increases at puberty. Mice in which
the Ttf1 gene was ablated from differentiated neurons grew normally and had
normal basal ganglia/hypothalamic morphology but exhibited delayed puberty,
reduced reproductive capacity, and a short reproductive span. These defects were 
associated with reduced hypothalamic expression of genes required for sexual
development and deregulation of a gene involved in restraining puberty. No
extrapyramidal impairments associated with basal ganglia dysfunction were
apparent. Thus, although TTF1 appears to fulfill only a morphogenic function in
the ventral telencephalon, once this function is satisfied in the hypothalamus,
TTF1 remains active as part of the transcriptional machinery controlling female
sexual development.

PMID: 17182767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 29;264(1-2):157-63. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Human Thyroid Oxidases genes promoter activity in thyrocytes does not appear to
be functionally dependent on Thyroid Transcription Factor-1 or Pax8.

Christophe-Hobertus C(1), Christophe D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Interdisciplinaire en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire
(IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles, IBMM, rue des Pr Jeener et Brachet, 12, 
B-6041 Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium.

Thyroid Oxidases (ThOX/DUOX) genes encode proteins that are thought to play a
crucial role in the biosynthesis of thyroid hormone by providing the oxidizing
agent required to allow the organification of iodine. The expression of these
genes is not restricted to the thyroid, but the corresponding mRNAs are found in 
the thyrocyte more abundantly than in several other cell types. It raises the
question whether the same transcription factors, namely Thyroid Transcription
Factor-1 (TTF-1) and Pax8, that control the expression of other genes involved in
the differentiated thyroid function, also regulate ThOX/DUOX gene transcription
in the thyrocyte. We set up a functional co-transfection assay in which fusion
proteins composed of the DNA-binding domain of either TTF-1 or Pax8 fused to the 
repressive domain of the drosophila engrailed protein were used to competitively 
counteract the activity of endogenous TTF-1 or Pax8 factor in the differentiated 
thyroid cell line PCCl3. Contrary to the Thyroglobulin or Thyroid Peroxidase
promoter, the known regulatory elements of the human ThOX/DUOX genes displayed no
reduction in transcriptional activity when either TTF-1 or Pax8 competitor was
produced in the cell, indicating that the presently characterized control
elements of human ThOX/DUOX genes are not responsive to these thyroid-specific
transcription factors.

PMID: 17182173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Apr 15;100(6):1415-29.

Key developmental regulators change during hyperoxia-induced injury and recovery 
in adult mouse lung.

Pogach MS(1), Cao Y, Millien G, Ramirez MI, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.
mpogach@lung.bumc.bu.edu

Developmentally important genes have recently been linked to tissue regeneration 
and epithelial cell repair in neonatal and adult animals in several organs,
including liver, skin, prostate, and musculature. We hypothesized that
developmentally important genes play roles in lung injury repair in adult mice.
Although there is considerable information known about these processes, the
specific molecular pathways that mediate injury and regulate tissue repair are
not fully elucidated. Using a hyperoxic injury model to study these mechanisms of
lung injury and tissue repair, we selected the following genes based upon their
known or putative roles in lung development and organogenesis: TTF-1, FGF9,
FGF10, BMP4, PDGF-A, VEGF, Ptc, Shh, Sca-1, BCRP, CD45, and Cyclin-D2. Our
findings demonstrate that several developmentally important genes (Sca-1, Shh,
PDGF-A, VEGF, BCRP, CD45, BMP4, and Cyclin-D2) change during hyperoxic injury and
normoxic recovery in mice, suggesting that adult lung may reactivate key
developmental regulatory pathways for tissue repair. The mRNA for one gene
(TTF-1), unchanged during hyperoxia, was upregulated late in recovery phase.
These novel findings provide the basis for testing the efficacy of post-injury
lung repair in animals genetically modified to inactivate or express individual
molecules.

PMID: 17167788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Gynecol Oncol. 2007 Feb;104(2):497-500. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Ovarian serous carcinoma presenting with mediastinal lymphadenopathy 20 months
before the intraabdominal mass: role of immunohistochemistry.

Zannoni GF(1), Vellone VG, Distefano MG, Fadda G, Scambia G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Agostino Gemelli, Catholic
University, 00168 Rome, Italy. gfzannoni@rm.unicatt.it

INTRODUCTION: Metastatic involvement of the mediastinal lymph nodes is an
extremely uncommon finding in epithelial ovarian cancers.
CASE REPORT: A 63-year-old woman was admitted to hospital for dyspnoea due to an 
anterior mediastinal mass. The surgical biopsy showed a 6-cm metastatic lymph
node with a papillary pattern, scattered psammomas and immunoreactivity for WT1, 
Cytokeratin 7, EMA and negative for E-cadherin, GCFDP-15, Thyroglobulin,
Cytokeratin 20, Cytokeratin 5/6, CEA, Vimentin, Calretinin, TTF1. After 20 months
a follow-up CT identified an ovarian mass with the same histological pattern and 
immunoreactivity of the mediastinal nodule.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry, especially WT1, is useful in assessing the ovarian
origin of an unusual metastasis particularly if it is the first presentation of
the disease.

PMID: 17126890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Surg Today. 2006;36(12):1039-46. Epub 2006 Dec 25.

Prognostic model of stage II non-small cell lung cancer by a discriminant
analysis of the immunohistochemical protein expression.

Kohri T(1), Sugano M, Kawashima O, Saito R, Sakurai S, Sano T, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan.

PURPOSE: We aimed to identify the key proteins that influence the prognosis of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using protein expression profiles of
previously known prognostic markers.
METHODS: Thirty-one cases of Stage II NSCLC with 5-year follow-up data were
selected. Tissue microarrays (TMA) and immunohistochemistry were used to make
protein expression profiles of 18 previously reported immunohistochemical
prognostic markers and their value in NSCLC was statistically re-evaluated by a
discriminant analysis.
RESULTS: For the discriminant analysis using marker protein expression profiles, 
we selected three significant markers, TTF-1, RCAS1 and c-MET, to evaluate each
patient's 5-year survival. The requested discriminant function was V = -1.08754 x
(RCAS1 score) - 0.83174 x (TTF1 score) + 0.55204 x (cMET score) + 5.46972, and V 
= 0 served as a cut-off point. The correctness for evaluating a patient's 5-year 
survival by a discriminant analysis was 87.1%.
CONCLUSIONS: A discriminant analysis is thus considered to be a useful
statistical method for analyzing the protein expression profiles obtained by
combined TMA and immunohistochemical techniques using archival NSCLC tissues.
However, the sample size and selection of the marker protein depending on the
histology greatly influence the results of a NSCLC study.

PMID: 17123130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Diagn Cytopathol. 2006 Dec;34(12):801-6.

The diagnostic utility of D2-40 for malignant mesothelioma versus pulmonary
carcinoma with pleural involvement.

Saad RS(1), Lindner JL, Lin X, Liu YL, Silverman JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Allegheny
General Hospital, 320 East North Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA.
rsaad@wpahs.org

Differentiating malignant mesothelioma (MM) from pulmonary carcinoma in pleural
fluid cytology can be challenging. Recent studies have suggested that D2-40, a
novel lymphatic marker, may be a useful marker for mesothelial differentiation in
surgical specimens. However, there are no available data regarding its utility in
effusion cytology specimens. We investigated the utility of D2-40 in pleural
fluid cytology in differentiating MM from pulmonary carcinomas. Twenty cases of
pleural effusion smears of surgically confirmed MM with their corresponding cell 
blocks were retrieved from the database of the hospital computer system. We also 
included 10 cases of metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma (PA) and 10 cases
metastatic pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) involving the pleural fluid. 
Cell blocks were formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded, and immunostained for TTF1,
p63, calretinin, CK5/6, WT-1, and D2-40. Cases were scored as negative (<5%
positivity) or positive (>5% moderate/strong positivity). The positive rates for 
TTF1, p63, calretinin, CK5/6, WT-1, and D2-40 were as follows: MM (0/20), (0/20),
(17/20), (18/20), (19/20), (17/20), for PA (8/10), (0/10), (3/10), (0/10),
(0/10), (0/10), and for PSCC (1/10), (10/10), (6/10), (10/10), (0/15), (0/10).
The staining pattern for D2-40 was characterized by thick membranous staining.
Diffuse cytoplasmic staining by D2-40 was seen in 2 cases of pulmonary carcinoma,
counted as negative. Our study showed that in differentiating MM from PA, CK5/6, 
WT-1, and D2-40 have high specificity and sensitivity for MM. Although calretinin
is a sensitive IHC marker for MM, it is not specific since it stained 30% of PA. 
Conversely, to differentiate between MM and PSCC, p63 and WT-1 are the best
available markers. We recommend a panel of CK5/6, p63, D2-40, and WT-1 to
differentiate MM from pulmonary carcinomas in effusion cytology specimens.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17115439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncol Rep. 2006 Dec;16(6):1403-10.

Fibronectin is distinctly downregulated in murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells
with high metastatic potential.

Urtreger AJ(1), Werbajh SE, Verrecchia F, Mauviel A, Puricelli LI, Kornblihtt AR,
Bal de Kier Joffé ED.

Author information: 
(1)Area Investigación, Instituto de Oncología 'Angel H. Roffo', Universidad de
Buenos Aires, (C1417DTB) Buenos Aires, Argentina.

In the present work we used a murine mammary cancer model of two related
adenocarcinomas with different lung metastasizing abilities, to compare their
global gene expression profiles. Clontech Atlas mouse cDNA microarrays of primary
cultured tumor cells were employed to identify genes that are modulated in the
more metastatic variant MM3 relative to its parental tumor M3. A total of 88 from
1,176 genes were differentially expressed in MM3 primary cultures, most of them
(n=86) were upregulated. Genes were grouped according to their functions as
associated with signal transduction and transcription regulation (e.g. Stat1 and 
Zfp 92), with cell adhesion and motility (cadherin 1, fibronectin), with invasion
and angiogenesis (uPA, 72 kDa MMP2), with the regulation of cell proliferation
and cell death (cyclins G and A2, TNF), and also included growth factors and
receptors, oncogenes and tumor suppressors genes (p107, TGFbeta2, TBR-I, PDGFR). 
Only 2 genes, TTF1 and fibronectin (FN), showed a significant downregulation.
Notably FN expression, loss of which has been associated with a malignant
phenotype, was reduced about 19-fold in the more metastatic MM3 cells. Previously
known differences in expression patterns associated with the metastatic capacity 
of MM3 and M3 adenocarcinomas, including downregulation of FN or upregulated
expression of TGFbeta and proteases, were confirmed by the array data. The fact
that FN was one of the only two genes significantly down-regulated out of the
1,176 genes analyzed stresses the hypothesis that FN may behave as an important
metastasis suppressor gene in mammary cancer.

PMID: 17089068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10399-407.

Loss of Nkx2.8 deregulates progenitor cells in the large airways and leads to
dysplasia.

Tian J(1), Mahmood R, Hnasko R, Locker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 
10461, USA.

Nkx2.8, a homeodomain transcription factor, has been characterized in liver
cancer and in the developing central nervous system. We now show that this factor
is also expressed in the lung, where it localizes in adults to a discrete
population of tracheobronchial basal cells. To target the mouse gene, the first
exon was replaced by a LacZ marker gene joined to the intact 5'-untranslated
region. Marker expression was observed throughout the lower respiratory tract,
beginning on E11 in a few cells of the distal lung buds. The region of expression
then spread upward. By neonatal day 1, expression was greatest in the large
airways and the Nkx2.8-/- mice exhibited generalized tracheobronchial
hyperplasia. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) labeling studies showed that a higher
rate of bronchial cell proliferation persisted at 6 to 8 months. In adults,
Nkx2.8 marker expression decreased with progressive differentiation into ciliated
and secretory cells. The cell localizations and patterns of coexpression with
BrdUrd and differentiation markers suggest a progenitor relationship: the cells
that most strongly express Nkx2.8 seem to function as tracheobronchial stem
cells. Moreover, Nkx2.8 acts to limit the number of these progenitor cells
because the marker-expressing population was greatly expanded in Nkx2.8-/- mice. 
Increased proliferation and an altered progenitor relationship caused progressive
bronchial pathology, which manifested as widespread dysplasia in the large
airways of 1-year-old Nkx2.8-/- mice.

PMID: 17079460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Clin Pathol. 2006 Nov;59(11):1203-5.

Epithelial cyst of the cardiac papillary muscle: case report and review of the
literature.

Soilleux EJ(1), Davies DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
elizabeth.soilleux@orh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Reports of endodermal heterotopia (previously known as inclusion
cysts) in cardiac atria are rare and there is only a single previous case report 
of endodermal heterotopia in a cardiac papillary muscle.
AIM AND METHODS: A cyst in a cardiac papillary muscle was identified during the
autopsy of an 87-year-old man who had died from an unrelated myocardial
infarction. The cyst was examined histologically and mucin staining and
immunostaining were carried out.
RESULTS: We report a unilocular cyst in a cardiac papillary muscle, which is
lined by low cuboidal, pseudostratified and occasionally ciliated
respiratory-type epithelium, surrounded by a layer of smooth muscle. The
immunohistochemical features (MNF116+, cytokeratin (CK)7+, CK8+, CK18+, CK19+,
epithelial membrane antigen positive, scattered cells positive for neuroendocrine
markers) suggest that this is an endodermal heterotopia. Immunostaining of
positive thyroid transcription factor-1 provides evidence for bronchogenic
differentiation.
DISCUSSION: The differential diagnoses of cystic structures in cardiac papillary 
muscle and the origin and importance of endodermal heterotopias are discussed.

PMCID: PMC1860518
PMID: 17071807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Endocrinology. 2007 Jan;148(1):54-62. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Hyaluronan accumulation in thyroid tissue: evidence for contributions from
epithelial cells and fibroblasts.

Gianoukakis AG(1), Jennings TA, King CS, Sheehan CE, Hoa N, Heldin P, Smith TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance,
California 90502, USA. tjsmith@ucla.edu.

Graves' disease (GD) and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) are autoimmune processes
often associated with hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism, respectively. Despite
their diverging clinical presentations, immune activation drives both diseases
and results in connective tissue accumulation of the nonsulfated
glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan. The hydrophilic property of hyaluronan contributes
to the pathogenesis of thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy, dermopathy and
hypothyroid myxedema. Whether hyaluronan accumulates in the thyroid and plays a
role in goiter formation in GD and HT remains unknown. We report here that levels
of hyaluronan are increased in thyroid tissue from individuals with both diseases
compared with glands uninvolved with autoimmune disorders. The transcript
encoding hyaluronan synthase (HAS)-3, one of three mammalian HAS isoforms, was
detected in thyroid tissue. Isolated thyrocytes in primary culture express all
three HAS isoforms when treated with IL-1beta. Thyrocytes and thyroid fibroblasts
produce hyaluronan under basal culture conditions and IL-1beta enhances levels of
this molecule in both cell types. On a per-cell basis, fibroblasts produce more
hyaluronan than do thyrocytes under basal conditions and after cytokine
treatment. Synthesis in thyrocytes can also be altered by increasing serum
concentration in the medium and by modifying culture density. Our findings
suggest that hyaluronan accumulation in thyroid tissue might derive from
thyrocytes and fibroblasts. Moreover, this glycosaminoglycan becomes more
abundant as a consequence of autoimmune disease. It may therefore contribute to
increased thyroid volume in GD and HT. Coupled with the newly identified
influence exerted by hyaluronan on immunocompetent cells, our findings represent 
potentially important insights into the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid
diseases.

PMID: 17068136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. BMC Endocr Disord. 2006 Oct 26;6:6.

A multinodular goiter as the initial presentation of a renal cell carcinoma
harbouring a novel VHL mutation.

Bugalho MJ(1), Mendonça E, Costa P, Santos JR, Silva E, Catarino AL, Sobrinho LG.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Endocrinologia, Instituto Português de Oncologia Francisco Gentil, 
Lisboa, Portugal. mjbugalho@ipolisboa.min-saude.pt

BACKGROUND: Secondary involvement of the thyroid gland is rare. Often the origin 
of the tumor is difficult to identify from the material obtained by fine-needle
aspiration cytology. Renal cell carcinoma of the clear-cell type is one of the
more common carcinomas to metastasize to the thyroid gland. Somatic mutations of 
the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene are associated with the sporadic form
of this tumor. We aimed to illustrate the potential utility of DNA based
technologies to search for specific molecular markers in order to establish the
anatomic site of origin.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 54-yr-old Caucasian male complaining of a rapidly increasing
neck tumor was diagnosed as having a clear-cell tumor by fine-needle aspiration
cytology. A positive staining for cytokeratin as well as for vimentin and CD10 in
the absence of staining for thyroglobulin, calcitonin and TTF1 suggested a renal 
origin confirmed by computed tomography. Using frozen RNA, obtained from cells
left inside the needle used for fine needle aspiration cytology, it was possible 
to identify a somatic mutation (680 delA) in the VHL gene.
CONCLUSION: In the presence of a clear-cell tumor of the thyroid gland, screening
for somatic mutations in the VHL gene in material derived from thyroid aspirates 
might provide additional information to immunocytochemical studies and therefore 
plays a contributory role to establish the final diagnosis. Moreover, in a near
future, this piece of information might be useful to define a targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC1634746
PMID: 17067398  [PubMed]


413. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2006 Oct;53(5):873-87, viii.

Transcriptional regulation of perinatal lung maturation.

Whitsett JA(1), Matsuzaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
3333 Burnet Avenue Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Respiration at birth depends on maturation changes in lung tissue architecture,
cell differentiation, and gene expression. At the transcriptional level,
maturation is controlled by the actions of a group of transcription factors
mediating gene expression in the lung. A network of transcription factors
regulates gene expression in the respiratory epithelium, which then influences
cell maturation throughout the lung. Glucocorticoids (via the glucocorticoid
receptor), acting primarily in the pulmonary mesenchyme, influence maturation in 
the respiratory epithelium. Elucidation of the intersecting pathways controlling 
perinatal lung function may provide opportunities to induce pulmonary maturation 
in preterm infants at risk for respiratory distress syndrome before birth, and
will help identify genes and processes important for various aspects of lung
function.

PMID: 17027615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Virchows Arch. 2006 Nov;449(5):603-5. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Unexpected and potentially misleading TTF-1 expression: a word of caution.

Agaimy A, Wünsch PH.

Comment in
    Virchows Arch. 2007 Jul;451(1):109-11.

PMID: 17006692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2597-609. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Calcineurin/Nfat signaling is required for perinatal lung maturation and
function.

Davé V(1), Childs T, Xu Y, Ikegami M, Besnard V, Maeda Y, Wert SE, Neilson JR,
Crabtree GR, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. davev0@cchmc.org

Pulmonary surfactant proteins and lipids are required for lung function after
birth. Lung immaturity and resultant surfactant deficiency cause respiratory
distress syndrome, a common disorder contributing to morbidity and mortality in
preterm infants. Surfactant synthesis increases prior to birth in association
with formation of the alveoli that mediate efficient gas exchange. To identify
mechanisms controlling perinatal lung maturation, the Calcineurin b1 (Cnb1) gene 
was deleted in the respiratory epithelium of the fetal mouse. Deletion of Cnb1
caused respiratory failure after birth and inhibited the structural maturation of
the peripheral lung. Synthesis of surfactant and a lamellar body-associated
protein, ABC transporter A3 (ABCA3), was decreased prior to birth. Nuclear factor
of activated T cells (Nfat) calcineurin-dependent 3 (Nfatc3), a transcription
factor modulated by calcineurin, was identified as a direct activator of Sftpa,
Sftpb, Sftpc, Abca3, Foxa1, and Foxa2 genes. The calcineurin/Nfat pathway
controls the morphologic maturation of lungs prior to birth and regulates
expression of genes involved in surfactant homeostasis that are critical for
adaptation to air breathing.

PMCID: PMC1570374
PMID: 16998587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):L249-57. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Role of endogenous TGF-beta in glucocorticoid-induced lung type II cell
differentiation.

McDevitt TM(1), Gonzales LW, Savani RC, Ballard PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California-San Francisco, 3333 California St., Suite 150, San Francisco, CA
94118-1981, USA.

In the fetal lung, endogenous transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta inhibits
early morphogenesis and blocks hormone-induced type II cell differentiation. We
hypothesized that endogenous TGF-beta inhibits type II cell differentiation and
that the stimulatory effects of glucocorticoids result in part from suppression
of TGF-beta. Epithelial cells were isolated from human fetal lung and cultured
under defined conditions with and without dexamethasone plus cAMP to promote type
II cell differentiation. Control cells produced TGF-beta, which was activated in 
part by alpha(V)beta(6)-integrin. Treatment with dexamethasone, but not cAMP,
reduced TGF-beta1 and -beta2 transcripts and TGF-beta bioactivity in culture
medium. To examine the effects of decreased TGF-beta in the absence of
glucocorticoid, cells were treated with antibodies to TGF-beta and its receptors.
By real-time RT-PCR, antibody blockade of TGF-beta reduced serpine1, a
TGF-beta-inducible gene, and increased gene expression for sftpa, sftpb, sftpc,
and titf1, mimicking the response to hormone treatment. By microarray analysis,
29 additional genes were induced by both TGF-beta antibody and hormone treatment,
and 20 other genes were repressed by both treatments. For some genes, the fold
response was comparable for antibody and hormone treatment. We conclude that
endogenous TGF-beta suppresses expression of surfactant proteins and selected
other type II cell genes in fetal lung, in part secondary to increased expression
of titf1, and we propose that the mechanism of glucocorticoid-induced type II
cell differentiation includes antagonism of TGF-beta gene suppression. Surfactant
production during fetal development is likely influenced by relative levels of
TGF-beta and glucocorticoids.

PMID: 16997883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):L74-84. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

Proteasome dysfunction inhibits surfactant protein gene expression in lung
epithelial cells: mechanism of inhibition of SP-B gene expression.

Das A(1), Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Center at
Tyler, 11937 US Highway 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant proteins maintain lung function through their actions to reduce
alveolar surface tension and control of innate immune responses in the lung. The 
ubiquitin proteasome pathway is responsible for the degradation of majority of
intracellular proteins in eukaryotic cells, and proteasome dysfunction has been
linked to the development of neurodegenerative, cardiac, and other diseases.
Proteasome function is impaired in interstitial lung diseases associated with
surfactant protein C (SP-C) mutation mapping to the BRICHOS domain located in the
proSP-C protein. In this study we determined the effects of proteasome inhibition
on surfactant protein expression in H441 and MLE-12 lung epithelial cells to
understand the relationship between proteasome dysfunction and surfactant protein
gene expression. Proteasome inhibitors lactacystin and MG132 reduced the levels
of SP-A, SP-B, and SP-C mRNAs in a concentration-dependent manner in H441 and
MLE-12 cells. In H441 cells, lactacystin and MG132 inhibition of SP-B mRNA was
associated with similar decreases in SP-B protein, and the inhibition was due to 
inhibition of gene transcription. Proteasome inhibitors decreased thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1)/Nkx2.1 DNA binding activity, and the reduced TTF-1
DNA binding activity was due to reduced expression levels of TTF-1 protein. These
data indicated that the ubiquitin proteasome pathway is essential for the
maintenance of surfactant protein gene expression and that disruption of this
pathway inhibits surfactant protein gene expression via reduced expression of
TTF-1 protein.

PMID: 16905641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Oncol Rep. 2006 Sep;16(3):587-95.

Identification and classification of differentially expressed genes in non-small 
cell lung cancer by expression profiling on a global human 59.620-element
oligonucleotide array.

Hofmann HS(1), Bartling B, Simm A, Murray R, Aziz N, Hansen G, Silber RE, Burdach
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Martin-Luther-University
Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany. stefan.hofmann@medizin.uni-halle.de

Improvements in detection, treatment and prognosis for patients with non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) depend on the molecular understanding of tumor
development and progression. Using Affymetrix GeneChips comprising 59,620
elements, we determined the gene expression profiles of 89 NSCLC and 15 normal
lung samples. We found 187 (0.3%) genes, which are at least 2-fold overexpressed 
and 157 (0.3%) genes 2-fold less expressed in NSCLC compared with normal lung.
Cell cycle regulation, cell adhesion and nucleotide metabolism were the major
biological processes connected to a large proportion of genes up-regulated in
NSCLC. Down-regulated genes were frequently involved in metabolic/catabolic
processes and signal transduction. The expression of specific genes revealed
reliable differentiation of tumor from normal lung tissues, as well as the
classification of both NSCLC subtypes squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.
In this context, collagens (COL7, 17) and cytokeratins (CK6, 15, 17) are
preferentially induced in squamous cell carcinoma, whereas several transcription 
factors (TTF1, DAT1, TF-2) are exclusively elevated in adenocarcinomas. Some gene
products involved in the metastatic process [matrixmetalloproteinase 12 (MMP-12) 
and urokinase plasminogen activator alpha (uPA)] were found as prognostic markers
for the recurrence free interval and survival. Particularly, the simultaneous use
of the MMP-12 and uPA expression predicted relapse-free and global survival of
the patients. Screening of NSCLC with a genome-wide array revealed diagnostic,
prognostic and potential therapeutic targets that might be suitable for an
individual risk profile by tumor specific arrays.

PMID: 16865260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mod Pathol. 2006 Oct;19(10):1358-68. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Distinction of pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma from small cell lung
carcinoma: a morphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular analysis.

Hiroshima K(1), Iyoda A, Shida T, Shibuya K, Iizasa T, Kishi H, Tanizawa T,
Fujisawa T, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. kenzo@faculty.chiba-u.jp

The distinction between pulmonary large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma and small
cell carcinoma is difficult in some cases. Some propose that these carcinomas
should be classified as one high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma. We examined
biological features of small cell carcinoma (n=23), large cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma (n=17), and classic large cell carcinoma (n=12). The average ratio of
nuclear diameter of the tumor cells to that of lymphocytes for small cell
carcinoma was smaller than that for large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
(P<0.0001). The frequencies of the expressions of CD56, mASH1, TTF-1, and p16
were higher and that of NeuroD was lower in small cell carcinoma than in large
cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. The frequency of loss of heterozygosity at 3p was 
higher in high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas than in classic large cell
carcinoma (P=0.0002). Allelic losses at D5S422 (5q33) were more frequent in small
cell carcinoma than in large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (P=0.0091). Mean
fractional regional loss indices of the tumors were 0.38, 0.65, and 0.72 for
patients with classic large cell carcinoma, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, 
and small cell carcinoma, respectively (P=0.0003). Five-year overall survivals of
patients with classic large cell carcinoma, large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma
and small cell carcinoma in stage I were 67, 73, 60%, respectively. Patients with
NeuroD expression had better survivals, and those with p63 expression had poorer 
survivals in large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. Patients with TTF-1 expression 
had poorer survivals in small cell carcinoma. Our data suggest that large cell
neuroendocrine carcinoma and small cell carcinoma are different morphologically, 
phenotypically, and genetically, although there are some overlapping features.
Although further studies are needed to analyze the biological behavior of
high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas including sensitivity to chemotherapy, the
pathological distinction of large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma from small cell
carcinoma may be necessary to treat the patients with neuroendocrine tumors.

PMID: 16862075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Pathol Int. 2006 May;56(5):240-5.

Immunohistochemical analysis of thyroid-specific transcription factors in thyroid
tumors.

Zhang P(1), Zuo H, Nakamura Y, Nakamura M, Wakasa T, Kakudo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), thyroid transcription factor 2 (TTF2) and 
paired box gene 8 (Pax8) are demonstrated to play a crucial role for the
differentiation and organogenesis of thyroid follicular cells. Their roles in
thyroid carcinogenesis are not very clear. Because dedifferentiation is a common 
process in thyroid carcinogenesis, thyroid-specific transcription factors seem
also to be involving in thyroid carcinogenesis. The purpose of the present paper 
was to investigate their expression in a broad spectrum of follicular cell tumors
in different degrees of differentiation, from well-differentiated benign
follicular adenoma to anaplastic carcinoma. Medullary (C cell) carcinoma was also
included in the investigation. Results of immunohistochemical staining showed
that nuclear localization of these transcription factors was gradually decreased 
corresponding to the progressive dedifferentiation of thyroid tumors. Also,
abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation of TTF2 and Pax8 was detected in many tumors
samples, which may indicate a subtle regulation mechanism on the function of
these transcription factors. In conclusion, abnormal expression of TTF1, TTF2 and
Pax8 was closely related to thyroid tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16669872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Virchows Arch. 2006 Jul;449(1):129-33. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and p63 expression in two primary thyroid 
papillary carcinomas of branchial cleft cysts.

Lanzafame S(1), Caltabiano R, Puzzo L, Cappellani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department G.F. Ingrassia, Section of Anatomic Pathology, University of
Catania, Santa Sofia 87 street, 95123 Catania, Italy. lanzafas@unict.it

Malignant lateral cervical cysts can be related to metastatic tumors or rarely to
primary thyroid carcinoma arising in branchial cleft cysts. This study evaluates 
the expression of thyroid-associated transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and p63 in
three branchial cleft cysts and in two primary thyroid papillary carcinoma of
branchial cleft cysts. TTF-1 was negative in the nuclei of the lining epithelia
of branchial cleft cysts, but positive in the adjacent normal thyroid tissue,
while TTF-1 was positive in the nuclei of the lining epithelia and in the nuclei 
of the papillae and follicles in branchial cleft cysts with ectopic thyroid
carcinoma. P63 was positive in the nuclei of the lining epithelia of branchial
cleft cysts, but negative in the adjacent normal thyroid tissue. Papillary
thyroid carcinoma of branchial cleft cysts displayed p63-positive foci. In
conclusion, our results demonstrate that TTF-1 cannot distinguish between primary
and metastatic tumors of branchial cleft cysts. The detection of p63 in papillary
thyroid carcinomas of branchial cleft cysts could suggest that p63 contributes to
the onset of this tumor. It is really important to evaluate if the case has a
metastatic derivation or represents papillary thyroid carcinoma arising in
ectopic thyroid tissue in a branchial cleft cyst.

PMID: 16628413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;20(8):1810-24. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

Functional inactivation of the transcription factor Pax8 through oligomerization 
chain reaction.

D'Andrea B(1), Iacone R, Di Palma T, Nitsch R, Baratta MG, Nitsch L, Di Lauro R, 
Zannini M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale-Consiglio Nazionale delie
Ricerche and Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Italy.

Among the approaches used to provide a functional inactivation of a target
protein, we have chosen the recently described oligomerization chain reaction
(OCR) strategy to functionally inactivate the transcription factor Pax8, a member
of the Pax gene family expressed in thyroid cells. The OCR strategy is based on
the fusion of the self-associating coiled-coil (CC) domain of the nuclear factor 
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) to target proteins that are able to self-associate
naturally or that form heterocomplexes. In the thyroid tissue, the transcription 
factor Pax8 is involved in the morphogenesis of the gland and in the
transcriptional regulation of thyroid-expressed genes. We have recently
demonstrated that in thyroid cells Pax8 interacts biochemically and functionally 
with the transcription factor TTF-1 (thyroid transcription factor 1), and that
such interaction leads to the synergistic activation of thyroglobulin (Tg) gene
expression. Fusion of the CC domain to Pax8 leads to the formation of aberrant,
nonfunctional high-molecular mass complexes to which TTF-1 is also recruited. The
CC-Pax8 chimera inhibits the transcriptional activity of Pax8 and of TTF-1 on
both synthetic and physiological promoters and prevents the synergistic
activation of the Tg promoter mediated by these two transcription factors.
Furthermore, the expression of the CC-Pax8 chimera in differentiated thyroid
cells leads to the down-regulation of the endogenous expression of several
differentiation markers such as Tg, sodium/iodide symporter, Foxe1, TTF-1, and
thyroid oxidase 2. These results demonstrate that the OCR is a useful tool to
functionally inactivate a transcription factor. Moreover, by this approach, we
identified Foxe1, TTF-1, and thyroid oxidase 2 as new direct targets of Pax8 or
TTF-1.

PMID: 16613988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 May;91(5):1832-41. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Functional study of a novel single deletion in the TITF1/NKX2.1 homeobox gene
that produces congenital hypothyroidism and benign chorea but not pulmonary
distress.

Moya CM(1), Perez de Nanclares G, Castaño L, Potau N, Bilbao JR, Carrascosa A,
Bargadá M, Coya R, Martul P, Vicens-Calvet E, Santisteban P.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute Alberto Sols, Spanish National Research
Council-Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

CONTEXT: We studied two sisters with congenital hypothyroidism and
choreoathetosis but not respiratory distress.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to establish the genetic defect that causes 
this phenotype and study the molecular mechanisms of the pathology by means of
functional analysis.
DESIGN: Sequencing of DNA, expression vectors generation, EMSAs, transfections
experiments as well as bioinformatics analysis were performed.
RESULTS: We found a new single deletion (825delC) in one allele of the
TITF1/NKX2.1 gene. The mutation located in the C-terminal domain generates a
nonsense thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) protein, with 22 amino less and
rich in positive charges. This protein shows diminished binding to DNA, does not 
interfere with wild-type (wt) TTF1 binding, and fails to activate reporter genes 
harboring the thyroglobulin (Tg), thyroperoxidase (TPO), or surfactant protein B 
(SP-B) promoters. In addition, the mutant (mut) protein has a dominant-negative
effect on the transcriptional activity of wt TTF1 in a promoter-specific manner, 
inhibiting the transcription of Tg and TPO but not of SP-B. Using a Gal4 reporter
system, we demonstrate that the mut protein is not transcriptionally active and
does not likely compete with the wild type for coactivators. Interestingly, the
mut protein impairs the wt capacity to synergize with paired box 8 (PAX8). This
cooperation is necessary for Tg and TPO transcription but dispensable for SP-B
expression.
CONCLUSION: These results are concordant with the phenotype of the two sisters
studied and demonstrate a differential role for TTF1 in the different tissues in 
which it is expressed.

PMID: 16507635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biol Neonate. 2006;90(1):9-16. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

Effects of nitrofen and vitamins A, C and E on maturation of cultured human H441 
pneumocytes.

Gonzalez-Reyes S(1), Martinez L, Martinez-Calonge W, Fernandez-Dumont V, Tovar
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Research Laboratory, Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Nitrofen (2,4-dichloro-4 -nitrodiphenyl ether), a teratogen with 
oxidant properties, induces congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) with lung
hypoplasia and delayed lung development and maturation in rat embryos. Several
phenotypic features of the alveolar epithelium including surfactant proteins A
and B synthesis and its regulation by transcription factors are reproduced in
cultured human H441 pneumocytes. The aim of the present study was to test whether
vitamins A, E and C with anti-oxidant properties were able to recover the
expression of such regulators in an in vitro setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cultured human H441 pneumocytes were treated with nitrofen
with or without additional exposure to vitamins A, E and C. Thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF-1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 3-beta (HNF-3beta) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3-beta surfactant protein B (SP-B) mRNAs were measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The cells were also
immunohistochemically stained for assessment of proliferation (PCNA) and
apoptosis (bis-benzimide) status and SP-B and TTF-1 protein expressions. Results 
were compared by ANOVA with a significant threshold of 5%.
RESULTS: Nitrofen severely decreased TTF-1, HNF-3beta and SP-B mRNA expression by
H441 pneumocytes in culture. Addition of vitamin E normalized the levels of the
three transcripts, while vitamin A normalized only those of TTF-1 and SP-B mRNA. 
Vitamin C was significantly beneficial only for SP-B transcript. Nitrofen
decreased proliferation and TTF-1 and SP-B protein expressions with no apparent
effect on apoptosis. Additional exposure to vitamins A, C or E rescued near
normal values.
CONCLUSIONS: The changes induced by nitrofen in cultured H441 human pneumocytes
are reverted in part by anti-oxidant vitamins by upregulating TTF-1, HNF-3beta
and SP-B and stimulating proliferation and maturity in nitrofen-treated cells.
These effects of anti-oxidant vitamins could be of some interest for developing
new transplacental therapeutic strategies aimed at improving lung development and
maturation in fetuses with CDH.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16490937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2003 Dec;1 Suppl 2:185-90; discussion 190.

Congenital hypothyroidism clinical aspects and late consequences.

Büyükgebiz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dokuz Eylül Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and
Adolescence Inciralti, Izmir, Türkiye. atilla.buyukgebiz@deu.edu.tr

Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the commonest treatable cause of mental
retardation. The prevelance is 1/3000 - 1/4000 live births worldwide. The
importance of CH is that, the longer the diagnosis of CH is delayed, the higher
the risk of mental retardation and neurologic sequale; such as poor motor
coordination, ataxia, spastic diplegia, muscular hypotonia, strabismus, learning 
disability and diminished attention span. The most common cause of permenant CH
is thyroid dysgenesis (85-90%) in which the transcription factors TTF1,TTF2 and
PAX8 would appear to be obvious candidate genes in the aetiology. Especially
cardiac defects and some other birth defects are described in patients with CH.
Inborn errors of thyroid hormonogenesis are responsible for 10-15% of CH cases
and usually have autosomal recessive inheritance, consistent with a single gene
mutation. Transient CH is very common in prematures with an estimate of 10% of CH
babies identified on newborn screening, or 1 in 40,000 neonates. CH neonates are 
usually symptom-free and the most encountered symptoms are prolonged jaundice,
large fontanelles and umbilical hernia. In general, the extent of clinical
findings depends on the cause, severity and duration of hypothyroidism. An
elevated TSH>20 microm Iu/L and a decreased concentration of T4 confirms the
diagnosis of CH. Infants with permanant abnormalities of thyroid function mostly 
have a serum TSH concentration > 50 microm Iu/L. Ultrasonography, thyroid
scintigraphy, bone x ray of the knee and serum thyroglobulin concentration are
the other essentials after diagnosis to clarify the status of the thyroid and the
severity of hypothyroidism. The higher doses of 10- 15 microm g/kg/day and the
commencement of treatment before 2 weeks gave rise to better long term outcome of
CH patients. In the follow up of the patients noncompliance is the most important
problem and serum freeT4 or T4 and TSH should be obtained at each visit to adjust
the doses of L-thyroxine. Still a small number of patients with severe
hypothyroidism in utero or reflected by clinical signs and symptoms extremely low
T4 levels and delayed bone age may have intellectual deficits despite normal
intelligence.

PMID: 16444157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Br J Cancer. 2005 Aug 22;93(4):450-2.

Positive thyroid transcription factor 1 staining strongly correlates with
survival of patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Barlési F(1), Pinot D, Legoffic A, Doddoli C, Chetaille B, Torre JP, Astoul P.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine - Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Department of
Thoracic Oncology, Fédération des Maladies Respiratoires, Hôpital
Sainte-Marguerite, Marseille, France. fabrice.barlesi@mail.ap-hm.fr

This study investigated the relation between positive thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF1) staining and survival of patients affected by primary
adenocarcinoma (ADC) of the lung. Pathological tissue from consecutive ADC
patients was collected from 2002 to 2004. The anti-TTF1 antibody (8G7G3/1,
dilution of 1/200) was used. Thyroid transcription factor 1 staining was assessed
for each tumour as positive or negative. Probability of survival was estimated by
Kaplan-Meier and difference tested by log-rank test. A Cox's regression
multivariate analysis was carried out. In all, 106 patients were studied (66%
male, 69% PS0-1, 83% with stage III or IV). Tumours expressed positive TTF1
staining in 66% of cases. Multivariate analysis demonstrated an independent lower
risk of death for patients whose tumour expresses positive TTF1 staining (HR =
0.51, 95% CI 0.30-0.85; P = 0.01) and higher grade of differentiation (HR = 0.40,
95% CI 0.24-0.68; P = 0.001). In conclusion, positive TTF1 staining strongly and 
independently correlates with survival of patients with primary ADC of the lung.

PMCID: PMC2361585
PMID: 16052216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32548-54. Epub 2005 Jul 20.

Temporal-spatial expression and transcriptional regulation of alpha7 nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor by thyroid transcription factor-1 and early growth
response factor-1 during murine lung development.

Reynolds PR(1), Hoidal JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pulmonary Division, University of Utah Health
Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, 84132, USA.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are ligand-gated ion channels formed by five
homologous subunits that are involved in processes including signal transduction,
proliferation, and apoptosis. The developmental role of these receptors, however,
is unclear. In the present investigation, alpha(7) nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry in mouse lungs from
embryonic day (E)13.5 to postnatal day (PN)20. Transcriptional mechanisms that
regulate alpha(7) were assessed by the transfection of murine bronchiolar cells
with a reporter containing 1.1 kb of the mouse alpha(7) promoter, TTF-1, and
Egr-1. alpha(7) was initially detected at E13.5 in pulmonary mesenchymal cells
and in the epithelium of the primitive tubules at E15.5. From E18.5 to PN1,
alpha(7) was expressed in conducting airway and saccule epithelial cells. By
PN10, expression was observed in the peripheral epithelium and on luminal
membranes of bronchiolar epithelial cells in the proximal lung, a pattern that
continued through PN20. From E15.5 to PN20, type II alveolar cells expressed both
prosurfactant protein C and alpha(7). From E18.5 to PN20, Clara cells in the
bronchiolar epithelium co-expressed Clara cell secretory protein and alpha(7).
TTF-1 dose-dependently activated alpha(7) transcription in vitro by binding
specific TTF-1 regulatory elements in the mouse alpha(7) promoter. Furthermore,
alpha(7) was not detected in TTF-1-null mice and markedly increased in
TTF-1-overexpressing mice. Conversely, Egr-1 inhibited alpha(7) expression.
Temporal-spatial alpha(7) expression supports the concept that these receptors
function during normal pulmonary morphogenesis. A model is also supported whereby
alpha(7) is induced by the essential pulmonary transcription factor TTF-1 and
suppressed by Egr-1 during pulmonary development.

PMID: 16033766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. BMC Cancer. 2005 Jul 19;5:80.

Recovery of NIS expression in thyroid cancer cells by overexpression of Pax8
gene.

Presta I(1), Arturi F, Ferretti E, Mattei T, Scarpelli D, Tosi E, Scipioni A,
Celano M, Gulino A, Filetti S, Russo D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, University of
Catanzaro Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. presta@unicz.it

BACKGROUND: Recovery of iodide uptake in thyroid cancer cells by means of
obtaining the functional expression of the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS)
represents an innovative strategy for the treatment of poorly differentiated
thyroid cancer. However, the NIS gene expression alone is not always sufficient
to restore radioiodine concentration ability in these tumour cells.
METHODS: In this study, the anaplastic thyroid carcinoma ARO cells were stably
transfected with a Pax8 gene expression vector. A quantitative RT-PCR was
performed to assess the thyroid specific gene expression in selected clones. The 
presence of NIS protein was detected by Western blot and localized by
immunofluorescence. A iodide uptake assay was also performed to verify the
functional effect of NIS induction and differentiation switch.
RESULTS: The clones overexpressing Pax8 showed the re-activation of several
thyroid specific genes including NIS, Pendrin, Thyroglobulin, TPO and TTF1. In
ARO-Pax8 clones NIS protein was also localized both in cell cytoplasm and
membrane. Thus, the ability to uptake the radioiodine was partially restored,
associated to a high rate of efflux. In addition, ARO cells expressing Pax8
presented a lower rate of cell growth.
CONCLUSION: These finding demonstrate that induction of Pax8 expression may
determine a re-differentiation of thyroid cancer cells, including a partial
recovery of iodide uptake, fundamental requisite for a radioiodine-based
therapeutic approach for thyroid tumours.

PMCID: PMC1180821
PMID: 16029487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Thyroid. 2005 May;15(5):417-21.

Long-term effect of norepinephrine on thyroglobulin gene expression in FRTL-5
cells.

Noseda PA(1), Thomasz L, Pregliasco L, Krawiec L, Pisarev MA, Juvenal GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Biochemistry Division, Department of Radiobiology, National Atomic
Energy Commission, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Many types of evidence support a role of the sympathetic nervous system in the
regulation of thyroid function, although there is no general consensus on the
type of influence that catecholamines exert. Depending on the experimental
approach, epinephrine and norepinephrine (NE) can stimulate, inhibit, or fail to 
act on thyroid function. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of NE 
on thyroglobulin (Tg) synthesis and gene expression in FRTL-5 cells. Tg content, 
measured by immunoprecipitation with a specific antibody, showed that NE caused a
45% inhibition of thyrotropin (TSH) effect. The content of Tg mRNA was analyzed
by Northern blot, the relative inhibition in total Tg mRNA levels from NE-treated
cells, compared to TSH alone, ran parallel with inhibition in Tg content, while
total RNA did not change after incubation with NE. There was no alteration in Tg 
mRNA stability by NE. When plasmids harboring different sequences of Tg promoter 
fused to the CAT reporter gene were transfected into FRTL-5 cells, TSH treatment 
stimulated promoter activity while NE diminished this effect by 43%-55%. Northern
blots were performed to analyze mRNA for thyroid transcription factors (TTF1,
TTF2, Pax8), and no significant changes were observed with the different
treatments. In conclusion these results suggest that NE inhibits Tg synthesis at 
the transcriptional level.

PMID: 15929661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Med Wieku Rozwoj. 2004 Jul-Sep;8(3 Pt 2):678-89.

[Molecular-genetic aspects of congenital hypothyroidism].

[Article in Polish]

Lacka K(1), Ogrodowicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra Endokrynologii, Przemiany Materii i Chorób Wewnetrznych, Akademia
Medyczna im. K. Marcinkowskiego, Przybyszewskiego 49, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.
k_lacka@wp.pl

Congenital hypothyroidism manifests a complex of symptoms caused by a total lack 
or significant deficiency of thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3) in foetal
life and in the first years of child's life. The incidence of congenital
hypothyroidism is 1 per 3000-4000 newborns in the world and l per 4800 in Poland.
There are two main causes of congenital hypothyroidism: defects of thyroid
development (about 90%), defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis (~10%), and the
more seldom occurring defects of the TBG proteins (thyroxine binding globulin) or
resistance. syndrome to thyroid hormones. Defects of thyroid gland development
include ectopia, hypoplasia or complete lack of the thyroid (athyreosis). These
defects are caused by immunological, factors, drugs as well as genetic factors
such as: TSH receptor gene or thyroid transcription factors: PAX 8. TTF l, TTF 2,
Pit 1, Prop 1. Defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis are inherited as
autosomal recessive. There are 5 main defects of thyroid hormones biosynthesis:
iodide transport (mutation of hNIS gene), iodine oxygenation (mutation of TPO,
THOX, PDS genes), the iodination of the tyrosine of thyroglobulin and their
conjunction (the mutation of TPO TG, PDS genes), the hydrolysis of the T3 and T4 
as well as deiodination. Searching molecular-genetic basis of congenital
hypothyroidism may improve its diagnostics, make possible to introduce genetic
examination among patients with congenital hypothyroidism and their family
members and may make gene therapy possible in the future.

PMID: 15858240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2004 Feb;48(1):62-9. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

[Genetic aspects in congenital hypothyrodism].

[Article in Portuguese]

Perone D(1), Teixeira SS, Clara SA, Santos DC, Nogueira CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Clínica Médica, Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Faculdade
de Medicina, UNESP, Botucatu, SP.

Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) affects between 1:3,000 and 1:4,000 newborns. Many
genes are essential for normal development of the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid 
axis and hormone production, and are associated with CH. About 85% of primary
hypothyroidism is called thyroid digenesis and evidence suggests that mutations
in transcription factors (TTF2, TTF1, and PAX-8) and TSH receptor gene could be
responsible for the disease. Genetic defects of hormone synthesis could be caused
by mutations in the following genes: NIS (natrium-iodide symporter), pendrine,
thyreoglobulin (TG), peroxidase (TPO). Recently, mutations in the THOX-2 gene
have also been related to organification defects. Central hypothyroidism affects 
about 1:20,000 newborns and has been associated with mutations in pituitary
transcriptional factors (POUIF1, PROP1, LHX3, and HESX1). The syndrome of
resistance to thyroid hormone is rare, implies a hypothyroidism state for some
tissues and is frequently associated with dominant autosomal mutations in the
beta-receptor (TRss).

PMID: 15611819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Dev Genes Evol. 2005 Jan;215(1):32-40. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Anatomical and molecular reinvestigation of lamprey endostyle development
provides new insight into thyroid gland evolution.

Kluge B(1), Renault N, Rohr KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17, 
50923 Cologne, Germany.

The thyroid gland of vertebrates is considered to be homologous to the endostyle 
of non-vertebrate chordates (cephalochordates, urochordates), a key character for
understanding the origin and evolution of the chordate body plan. In lampreys,
the larval endostyle transforms into an adult thyroid gland during metamorphosis,
reflecting evolutionary changes that occurred in the vertebrate lineage.
Focussing on thyroid-like cells in the endostyle, we here relate morphologically 
visible steps of lamprey (Lampetra fluviatilis) endostyle differentiation to
embryonic stages and determine the onset of thyroid-like function. Analysing
lamprey endostyle development using semi-thin histological sections,
immunohistochemical detection of thyroid hormone, and the molecular marker
thyroid transcription factor1 (Ttf1) refines our current view of the homology
between endostyle and thyroid gland. In contrast to earlier literature, we find
that a duct always persists to connect the endostyle lumen to the pharynx, a
structure that resembles the thyroglossal duct in thyroid development and could
further support the homology between endostyle and thyroid. Before the onset of
thyroid-like function, Ttf1 expression becomes restricted to the ventral part of 
the endostyle, on the one hand showing that dorsal thyroid-like cells produce
thyroid hormone in the absence of Ttf1, and on the other suggesting that Ttf1 was
initially involved in specifying ventral fates in the endostyle.

PMID: 15592682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Feb;13(2):232-9.

Linkage and mutational analysis of familial thyroid dysgenesis demonstrate
genetic heterogeneity implicating novel genes.

Castanet M(1), Sura-Trueba S, Chauty A, Carré A, de Roux N, Heath S, Léger J,
Lyonnet S, Czernichow P, Polak M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U457, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.

The pathophysiology of thyroid dysgenesis (TD) is not elucidated yet in the
majority of cases. The unexpected familial clustering of congenital
hypothyroidism due to TD suggests a genetically determined disorder. Four genes
have been hitherto involved in thyroid development, including migration and
growth. Three of these encode transcription factors (the thyroid transcription
factors 1 and 2 (TTF1 or NKX2.1 and TTF2 or FOXE1) and PAX8) while the other
encodes the thyrotropin hormone receptor (TSHR). Some mutations have been
reported in patients affected by thyroid defects, which supports the relevance of
these four genes in TD. However, their involvement in the general TD population
remains questionable. Therefore, to document their involvement, we performed a
linkage analysis followed by mutational analysis in 19 multiplex TD families. The
LOD score results failed to prove linkage between any of the four genes and the
TD phenotype, whatever the postulated mode of inheritance. Manual extended
haplotypes showed allele sharing among affected individuals of at least one of
these four genes in the majority of families. Nevertheless, mutational analysis
did not identify mutations in these cases, arguing in favor of identity by
descent and not identity by state. Furthermore, as a main result of the present
study, extended haplotypes confirmed by mutational analysis showed that the four 
genes were excluded in five out of the 19 investigated families, demonstrating
the relevance of other genes. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates
genetic heterogeneity in the TD disorder and suggests the involvement of novel
genes.

PMID: 15547625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2004 Oct;23(4):330-6.

An immunohistochemical analysis of ovarian small cell carcinoma of hypercalcemic 
type.

McCluggage WG(1), Oliva E, Connolly LE, McBride HA, Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Group of Hospitals Trust, Belfast, Northern
Ireland. glenn.mccluggage@bll.n-i.nhs.uk

Ovarian small cell carcinoma of hypercalcemic type (OSCCHT) is a rare neoplasm
with an aggressive behavior, broad differential diagnosis, and unknown
histogenesis. To add to knowledge concerning the possible aid of
immunohistochemistry in resolving problems in differential diagnosis and to
further explore whether that modality points to any specific histogenesis, we
undertook an immunohistochemical study of this neoplasm. Fifteen OSCCHTs
(including four of the ''large cell" variant) were stained with a range of
antibodies, some of which have not been investigated previously in this neoplasm.
Cases were stained with AE1/3, EMA, BerEP4, CK5/6, calretinin, WT1, chromogranin,
CD56, synaptophysin, CD99, NB84, desmin, S100, CD10, alpha inhibin, TTFI, and
p53. Staining was classified as 0 (negative), 1+ (<5% cells positive), 2+ (5% to 
25% cells positive), 3+ (26% to 50% cells positive), or 4+ (>50% cells positive).
All cases were positive with p53 (two 1+, five 3+, eight 4+), 14 of 15 cases were
positive with WT1 (one 1+, thirteen 4+), 14 of 15 with CD10 (three 1+, four 2+,
two 3+, five 4+), 13 of 15 with EMA (three 1+, three 2+, two 3+, five 4+), 11 of 
15 with calretinin (nine 1+, one 3+, one 4+), 9 of 15 with AE1/3 (eight 1+, one
2+), 4 of 15 with CD56 (one 1+, two 2+, one 4+), 3 of 15 with BerEP4 (two 2+, one
4+), 2 of 15 with synaptophysin (two 1+), and 1 of 15 with S100 (4+). All cases
were negative with CK5/6, chromogranin, CD99, NB84, desmin, alpha inhibin, and
TTF1. The only noticeable difference in the immunophenotype between typical
OSCCHT and the large cell variant was that there was 4 +EMA positivity in three
of four cases of large cell variant compared with two of 11 cases of typical
OSCCHT. OSCCHT is characteristically positive with AE1/3, EMA, CD10, calretinin, 
WT1, and p53. Combined EMA and WT1 positivity, the latter usually intense and
diffuse, may be of diagnostic value, inasmuch as only a few of the neoplasms in
the differential diagnosis are positive with both antibodies. Negative staining
with CD99, desmin, NB84, alpha-inhibin, and TTF1 may aid in the cases in which
primitive neuroectodermal tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma, intraabdominal desmoplastic
small round cell tumor, neuroblastoma, a sex cord-stromal tumor, and metastatic
pulmonary small cell carcinoma are in the differential. Calretinin positivity
precludes its use in the differential with granulosa cell tumors. The results of 
this investigation do not settle the issue of histogenesis, which remains
enigmatic. The typical age distribution, follicle formation, and calretinin
positivity are consistent with a sex cord origin. On the other hand, WT1 and EMA 
positivity and negative staining with alpha-inhibin would be unusual in a sex
cord-stromal neoplasm and can be used as an argument for a surface epithelial
origin. Germ cell and neuroendocrine origins seem highly unlikely.

PMID: 15381902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):402-15.

Retinoic acid selectively regulates Fgf10 expression and maintains cell identity 
in the prospective lung field of the developing foregut.

Desai TJ(1), Malpel S, Flentke GR, Smith SM, Cardoso WV.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Although respiratory tract defects that result from disruption of retinoic acid
(RA) signaling have been widely reported, the mechanism by which endogenous RA
regulates early lung morphogenesis is unknown. Here, we provide novel evidence
that a major role for RA is to selectively maintain mesodermal proliferation and 
induce fibroblast growth factor 10 (Fgf10) expression in the foregut region where
the lung forms. By using a pan-RAR antagonist (BMS493) in foregut explant
cultures, we show that bud initiation is selectively blocked in the prospective
respiratory region by failure to induce Fgf10 in the corresponding mesoderm. The 
RA regulation of Fgf10 expression occurs only in this region, within a defined
developmental window, and is not seen in other foregut derivatives such as
thyroid and pancreas where Fgf10 is also required for normal development.
Furthermore, we show that RA activity is essential in the lung field to maintain 
lung cell identity in the endoderm; RAR antagonism disrupts expression of thyroid
transcription factor 1 (Ttf1), an early marker of the respiratory region in the
endoderm, and surfactant protein C (Sp-C) mRNAs. Our observations in mouse
foregut cultures are corroborated by data from an in vivo model of vitamin A
deficiency in rats. Our study supports RA as an essential regulator of gene
expression and cellular activities during primary bud formation.

PMID: 15328022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 3;32(14):4091-9. Print 2004.

The chromatin remodeling complex NoRC and TTF-I cooperate in the regulation of
the mammalian rRNA genes in vivo.

Németh A(1), Strohner R, Grummt I, Längst G.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf Butenandt Institut, Molekularbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München, Schillerstrasse 44, D-80336 München, Germany.

The transcription termination factor (TTF)-I is a multifunctional nucleolar
protein that terminates ribosomal gene transcription, mediates replication fork
arrest and regulates RNA polymerase I transcription on chromatin. TTF-I plays a
dual role in rDNA regulation, being involved in both activation and silencing of 
rDNA transcription. The N-terminal part of TTF-I contains a negative regulatory
domain (NRD) that inhibits DNA binding. Here we show that interactions between
the NRD and the C-terminal part of TTF-I mask the DNA-binding domain of TTF-I.
However, interaction with TIP5, a subunit of the nucleolar chromatin remodeling
complex, NoRC, recovers DNA-binding activity. We have mapped the protein domains 
that mediate the interaction between TTF-I and TIP5. The association of TIP5 with
the NRD facilitates DNA binding of TTF-I and leads to the recruitment of NoRC to 
the rDNA promoter. Thus, TTF-I and NoRC act in concert to silence rDNA
transcription.

PMCID: PMC514363
PMID: 15292447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Chromosome Res. 2004;12(5):439-51.

Nascent RNA synthesis in the context of chromatin architecture.

Sadoni N(1), Zink D.

Author information: 
(1)Universität München (LMU), Department Biologie II, Goethestr. 31, 80336
München, Germany.

Based on the idea that chromatin domains provide physical barriers for large
molecules and multi-enzyme complexes, including the components of the
transcription machinery, it has been proposed that transcription should be
confined to the surfaces of chromatin domains. As a consequence nascent RNA
should accumulate in the interchromatin space, which is thought to provide a
special nuclear compartment involved in transcription, as well as in the
processing and export of RNA (Cremer et al. 1993, Cremer & Cremer 2001). To
further address the relationships between chromatin organization and RNA
synthesis, we investigated the localization of BrUTP-labelled nascent RNA in HeLa
cells stably expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged histone H2B, which
highlights the chromatin structure. Our results showed that nascent RNA does not 
preferentially localize within the interchromatin space. The findings do not
support the idea that the interchromatin space provides a nuclear compartment
playing an essential role in nascent RNA synthesis. However, the results are in
agreement with the emerging view that even condensed chromatin domains display a 
highly dynamic organization and are not a physical barrier for transcription
factors.

PMID: 15252240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Virchows Arch. 2004 Aug;445(2):206-9. Epub 2004 Jun 30.

Localised pleural malignant mesothelioma. Report of two cases simulating
pulmonary carcinoma and review of the literature.

Asioli S(1), Dal Piaz G, Damiani S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Anatomic Pathology M. Malpighi Department of Oncologic Sciences,
University of Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, Via Altura 3, 40139 Bologna, Italy.

AIMS: To describe two cases of localised malignant mesothelioma with a
predominantly intrapulmonary growth which led to a pre-operative diagnosis of
pulmonary carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Both cases presented as intrapulmonary masses, while at
computed tomography scan the pleura appeared not significantly thickened. In one 
patient, the main bronchus was diffusely infiltrated by the tumour. In both
cases, a preoperative biopsy showed a proliferation of large cells leading to a
diagnosis of non-small-cell lung carcinoma. Histological examination of the
surgical specimens revealed features consistent with epithelioid mesothelioma
with deciduoid features in one case and with biphasic mesothelioma in the other. 
Both cases were diffusely positive with anti-calretinin antibody, while
anti-TTF1, anti-surfactant and anti-CEA antisera were negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Localised malignant mesotheliomas are unusual and predominantly
intrapulmonary growth is rare. Pathologists should be aware of this possibility
to avoid misdiagnosis, particularly in small biopsies.

PMID: 15232743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(4):1791-8.

Recruitment of the nucleolar remodeling complex NoRC establishes ribosomal DNA
silencing in chromatin.

Strohner R(1), Németh A, Nightingale KP, Grummt I, Becker PB, Längst G.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf-Butenandt-Institut, Molekularbiologie, Ludwig Maximilians Universität,
80336 Munich. German.

The rRNA gene cluster consists of multiple transcription units. Half of these are
active, while the other half are transcriptionally inactive. Previously, in vivo 
studies have demonstrated that silencing of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) is mediated by
the chromatin remodeling NoRC (nucleolar remodeling complex). To explore the
mechanisms underlying NoRC-directed silencing of rDNA transcription, we
investigated the effect of recombinant NoRC on RNA polymerase I transcription on 
reconstituted chromatin templates. We show that NoRC interacts with the
transcription terminator factor (TTF-I), and this interaction is required both
for the binding of TTF-I to its promoter-proximal target site and for the
recruitment of NoRC to the promoter. After association with the rDNA promoter,
NoRC alters the position of the promoter-bound nucleosome, thereby repressing RNA
polymerase I transcription. This NoRC-directed rDNA repression requires the N
terminus of histone H4. Repression is effective before preinitiation complex
formation and as such is unable to exert an effect upon activated rDNA genes.
Furthermore, the early steps of rDNA repression do not depend on DNA and histone 
modifications. These results reveal an important role for TTF-I in recruiting
NoRC to rDNA and an active role for NoRC in the establishment of rDNA silencing.

PMCID: PMC344174
PMID: 14749393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 1;64(1):363-9.

Development of a cancer-targeted tissue-specific promoter system.

Fukazawa T(1), Maeda Y, Sladek FM, Owen-Schaub LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of California, Riverside,
California, USA. FukazawaT@aol.com

Present cancer gene therapy using proapoptotic genes has had limited success
because the therapy is prone to cause side effects as a result of the lack of
tissue and cancer specificity. To target cancer cells without damaging normal
cells, we have designed a novel dual promoter system in which a tissue-specific
transcription system under the control of a cancer-specific promoter drives
expression of a therapeutic gene. The applicability of this system was
demonstrated by adapting it to target lung cancer. We termed this lung cancer
system TTS (TTF1 gene under the control of human telomerase reverse transcriptase
promoter and human surfactant protein A1 promoter). The TTS system showed much
higher promoter activity in lung cancer cells compared with other kinds of cancer
and normal lung cells, including stem cells. Moreover, insertion of negative
glucocorticoid responsive elements in the system allows it to be drug
controllable. The approaches that we have used could be adapted to target other
types of cancer. We report a novel cancer-targeted tissue-specific dual promoter 
system designed for gene therapy.

PMID: 14729646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Rev Port Pneumol. 2003 Mar-Apr;9(2):153-60.

[Morphological features of the pulmonary sequestration].

[Article in Portuguese]

Sousa V(1), Carvalho L.

Author information: 
(1)Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra, Serviço de Anatomia Patológica.

The pulmonary sequestration corresponds to pulmonary tissue intra or extra-lobar 
with systemic arterial nutrition and collateral bronchial ramification. It is
infrequent and the intra-lobar identification depends on the correct clinical
signs and morphology. The correct study includes imagiologic identification of
the systemic artery and morphological characterization of parenchymal changes.
These allow identification of abnormal pulmonary parenchyma in intra-lobar cases 
and were observed using histochemical and immunohistochemical routine methods,
both in intra and extra-lobar cases. Four cases of intra-lobar sequestration and 
four cases of extra-lobar sequestration were studied with application of
histochemical techniques--Movat's pentachrome stain and Verhoeff--and
immunolabelling with CK7 and TTF1. The parenchymal inflammatory distortion by
collagenization was constantly seen as was BALT hyperplasia and pleuritis. By
using Movat's pentachrome stain we characterized the sequestration by identifying
the artery and the parenchymal changes. The CK7 was useful in the identification 
of parenchymal damage, together with the antibody anti-TTF1 that had a variable
expression, stronger in areas of inflammation because of PII hyperplasia.

PMID: 14685640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Rev Port Pneumol. 2003 May-Jun;9(3):249-56.

[Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung or congenital pulmonary
airway malformation].

[Article in Portuguese]

Sousa V(1), Carvalho L.

Author information: 
(1)Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra, Serviço de Anatomia Patológica.

The cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung is an hamartomatous lesion,
easily identifiable by its morphology through the application of Stocker's et al 
(1977) classification (type 1, 2 and 3) and also following the criteria of
Yousem, to understand the five types dependent on the level of malformation in
the airway and lung. The three morphological types described by Stocker were
identified in 6 cases of the archive of the Department of Pathology of Coimbra's 
University Hospital, studied morphologically by the use of Movat's pentachromic
stain and the application of the antibody anti-CK7 and anti-body anti-TTF1. In
the three morphological types the elastic alveolar net is absent. The CK7
identifies the epithelial distribution and is useful to evaluate the extension of
the inflammatory lesion. The antibody anti-TTF1, apparently absent in type 3
cases, is easily identified in type 1 and 2 cases and overexpressed in
inflammatory areas. It seems that the absence of cells identified by the antibody
anti-TTF1 prevents overdiagnosing of type 4 in Yousem's classification of
congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM).

PMID: 14685634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Pathologica. 2003 Jun;95(3):162-6.

[Solitary fibrous pseudopapillary tumor of the lung: pulmonary fibroadenoma and
adenofibroma revisited].

[Article in Italian]

Cavazza A(1), Rossi G, De Marco L, Putrino I, Pellegrino S, Piana S.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operative di Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale S. Maria Nuova di Reggio
Emilia, viale Risorgimento 80, 42100 Reggio Emilia. cavazza.alberto@asmn.re.it

We describe a peculiar pulmonary lesion, that we interpreted as a pseudopapillary
variant of solitary fibrous tumor. The patient was a 62-year-old asymptomatic
male, non smoking, presenting with a peripheral nodule, 0.8 cm across, located in
the lower lobe of the right lung. The patient is alive and well 18 months after
surgical excision of the nodule. Microscopically, the lesion was
well-circumscribed and characterized by a diffuse pseudopapillary pattern.
Pseudopapillae were large, and were covered by a rim of cubic epithelium devoid
of atypia. The stromal axis was fibrous and contained scattered bland spindle
cells. Immunohistochemically, the latter were strongly positive for vimentin and 
CD34, focally positive for BCL2 and CD99, negative for cytokeratin, EMA, TTF1,
calretinin, smooth muscle actin, desmin and S100 protein; the epithelial cells
were immunoreactive for cytokeratin, EMA and TTF1. We interpret this lesion as a 
peculiar pseudopapillary variant of solitary fibrous tumor, corresponding to what
has been reported in the literature as pulmonary adenofibroma and fibroadenoma.
The most important differential diagnostic considerations are briefly discussed.

PMID: 12968312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 15;31(18):e110.

An improved method for the in vitro evolution of aptamers and applications in
protein detection and purification.

Murphy MB(1), Fuller ST, Richardson PM, Doyle SA.

Author information: 
(1)DOE Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA.

One of the key components of proteomics initiatives is the production of high
affinity ligands or probes that specifically recognize protein targets in assays 
that detect and capture proteins of interest. Particularly versatile probes with 
tremendous potential for use as affinity molecules are aptamers. Aptamers are
short single-stranded DNA or RNA sequences that are selected in vitro based on
affinity for a target molecule. Aptamers offer advantages over traditional
antibody-based affinity molecules in their ease of production, regeneration and
stability, largely due to the chemical properties of nucleic acids versus amino
acids. We describe an improved in vitro selection protocol that relies on
magnetic separations for DNA aptamer production that is relatively easy and
scalable without the need for expensive robotics. We demonstrate the ability of
aptamers that recognize thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) to bind their
target protein with high affinity and specificity, and detail their uses in a
number of assays. The TTF1 aptamers were characterized using surface plasmon
resonance, and shown to be useful for enzyme-linked assays, western blots and
affinity purification.

PMCID: PMC203336
PMID: 12954786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46911-8. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Down-regulation of retinoic acid receptor alpha signaling is required for
sacculation and type I cell formation in the developing lung.

Wongtrakool C(1), Malpel S, Gorenstein J, Sedita J, Ramirez MI, Underhill TM,
Cardoso WV.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, 80 East Concord Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Although retinoic acid (RA) has been shown to be critical for lung development,
little is known about when RA is required and the role of individual RA receptors
(RAR) in this process. Previously reported data from an RA responsive element
RARE-lacZ reporter mouse show that when epithelial tubules are branching and
differentiating RA signaling becomes markedly down-regulated in the epithelium.
It is unclear why this down-regulation occurs and what role it might play in the 
developing lung. Here we analyze the effects of preventing potential progenitors 
of the distal lung from turning off RA signaling by locally expressing
constitutively activated RARalpha or RARbeta chimeric receptors (RARVP16) in
branching airways of transgenic mice. Continued RA activation resulted in lung
immaturity in both cases, but the phenotypes were remarkably different.
RARalphaVP16 lungs did not expand to form saccules or morphologically
identifiable type I cells. High levels of surfactant protein C (Sp-C), thyroid
transcription factor-1 (Ttf1), and Gata6, but not Sp-A or Sp-B in the epithelium 
at birth suggested that in these lungs differentiation was arrested at an early
stage. These alterations were not observed in RARbetaVP16 lungs, which showed
relatively less severe changes. Our data suggest a model in which activation of
RAR signaling at the onset of lung development establishes an initial program
that assigns distal cell fate to the prospective lung epithelium. Down-regulation
of RA signaling, however, is required to allow completion of later steps of this 
differentiation program that ultimately form mature type I and II cells.

PMCID: PMC2168590
PMID: 12947094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;17(11):2295-302. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

Hypothyroidism in thyroid transcription factor 1 haploinsufficiency is caused by 
reduced expression of the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor.

Moeller LC(1), Kimura S, Kusakabe T, Liao XH, Van Sande J, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Humans expressing one allele of the thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) gene
have neurological symptoms and increased serum TSH with variable degrees of
hypothyroidism. Ttf1+/- mice have also poor coordination and increased serum TSH 
concentration (205 +/- 22 vs. 92 +/- 12 mU/liter; P < 0.001) and slightly lower
T4 (46 +/- 3 vs. 63 +/- 6 nmol/liter; P < 0.02) as compared with Ttf1+/+ mice. To
determine whether the hypothyroidism is of central or primary origin, we examined
the bioactivity of TSH, thyroidal response to exogenous TSH and the expression of
genes regulated by TTF1. TSH bioactivity was normal, but T4 response to a low but
not high dose of TSH was significantly reduced in the Ttf1+/- mice (5.5 +/- 2.2
vs. 15.3 +/- 4.1 nmol/liter; P < 0.03), indicating a reduced thyroidal response. 
Thyroid mRNAs were measured by real-time PCR (Ttf1+/+ littermates = 100%).
Ttf1+/- mice had half the levels of TTF1 mRNA (54 +/- 9; P < 0.01) and protein,
confirming their haploinsufficiency. Significantly lower levels of mRNAs were
observed for two of the three genes with TTF1 cis elements: TSH receptor (TSHr,
57 +/- 4%; P < 0.002), thyroglobulin (63 +/- 7%; P < 0.005), but not thyroid
peroxidase (81 +/- 12%; P > 0.05). No significant difference between the two
genotypes was found for Pax8, sodium iodide symporter, and iodothyronine
deiodinase 1. These results show that Ttf1 haploinsufficiency causes a reduction 
in the expression of TSHr and thyroglobulin, genes with TTF1 binding sites in
their promoter regions. The low TSHr is only partially compensated by an increase
in TSH secretion because T4 remains mildly reduced. However, administration of a 
larger amount of TSH obliterates the response differences by saturating a reduced
amount of receptor.

PMID: 12907760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biophys J. 2003 May;84(5):3353-63.

Analyzing intracellular binding and diffusion with continuous fluorescence
photobleaching.

Wachsmuth M(1), Weidemann T, Müller G, Hoffmann-Rohrer UW, Knoch TA, Waldeck W,
Langowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Division Biophysics of Macromolecules, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Transport and binding of molecules to specific sites are necessary for the
assembly and function of ordered supramolecular structures in cells. For
analyzing these processes in vivo, we have developed a confocal fluorescence
fluctuation microscope that allows both imaging of the spatial distribution of
fluorescent molecules with confocal laser scanning microscopy and probing their
mobility at specific positions in the cell with fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy and continuous fluorescence photobleaching (CP). Because
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy is restricted to rapidly diffusing
particles and CP to slower processes, these two methods complement each other.
For the analysis of binding-related contributions to mobility we have derived
analytical expressions for the temporal behavior of CP curves from which the
bound fraction and/or the dissociation rate or residence time at binding sites,
respectively, can be obtained. In experiments, we investigated HeLa cells
expressing different fluorescent proteins: Although enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) shows high mobility, fusions of histone H2B with the yellow
fluorescent protein are incorporated into chromatin, and these nuclei exhibit the
presence of a stably bound and a freely diffusing species. Nonpermanent binding
was found for mTTF-I, a transcription termination factor for RNA polymerase I,
fused with EGFP. The cells show fluorescent nucleoli, and binding is transient.
CP yields residence times for mTTF-I-EGFP of approximately 13 s.

PMCID: PMC1302895
PMID: 12719264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Virchows Arch. 2003 Apr;442(4):393-9. Epub 2003 Apr 4.

Pulmonary well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma expressing lineage-specific
transcription factors (TTF-1 and GATA-6) to respiratory epithelial
differentiation: an immunohistochemical and ultrastructural study.

Yamazaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saiseikai Central Hospital, 1-4-17 Mita, Minatoku,
108-0073, Tokyo, Japan. KazutoYamazaki@aol.com

A case of pulmonary well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma was examined with
conventional histological, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural studies that 
revealed the distribution of lineage-specific transcription factors (TTF-1 and
GATA-6). The patient was a 33-year-old Japanese woman, who underwent resection of
the right lower lobe for the lung tumor. The tumor demonstrated an organized
histology mimicking the epithelial differentiation of fetal lung with peculiar
glands and moruloid cell nests, without mesenchymal proliferation. Adenocarcinoma
cells forming the atypical glands were similar to the epithelial cells of the
branching tubules in the pseudo glandular stage of the fetal lung. Distribution
of TTF-1 was observed in many of the nuclei of the adenocarcinoma cells forming
the glands. Tumor cells in the morula were primitive epithelial cells with some
immunohistochemical neuroendocrine cell differentiation and some of them showed
GATA-6-positive stains in the nuclei. In the ultrastructural study,
adenocarcinoma cells showed little differentiation toward mucous cells and
ciliated cells. Neuroendocrine granules were seen in a few tumor cells in the
morula. In the present case, tumor cells forming the peculiar histological,
molecular, and ultrastructural constructions showed partial and incomplete
mimicry of the morphogenesis of respiratory epithelium.

PMID: 12684771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nat Genet. 2002 Nov;32(3):340-1. Epub 2002 Oct 7.

Uniting the paths to gene silencing.

Pikaard CS, Lawrence RJ.

Comment on
    Cell. 2002 Feb 22;108(4):489-500.

PMID: 12368915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biol Chem. 2002 May;383(5):765-71.

Ku antigen supports termination of mammalian rDNA replication by transcription
termination factor TTF-I.

Wallisch M(1), Kunkel E, Hoehn K, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Würzburg, Germany.

A replication fork barrier at the 3'-end of mouse ribosomal RNA genes blocks
bidirectional fork progression and limits DNA replication to the same direction
as transcription. This barrier is an inherent property of a defined DNA-protein
complex including transcription termination factor I, and specific
protein-protein interactions occur between this factor and protein(s) of the
replication machinery. Here we report that a second DNA-binding protein is
essential for barrier activity. We have purified and functionally characterised
the protein from HeLa cells. The final preparation contained two polypeptides
with molecular masses of 70 and 86 kDa, respectively. Both polypeptides interact 
with a GC-stretch adjacent to the binding site of transcription termination
factor I. The specificity of binding to the barrier DNA was demonstrated in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The biochemical properties of this protein 
resemble that of Ku antigen, a human nuclear DNA-binding heterodimer that is the 
target of autoimmune-antibodies in several autoimmune diseases. Recombinant Ku
protein, purified as heterodimer from co-infected insect cells, is able to
partially rescue the barrier activity in Ku-depleted HeLa cell extracts. These
data demonstrate that transcription termination factor I and Ku act
synergistically to prevent head-on collision between the replication and the
transcription machinery.

PMID: 12108541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Adv Clin Path. 2002 Jul-Oct;6(3-4):131-4.

Sclerosing haemangioma with a predominant sclerotic pattern: an unusual pulmonary
lesion which can be misdiagnosed.

Cavazza A(1), Pellegrino S, Putrino I, De Marco L, Rossi G.

Author information: 
(1)Unità Operativa di Anatomia Patologica, Ospedale S. Maria Nuova, Viale
Risorgimento 80, 42100 Reggio Emilia, Italy. cavazza.alberto@asmn.re.it

AIMS: An unusual sclerosing haemangioma of the lung with a predominant sclerotic 
pattern is described.
MAIN RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The patient was a 51-year-old male, presenting with
a well-circumscribed nodule, 0,6 cm in diameter, located in the lower lobe of the
left lung. He is alive and well 9 years after surgical excision of the nodule.
Microscopically, the lesion was well demarcated and mostly composed of sclerotic 
tissue, with numerous irregular entrapped alveolar spaces The characteristic
bland, round cells with abundant pale cytoplasm, immunohistochemically positive
for TTF-1 and negative for cytokeratin, were limited to small clusters embedded
in the stroma at the periphery of the nodule. The most important differential
diagnostic considerations of the sclerotic variant of pulmonary sclerosing
haemangioma are briefly discussed.

PMID: 19757636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Endocrinology. 2002 Jun;143(6):2019-24.

Perspective: genetic defects in the etiology of congenital hypothyroidism.

Kopp P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism & Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. p-kopp@northwestern.edu

Congenital hypothyroidism affects about 1:3000 to 1:4000 infants and may be
caused by defects in thyroidal ontogeny or hormone synthesis. The impressive
advances in molecular genetics led to the characterization of numerous genes that
are essential for normal development and hormone production of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Mutations in many of these genes now provide
a molecular explanation for a subset of the sporadic and familial forms of
congenital hypothyroidism. Defects in one of the multiple steps required for
normal hormone synthesis account for about 10% of cases with congenital
hypothyroidism. They are typically recessive and therefore more common in inbred 
families. In the vast majority of patients, congenital hypothyroidism is sporadic
and associated with thyroid dysgenesis, a spectrum of developmental defects,
which includes the absence of detectable thyroid tissue, ectopic tissue, and
thyroid hypoplasia. The molecular defects known to date only explain a minority
of these cases and include mutations in the paired box transcription factor PAX8,
and the thyroid transcription factors TTF1 and TTF2. It is likely that a further 
subset of patients with thyroid dysgenesis have defects in other transacting
proteins or elements of the signaling pathways controlling growth and function of
thyrocytes. In other instances, thyroid dysgenesis may be a polygenic disease or 
have a multifactorial basis. Aside from providing fundamental insights into the
ontogeny and the pathophysiology of the thyroid, the characterization of the
molecular basis of congenital hypothyroidism may have growing importance for
genetic testing and counseling in the future.

PMID: 12021164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Apr;16(4):837-46.

The synergistic activity of thyroid transcription factor 1 and Pax 8 relies on
the promoter/enhancer interplay.

Miccadei S(1), De Leo R, Zammarchi E, Natali PG, Civitareale D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome 00158, Italy.

The transcription factors, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and Pax 8, play
a pivotal role in the transcriptional regulation of the thyroid differentiation
marker genes and in the differentiation of the thyroid follicular cells. They
have a very restricted tissue distribution, and the thyrocyte is the only cell
type with the simultaneous expression of these factors. Here we show that TTF-1
and Pax 8 cooperatively activate their target genes and that their synergistic
activity requires the cross-talk between enhancer and gene promoter. We have
characterized the cis and trans requirements of the TTF1/Pax 8 synergistic
activity on the thyroperoxidase gene. We show that their synergy is also
important for thyroglobulin gene transcription.

PMID: 11923479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Clin Invest. 2002 Feb;109(4):469-73.

Partial deficiency of thyroid transcription factor 1 produces predominantly
neurological defects in humans and mice.

Pohlenz J(1), Dumitrescu A, Zundel D, Martiné U, Schönberger W, Koo E, Weiss RE, 
Cohen RN, Kimura S, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Johannes Gutenberg, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2002 Feb;109(4):451-5.

Three genes, TTF1, TTF2, and PAX8, involved in thyroid gland development and
migration have been identified. Yet systematic screening for defects in these
genes in thyroid dysgenesis gave essentially negative results. In particular, no 
TTF1 gene defects were found in 76 individuals with thyroid dysgenesis even
though a deletion of this gene in the mouse results in thyroid and lung agenesis 
and defective diencephalon. We report a 6-year-old boy with predominant
dyskinesia, neonatal respiratory distress, and mild hyperthyrotropinemia. One
allele of his TTF1 gene had a guanidine inserted into codon 86 producing a
nonsense protein of 407, rather than 371, amino acids. The mutant TTF1 did not
bind to its canonical cis-element or transactivate a reporter gene driven by the 
thyroglobulin promoter, a natural target of TTF1. Failure of the mutant TTF1 to
interfere with binding and transactivation functions of the wild-type TTF1
suggested that the syndrome was caused by haploinsufficiency. This was confirmed 
in mice heterozygous for Ttf1 gene deletion, heretofore considered to be normal. 
Compared with wild-type littermates, Ttf1(+/-) mice had poor coordination and a
significant elevation of serum thyrotropin. Therefore, haploinsufficiency of the 
TTF1 gene results in a predominantly neurological phenotype and secondary
hyperthyrotropinemia.

PMCID: PMC150877
PMID: 11854318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Dev Biol. 2002 Feb 15;242(2):75-87.

Increased expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) in respiratory
epithelial cells inhibits alveolarization and causes pulmonary inflammation.

Wert SE(1), Dey CR, Blair PA, Kimura S, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), a member of the Nkx2 family of
homeodomain-containing transcription factors, is expressed in the epithelium of
the lung. TTF-1 is a critical regulator of transcription for the surfactant
proteins (SP) A, B, and C and is essential for lung morphogenesis. Sites and
levels of TTF-1 expression vary during lung morphogenesis and following injury.
In order to determine the role of TTF-1 in lung formation, transgenic mice were
generated in which TTF-1 was expressed in respiratory epithelial cells of
wild-type and Ttf1 null mutant (-/-) mice, using the lung-specific SP-C promoter.
The SP-C-Ttf1 transgene did not rescue the severe pulmonary hypoplasia
characteristic of the Ttf1 (-/-) mice. Increased expression of TTF-1, however,
caused dose-dependent alterations in postnatal lung morphology of wild-type mice.
Modest overexpression of TTF-1 caused type II cell hyperplasia and increased the 
cellular content of SP-B. In contrast, higher expression levels of TTF-1
disrupted alveolar septation, causing emphysema. In mice with the highest
transgene expression, TTF-1 caused severe inflammation, pulmonary fibrosis,
respiratory failure, and death, associated with eosinophil infiltration and
increased expression of eotaxin and IL-6. Increased expression of TTF-1 altered
alveolarization and caused chronic pulmonary inflammation, demonstrating that
precise regulation of TTF-1 is critical for homeostasis in the postnatal lung.

PMID: 11820807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 21;276(51):47807-13. Epub 2001 Oct 2.

Nestin is a neuroepithelial target gene of thyroid transcription factor-1, a
homeoprotein required for forebrain organogenesis.

Lonigro R(1), Donnini D, Zappia E, Damante G, Bianchi ME, Guazzi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via
Olgettina, 58, Milano 20132, Italy.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1, also known as NKX2.1 and T/EBP), a
transcription factor belonging to the NKX-2 family of homeodomain-containing
genes, plays an essential role in the organogenesis of the thyroid gland, lung,
and ventral forebrain. Nestin is an intermediate filament protein strongly
expressed in multipotential neuroepithelial stem cells and rapidly down-regulated
during postnatal life. Here we show that stable fibroblastic clones expressing
TTF-1 acquire a phenotype reminiscent of neuroepithelial cells in culture and
up-regulate the endogenous nestin gene. TTF-1 transactivates in HeLa and NIH3T3
cells a reporter gene driven by a central nervous system-specific enhancer
element from the second intron of the rat nestin gene, where it recognizes a
DNA-binding site (NestBS) whose sequence resembles a nuclear
hormone/cAMP-responsive element very different from canonical TTF-1 binding
sites. Nuclear extracts from the head of mouse embryos form a retarded complex
with NestBS of the same mobility of the extracts obtained from TTF1-expressing
clones, which is either abolished or supershifted in the presence of two
different antibodies recognizing the TTF-1 protein. Thus, the neuroepithelial
marker nestin is a direct central nervous system-specific target gene of TTF-1,
leading to the hypothesis that it might be the effector through which TTF-1 plays
its role in the organogenesis of the forebrain.

PMID: 11584016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3559-70.

Early embryonic expression of a LIM-homeobox gene Cs-lhx3 is downstream of
beta-catenin and responsible for the endoderm differentiation in Ciona savignyi
embryos.

Satou Y(1), Imai KS, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. yutaka@ascidian.zool.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In early Ciona embryos, nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin is most probably the
first step of endodermal cell specification. If beta-catenin is mis- and/or
overexpressed, presumptive notochord cells and epidermal cells change their fates
into endodermal cells, whereas if beta-catenin nuclear localization is
downregulated by the overexpression of cadherin, the endoderm differentiation is 
suppressed, accompanied with the differentiation of extra epidermal cells ( Imai,
K., Takada, N., Satoh, N. and Satou, Y. (2000) Development 127, 3009-3020).
Subtractive hybridization screens of mRNAs between beta-catenin overexpressed
embryos and cadherin overexpressed embryos were conducted to identify potential
beta-catenin target genes that are responsible for endoderm differentiation in
Ciona savignyi embryos. We found that a LIM-homeobox gene (Cs-lhx3), an otx
homolog (Cs-otx) and an NK-2 class gene (Cs-ttf1) were among beta-catenin
downstream genes. In situ hybridization signals for early zygotic expression of
Cs-lhx3 were evident only in the presumptive endodermal cells as early as the
32-cell stage, those of Cs-otx in the mesoendodermal cells at the 32-cell stage
and those of Cs-ttf1 in the endodermal cells at the 64-cell stage. Later, Cs-lhx3
was expressed again in a set of neuronal cells in the tailbud embryo, while
Cs-otx was expressed in the anterior nervous system of the embryo. Expression of 
all three genes was upregulated in beta-catenin overexpressed embryos and
downregulated in cadherin overexpressed embryos. Injection of morpholino
oligonucleotides against Cs-otx did not affect the embryonic endoderm
differentiation, although the formation of the central nervous system was
suppressed. Injection of Cs-ttf1 morpholino oligonucleotides also failed to
suppress the endoderm differentiation, although injection of its synthetic mRNAs 
resulted in ectopic development of endoderm differentiation marker alkaline
phosphatase. By contrast, injection of Cs-lhx3 morpholino oligo suppressed the
endodermal cell differentiation and this suppression was rescued by injection of 
Cs-lhx3 mRNA into eggs. In addition, although injection of delE-Ci-cadherin mRNA 
into eggs resulted in the suppression of alkaline phosphatase development,
injection of delE-Ci-cadherin mRNA with Cs-lhx3 mRNA rescued the alkaline
phosphatase development. These results strongly suggest that a LIM-homeobox gene 
Cs-lhx3 is one of the beta-catenin downstream genes and that its early expression
in embryonic endodermal cells is responsible for their differentiation.

PMID: 11566860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. EMBO J. 2001 Sep 3;20(17):4892-900.

NoRC--a novel member of mammalian ISWI-containing chromatin remodeling machines.

Strohner R(1), Nemeth A, Jansa P, Hofmann-Rohrer U, Santoro R, Längst G, Grummt
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum, D-69120 Heidelberg and Adolf-Butenandt-Institut,
Schillerstrasse 44, D-80336 München, Germany.

Transcription by RNA polymerase I on nucleosomal templates requires binding of
the transcription termination factor TTF-I to a cognate site 160 bp upstream of
the transcription start site. Binding of TTF-I is accompanied by changes in the
chromatin architecture which suggests that TTF-I recruits a remodeling activity
to the rDNA promoter. We have cloned a cDNA that encodes TIP5 (TTF-I-interacting 
protein 5), a 205 kDa protein that shares a number of important protein domains
with WSTF (Williams syndrome transcription factor) and hAcf1/WCRF180, the largest
subunits of human chromatin remodeling complexes hCHRAC and WCRF. TIP5
co-localizes with the basal RNA polymerase I transcription factor UBF in the
nucleolus and is associated with SNF2h. The cellular TIP5-SNF2h complex, termed
NoRC (nucleolar remodeling complex), induces nucleosome sliding in an ATP- and
histone H4 tail-dependent fashion. The results suggest that NoRC is a novel
nucleolar chromatin remodeling machine that may serve a role in the regulation of
the rDNA locus.

PMCID: PMC125270
PMID: 11532953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cancer Res. 2001 May 1;61(9):3640-6.

Transcriptional activation of the thyroglobulin promoter directing suicide gene
expression by thyroid transcription factor-1 in thyroid cancer cells.

Shimura H(1), Suzuki H, Miyazaki A, Furuya F, Ohta K, Haraguchi K, Endo T, Onaya 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Yamanashi Medical University, Yamanashi
409-3898, Japan.

Gene therapy with thyroglobulin (TG) promoter and a prodrug/suicide gene
combination may prove useful as a treatment for thyroid carcinoma. However, most 
poorly differentiated and anaplastic thyroid carcinomas have lost the ability to 
express the TG gene expression accompanied by loss of transcription factors
[thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), TTF-2, or Pax-8] interacting with the TG
promoter. In anticipation of developing transcriptionally targeted gene therapy
of TG-nonproducing thyroid carcinomas, we investigated the effect of TTF-1 gene
transfer on TG promoter activity and the cytotoxic effect obtained by the TG
promoter-driven HSV-TK gene along with ganciclovir in thyroid carcinoma and
nonthyroidal cells. Using a chimeric construct containing the 5'-flanking region 
of the rat TG gene between -826 and +39 bp and the luciferase gene, TG promoter
activity was detected in a normal rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5), but not in a
dedifferentiated line of thyroid cells (FRT) expressing Pax-8 but not TTF-1,
TTF-2, or TG [TTF-1(-)/TTF-2(-)/Pax-8(+)/TG(-)], or in a human papillary thyroid 
carcinoma cell line [BHP15-3; TTF-1(-)/TTF-2(-)/Pax-8(-)/TG(-)], a human
pulmonary cell line [H441; TTF-1(+)/TTF-2(-)/Pax-8(-)/TG(-)], or a dog kidney
epithelial cell line [MDCK; TTF-1(-)/TTF-2(-)/Pax-8(+)/TG(-)]. Cotransfection of 
the TTF-1 expression vector stimulated TG promoter activity in FRT and BHP15-3
dedifferentiated thyroid cells, but not in H441 pulmonary cells. Only weak
activation was observed in MDCK kidney cells. We then constructed recombinant
adenovirus vectors, AdTTF-1 and ADTGTK: AdTTF-1 contained cytomegalovirus
promoter and rat TTF-1 cDNA; AdTGTK carried the TG promoter-driven HSV-TK gene.
Infection with AdTGTK and combined with GCV treatment induced a cytotoxic effect 
in FRTL-5 cells but not in dedifferentiated thyroid or nonthyroid cells.
Cotransduction of AdTTF-1 and AdTGTK permitted 90% cytotoxicity for BHP15-3 and
>95% cytotoxicity for FRT, as well as for BHP7-13 and BHP18-21v thyroid cancer
cell lines [both/TTF1(-)/TTF-2(-)/Pax-8(+)/TG(-)]. In contrast, little
cytotoxicity was seen for H441 and MDCK cell lines even with 300 microg/ml of
ganciclovir. These results suggest that cotransduction of a TG
promoter-controlled suicide gene and the TTF-1 gene by adenoviral vectors confers
transcriptionally targeted gene-mediated cytotoxicity in poorly differentiated
thyroid carcinoma cells unable to express the TG gene.

PMID: 11325833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Development. 2001 Feb;128(4):503-11.

The transcription factor GATA6 is essential for branching morphogenesis and
epithelial cell differentiation during fetal pulmonary development.

Keijzer R(1), van Tuyl M, Meijers C, Post M, Tibboel D, Grosveld F, Koutsourakis 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Recent loss-of-function studies in mice show that the transcription factor GATA6 
is important for visceral endoderm differentiation. It is also expressed in early
bronchial epithelium and the observation that this tissue does not receive any
contribution from Gata6 double mutant embryonic stem (ES) cells in chimeric mice 
suggests that GATA6 may play a crucial role in lung development. The aim of this 
study was to determine the role of GATA6 in fetal pulmonary development. We show 
that Gata6 mRNA is expressed predominantly in the developing pulmonary endoderm
and epithelium, but at E15.5 also in the pulmonary mesenchyme. Blocking or
depleting GATA6 function results in diminished branching morphogenesis both in
vitro and in vivo. TTF1 expression is unaltered in chimeric lungs whereas SPC and
CC10 expression are attenuated in abnormally branched areas of chimeric lungs.
Chimeras generated in a ROSA26 background show that endodermal cells in these
abnormally branched areas are derived from Gata6 mutant ES cells, implicating
that the defect is intrinsic to the endoderm. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that GATA6 is not essential for endoderm specification, but is
required for normal branching morphogenesis and late epithelial cell
differentiation.

PMID: 11171334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Pathol Res Pract. 2000;196(12):835-40.

Is TTF1 a good immunohistochemical marker to distinguish primary from metastatic 
lung adenocarcinomas?

Reis-Filho JS(1), Carrilho C, Valenti C, Leitão D, Ribeiro CA, Ribeiro SG,
Schmitt FC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Molecular Immunology at Porto University, IPATIMUP,
Portugal.

To evaluate the immunohistochemical expression of thyroid transcription factor 1 
(TTF1) in primary and metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinomas, and test the
diagnostic accuracy of this antibody, two surgical pathologists independently
evaluated 34 cases of adenocarcinomas in the lung without clinical data and tried
to distinguish between primary and metastatic cases using histological criteria
exclusively. Thirteen cases were primary in the lung and 21 were metastases of
extrapulmonary adenocarcinomas: 6 from the endometrium, 4 from the ovary, 3 from 
the colon, 2 from the kidney, 2 from the breast, 2 from the liver and 1 from the 
prostate. Afterward, the immunoreactivity of TTF1 in these neoplasms was
evaluated and correlated with morphological and clinical data. The two
pathologists were able to diagnose only 5 out of 13 cases of primary lung
adenocarcinomas (sensitivity of 38.46%) and also misdiagnosed two primary
malignancies as metastases. After correlation with TTF1 data, the sensitivity
increased to 61.53%. The specificity of TTF1 was 100%. In conclusion, TTF1 is a
highly specific marker for primary lung adenocarcinomas, and should be included
in a panel of antibodies for the differential diagnosis between primary and
metastatic adenocarcinomas of the lung.

PMID: 11156325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Dec;11(12):649-54.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 phosphorylation is not required for protein kinase
A-dependent transcription of the thyroglobulin promoter.

Feliciello A(1), Allevato G, Musti AM, De Brasi D, Gallo A, Avvedimento VE,
Gottesman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Molecolare e Cellulare, Centro di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) is a nuclear homeodomain protein that binds
to and activates the promoters of several thyroid-specific genes, including that 
of the thyroglobulin gene (pTg). These genes are also positively regulated by
thyroid-stimulating hormone/cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) signaling.
We asked whether PKA directly activates TTF1. We show that cAMP/PKA activates pTg
and a synthetic target promoter carrying TTF1 binding site repeats in several
cell types. Activation depends on TTF1. Phosphopeptide mapping indicates that
TTF1 is constitutively phosphorylated at multiple sites, and that cAMP stimulated
phosphorylation of one site, serine 337, in vivo. However, alanine substitution
at this residue or at all sites of phosphorylation did not reduce PKA activation 
of pTg. Thus, PKA stimulates TTF1 transcriptional activity in an indirect manner,
perhaps by recruiting to or removing from the target promoter another regulatory 
factor(s).

PMID: 11149600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Jan 15;29(2):423-9.

The transcript release factor PTRF augments ribosomal gene transcription by
facilitating reinitiation of RNA polymerase I.

Jansa P(1), Burek C, Sander EE, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Termination of murine rDNA transcription by RNA polymerase I (Pol I) requires
pausing of Pol I by terminator-bound TTF-I (transcription termination factor for 
Pol I), followed by dissociation of the ternary complex by PTRF (Pol I and
transcript release factor). To examine the functional correlation between
transcription termination and initiation, we have compared transcription on
terminator-containing and terminator-less rDNA templates. We demonstrate that
terminated RNA molecules are more efficiently synthesized than run-off
transcripts, indicating that termination facilitates reinitiation.
Transcriptional enhancement is observed in multiple- but not single-round
transcription assays measuring either promoter-dependent or promoter-independent 
Pol I transcription. Increased synthesis of terminated transcripts is observed in
crude extracts but not in a PTRF-free reconstituted transcription system,
indicating that PTRF-mediated release of pre-rRNA is responsible for
transcriptional enhancement. Consistent with PTRF serving an important role in
modulating the efficiency of rRNA synthesis, PTRF exhibits pronounced charge
heterogeneity, is phosphorylated at multiple sites and fractionates into
transcriptionally active and inactive forms. The results suggest that regulation 
of PTRF activity may be an as yet unrecognized means to control the efficiency of
ribosomal RNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC29675
PMID: 11139612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Anim Genet. 2000 Oct;31(5):318-21.

Mapping of the CYP1A1, SSTR1 and TTF1 genes to pig chromosome 7q refines the
porcine-human comparative map.

Marklund S(1), Tuggle CK, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

The cytochrome P-450, subfamily I, polypeptide 1 (CYP1A1), somatostatin receptor 
1 (SSTR1) and transcription termination factor 1 (TTF1) genes, predicted to
reside on SSC7q based on chromosome painting studies, were selected for genetic
mapping in the pig. Porcine sequence tagged sites (STSs) spanning 0.9-1.5 kb
genomic DNA sequences were generated and all genes were physically assigned to
SSC7q12-q23, q26 using a pig-rodent somatic cell hybrid panel. Direct sequencing 
of PCR products from four different breeds revealed single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in all genes. SNPs in the SSTR1 and CYP1A1 genes allowed
simple genotyping using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis and linkage mapping with the PiGMaP reference families. SSTR1 was found 
to be closely linked to CYP1A1 (0.0 cM; LOD = 11.1) and ANPEP (0.0 cM; LOD =
9.0). This refined the localization of a previously identified breakpoint in the 
linkage map between regions with orthology to human chromosome 15q (represented
by CYP1A1 and ANPEP) and 14q (represented by SSTR1). Moreover, multipoint linkage
data suggest inverted segments of orthology between HSA14q11-q13 and SSC7q. The
TTF1 SNP was confirmed by allele-specific PCR but was not informative in any of
the families used for linkage analysis.

PMID: 11105212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Gen Genet. 1999 Oct;262(3):508-14.

Mechanism of transcription termination: PTRF interacts with the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase I and dissociates paused transcription complexes from yeast and
mouse.

Jansa P(1), Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Transcription termination by RNA polymerase I (Pol I) is a stepwise process.
First the elongating RNA polymerase is forced to pause by DNA-bound transcription
termination factor (TTF-I). Then the ternary transcription complex is dissociated
by PTRF, a novel factor that promotes release of both nascent transcripts and Pol
I from the template. In this study we have investigated the ability of PTRF to
liberate transcripts from ternary transcription complexes isolated from yeast and
mouse. Using immobilized, tailed templates that contain terminator sequences from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mouse, respectively, we demonstrate that PTRF
promotes release of terminated transcripts, irrespective of whether mouse Pol I
has interacted with the murine termination factor TTF-I or its yeast homolog
Reb1p. In contrast, mouse Pol I paused by the lac repressor remains bound to the 
template both in the presence and absence of PTRF. We demonstrate that PTRF
interacts with the largest subunit of murine Pol I, with TTF-I and Reb1p, but not
the lac repressor. The results imply that Pol I transcription termination in
yeast and mouse is mediated by conserved interactions between Pol I, Reb1p/TTF-I 
and PTRF.

PMID: 10589839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biochimie. 1999 Apr;81(4):321-7.

Thyroid-specific enhancer-binding protein/thyroid transcription factor 1 is not
required for the initial specification of the thyroid and lung primordia.

Kimura S(1), Ward JM, Minoo P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Targeted disruption of the homeobox gene T/ebp (Ttf1) in mice results in ablation
of the thyroid and pituitary, and severe deformities in development of the lung
and hypothalamus. T/ebp is expressed in the thyroid, lung, and ventral forebrain 
during normal embryogenesis. Examination of thyroid development in T/ebp
homozygous null mutant embryos revealed that the thyroid rudiment is initially
formed but is eliminated through apoptosis. Absence of T/EBP expression in the
lung primordium does not activate apoptosis since a lung tissue, albeit
dysmorphic, is nevertheless formed in T/ebp-/- embryos. These results demonstrate
that T/EBP is not required for the initial specification of thyroid or lung
primordia, but is absolutely essential for the development and morphogenesis of
these organs.

PMID: 10401665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4835-40.

Formation of Rathke's pouch requires dual induction from the diencephalon.

Takuma N(1), Sheng HZ, Furuta Y, Ward JM, Sharma K, Hogan BL, Pfaff SL, Westphal 
H, Kimura S, Mahon KA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development and Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Targeted disruption of the homeobox gene T/ebp (Nkx2.1, Ttf1, Titf1) in mice
results in ablation of the pituitary. Paradoxically, while T/ebp is expressed in 
the ventral diencephalon during forebrain formation, it is not expressed in
Rathke's pouch or in the pituitary gland at any time of embryogenesis.
Examination of pituitary development in the T/ebp homozygous null mutant embryos 
revealed that a pouch rudiment is initially formed but is eliminated by
programmed cell death before formation of a definitive pouch. In the diencephalon
of the mutant, Bmp4 expression is maintained, whereas Fgf8 expression is not
detectable. These data and additional genetic and molecular observations suggest 
that Rathke's pouch develops in a two-step process that requires at least two
sequential inductive signals from the diencephalon. First, BMP4 is required for
induction and formation of the pouch rudiment, a role confirmed by analysis of
Bmp4 homozygous null mutant embryos. Second, FGF8 is necessary for activation of 
the key regulatory gene Lhx3 and subsequent development of the pouch rudiment
into a definitive pouch. This study provides firm molecular genetic evidence that
morphogenesis of the pituitary primordium is induced in vivo by signals from the 
adjacent diencephalon.

PMID: 9806931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. EMBO J. 1998 Jun 1;17(11):3135-45.

TTF-I determines the chromatin architecture of the active rDNA promoter.

Längst G(1), Becker PB, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Transcription of ribosomal genes assembled into chromatin requires binding of the
transcription termination factor TTF-I to the promoter-proximal terminator T0. To
analyze the mechanism of TTF-I-mediated transcriptional activation, we have used 
mutant templates with altered sequence, polarity and distance of T0 with respect 
to the transcription start site. Transcription activation by TTF-I is chromatin
specific and requires the precise positioning of the terminator relative to the
promoter. Whereas termination by TTF-I depends on the correct orientation of a
terminator, TTF-I-mediated transcriptional activation is orientation independent.
TTF-I can bind to nucleosomal DNA in the absence of enzymatic activities that
destabilize nucleosome structure. Chromatin-bound TTF-I synergizes with
ATP-dependent cofactors present in extracts of Drosophila embryos and mouse cells
to position a nucleosome over the rDNA promoter and the transcription start site.
Nucleosome positioning correlates tightly with the activation of rDNA
transcription. We suggest that transcriptional activation by TTF-I is a stepwise 
process involving the creation of a defined promoter architecture and that the
positioning of a nucleosome is compatible with, if not a prerequisite for,
transcription initiation from rDNA chromatin.

PMCID: PMC1170652
PMID: 9606195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. EMBO J. 1998 May 15;17(10):2855-64.

Cloning and functional characterization of PTRF, a novel protein which induces
dissociation of paused ternary transcription complexes.

Jansa P(1), Mason SW, Hoffmann-Rohrer U, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Termination of transcription by RNA polymerase I (Pol I) is a two-step process
which involves pausing of elongating transcription complexes and release of both 
pre-rRNA and Pol I from the template. In mouse, pausing of elongation complexes
is mediated by the transcription termination factor TTF-I bound to the 'Sal box' 
terminator downstream of the rDNA transcription unit. Dissociation of paused
ternary complexes requires a cellular factor, termed PTRF for Pol I and
transcript release factor. Here we describe the molecular cloning of a cDNA
corresponding to murine PTRF. Recombinant PTRF is capable of dissociating ternary
Pol I transcription complexes in vitro as revealed by release of both Pol I and
nascent transcripts from the template. Consistent with its function in
transcription termination, PTRF interacts with both TTF-I and Pol I. Moreover, we
demonstrate specific binding of PTRF to transcripts containing the 3' end of
pre-rRNA. Substitution of 3'-terminal uridylates by guanine residues abolishes
PTRF binding and impairs release activity. The results reveal a network of
protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions that governs termination of
Pol I transcription.

PMCID: PMC1170626
PMID: 9582279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):87-90.

Follicular cells of the thyroid gland require Pax8 gene function.

Mansouri A(1), Chowdhury K, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)MPI of Biophysical Chemistry, Dept of Molecular Cell Biology, Göttingen,
Germany.

The thyroid gland develops from two distinct embryonic lineages: follicular cells
(which produce thyroxine) and parafollicular C-cells (which produce calcitonin)
are of endodermal and neural crest origin, respectively. Little is known about
the molecular mechanisms governing the generation of these different cell types. 
Mice lacking the transcription factor Ttf1 lack both cell types and thus are
unable to develop a thyroid gland. By analysis of Pax8-/- mice, we demonstrate
that Pax8 is required for the formation of the follicular cells in the thyroid.
We present evidence that Pax8 is necessary for providing cues for the
differentiation of competent endoderm primordia into thyroxin-producing
follicular cells.

PMID: 9590297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Cell. 1997 Aug 8;90(3):559-67.

Termination of mammalian rDNA replication: polar arrest of replication fork
movement by transcription termination factor TTF-I.

Gerber JK(1), Gögel E, Berger C, Wallisch M, Müller F, Grummt I, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Würzburg, Germany.

A replication fork barrier (RFB) at the 3' end of eukaryotic ribosomal RNA genes 
blocks bidirectional fork progression and limits DNA replication to the same
direction as transcription. We have reproduced the RFB in vitro in HeLa cell
extracts using 3' terminal murine rDNA fused to an SV40 origin-based vector. The 
RFB is polar and modularly organized, requiring both the Sal box transcription
terminator and specific flanking sequences. Mutations within the terminator
element, depletion of the RNA polymerase I-specific transcription termination
factor TTF-I, or deletion of the termination domain of TTF-I abolishes RFB
activity. Thus, the same factor that blocks elongating RNA polymerase I prevents 
head-on collision between the DNA replication apparatus and the transcription
machinery.

PMID: 9267035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Aug;82(8):2633-8.

Growth inhibition of new human thyroid carcinoma cell lines by activation of
adenylate cyclase through the beta-adrenergic receptor.

Ohta K(1), Pang XP, Berg L, Hershman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Laboratory, West Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, California 90073, USA.

In normal thyroid cells, the TSH-adenylate cyclase system plays a pivotal role in
controlling growth and differentiation. However, the role of this system in the
growth of thyroid carcinoma is not well understood. To investigate this subject, 
we have established four new human thyroid carcinoma cell lines, designated BHP
2-7, 7-13, 10-3, and 18-21, from different patients. Northern gel analysis
revealed that all of these cell lines expressed Pax-8 messenger ribonucleic acid;
additionally, only BHP 18-21 cells expressed TTF-1 messenger ribonucleic acid.
These cells were treated with various concentrations of 8-bromo-cAMP, forskolin, 
TSH, and adrenergic receptor agonist (norepinephrine, epinephrine, and
isoproterenol). Cell proliferation was assessed by [3H]thymidine incorporation
and cell number. In these human thyroid carcinoma cell lines, the addition of
8-bromo-cAMP reduced [3H]thymidine incorporation at a concentration of 10
mumol/L. Forskolin (0.1-10 mumol/L) significantly induced cAMP accumulation,
decreased [3H]thymidine incorporation, and reduced cell number in a
dose-dependent manner. Conversely, TSH (0.01-1 mU/ mL) did not affect the
accumulation of cAMP or cell growth. We found that adrenergic receptor agonists
induced the accumulation of cAMP and inhibited cell growth. The rank of potency
was isoproterenol > epinephrine > > norepinephrine. The binding studies of
[3H]CGP-12177, a specific beta-adrenergic agonist, revealed that these new
thyroid carcinoma cells had beta-adrenergic receptors. These results indicate
that cAMP inhibits the growth of some human thyroid carcinoma cells, and that
cAMP production is regulated through beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated pathways, 
but not through TSH receptor-mediated pathways.

PMID: 9253346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Mol Biol. 1997 May 2;268(2):229-34.

RNA polymerase I transcription termination: similar mechanisms are employed by
yeast and mammals.

Mason SW(1), Wallisch M, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II,
Heidelberg.

Termination of RNA polymerase I (Pol I) transcription requires the interaction of
a specific DNA binding factor with terminator elements downstream of the pre-rRNA
coding region. Both the terminator elements and the respective termination
factors are distinct in yeast and mammals, and differences in the mechanism of
transcription termination have been postulated. We have compared in vitro
transcription termination of yeast and mouse Pol I using both the murine factor
TTF-I, and the yeast homolog Reb1p. We show that, similar to TTF-I, Reb1p was
sufficient for pausing of Pol I from either species, but was unable to cause
release of the nascent transcripts from the paused ternary complex. The
deficiency of Reb1p to mediate transcript release from Pol I of either species
was complemented by the recently characterized murine release factor. Thus, both 
yeast and mouse Pol I termination requires a trans-acting factor that, in
conjunction with the T-rich flanking sequence, releases the transcripts and Pol I
from the template. The observation that the murine factor causes dissociation of 
ternary transcription complexes arrested by Reb1p suggests that the mechanism of 
Pol I termination is highly conserved from yeast to mammals.

PMID: 9159465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. EMBO J. 1997 Feb 17;16(4):760-8.

RNA polymerase I transcription on nucleosomal templates: the transcription
termination factor TTF-I induces chromatin remodeling and relieves
transcriptional repression.

Längst G(1), Blank TA, Becker PB, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Eukaryotic ribosomal gene promoters are preceded by a terminator element which is
recognized by the transcription termination factor TTF-I. We have studied the
function of this promoter-proximal terminator and show that binding of TTF-I is
the key event which leads to ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling and
transcriptional activation of mouse rDNA pre-assembled into chromatin. We have
analyzed TTF-I mutants for their ability to bind to free or nucleosomal DNA, and 
show that the DNA binding domain of TTF-I on its own is not sufficient for
interaction with chromatin, indicating that specific protein features exist that 
endow a transcription factor with chromatin binding and remodeling properties.
This first analysis of RNA polymerase I transcription in chromatin provides a
clue for the function of the upstream terminator and establishes a dual role for 
TTF-I both as a termination factor and a chromatin-specific transcription
activator.

PMCID: PMC1169677
PMID: 9049305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Feb 15;25(4):904-10.

Molecular cloning and analysis of Schizosaccharomyces pombe Reb1p:
sequence-specific recognition of two sites in the far upstream rDNA intergenic
spacer.

Zhao A(1), Guo A, Liu Z, Pape L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, New York University 10003, USA.

The coding sequences for a Schizosaccharomyces pombe sequence-specific DNA
binding protein, Reb1p, have been cloned. The predicted S. pombe Reb1p is 24-29% 
identical to mouse TTF-1 (transcription termination factor-1) and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae REB1 protein, both of which direct termination of RNA polymerase I
catalyzed transcripts. The S.pombe Reb1 cDNA encodes a predicted polypeptide of
504 amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of 58.4 kDa. The S. pombe Reb1p
is unusual in that the bipartite DNA binding motif identified originally in
S.cerevisiae and Klyveromyces lactis REB1 proteins is uninterrupted and thus
S.pombe Reb1p may contain the smallest natural REB1 homologous DNA binding
domain. Its genomic coding sequences were shown to be interrupted by two introns.
A recombinant histidine-tagged Reb1 protein bearing the rDNA binding domain has
two homologous, sequence-specific binding sites in the S. pomber DNA intergenic
spacer, located between 289 and 480 nt downstream of the end of the approximately
25S rRNA coding sequences. Each binding site is 13-14 bp downstream of two of the
three proposed in vivo termination sites. The core of this 17 bp site,
AGGTAAGGGTAATGCAC, is specifically protected by Reb1p in footprinting analysis.

PMCID: PMC146519
PMID: 9016645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. EMBO J. 1997 Jan 2;16(1):163-72.

Identification of a transcript release activity acting on ternary transcription
complexes containing murine RNA polymerase I.

Mason SW(1), Sander EE, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Termination of mammalian ribosomal gene transcription by RNA polymerase I (Pol I)
requires binding of the nucleolar factor TTF-I (transcription termination factor 
for Pol I) to specific rDNA terminator elements. We have used recombinant murine 
TTF-I in an immobilized tailed template assay to analyze individual steps of the 
termination reaction. We demonstrate that, besides the TTF-I-DNA complex which
stops elongating Pol I, an additional activity is required to release both the
nascent transcript and Pol I from the template. Moreover, transcript release, but
not TTF-I-directed pausing, depends on upstream sequences directly flanking the
terminator element. Together, complete termination of Pol I transcription
requires TTF-I bound to the terminator DNA, a stretch of thymidine residues
upstream of the TTF-I-mediated pause site and an activity which releases the RNA 
transcript and Pol I from the DNA template.

PMCID: PMC1169623
PMID: 9009277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):2056-64.

Transcriptional regulation of a mouse Clara cell-specific protein (mCC10) gene by
the NKx transcription factor family members thyroid transciption factor 1 and
cardiac muscle-specific homeobox protein (CSX).

Ray MK(1), Chen CY, Schwartz RJ, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

This report defines the elements between bp -800 and -166 that regulate the
quantitative level of mouse CC10 (mCC10) transcription in the lungs. The elements
in this promoter domain are the response elements for the NKx2.1 homeobox
protein, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1). DNase I footprint analysis
identified five binding sites for TTF1 between bp -800 and - 166. These sites are
located at bp -344 to -335, - 282 to -273, -268 to -263, -258 to -249, and - 199 
to - 190. In addition to these enhancer elements, two TTF1 binding sites were
identified in the proximal promoter region (bp - 166 to + 1), at bp -74 to -69
and -49 to -39. An identical footprint of the mCC10 promoter region was also
observed with another member of the NKx family, NKx 2.5, the cardiac
muscle-specific homeobox protein (CSX). Deletion and linker-scanner mutational
analyses of the TTF1 binding sites in the mCC10 distal promoter region with
transient cotransfection into CV1 cells with either TTF1 or CSX identified the
site located between bp -282 and -273 as the major regulator of CC10 expression, 
with minor regulation by sites at bp -344 to -335 and -258 to -249. The
importance of the NKx binding site at bp -282 to -273 was verified in vivo.
Transgenic mice generated with the human growth hormone gene fused to 800 bp of
the mCC10 promoter containing a mutation in the TTF1 binding site at bp -282 to
-273 showed a reduction in transgene expression equal to that of the mice
generated with only 166 bp of 5'-flanking DNA. This report emphasizes the
importance of TTF1 or related factors as major regulators of pulmonary gene
expression and demonstrates the potential of NKx proteins to bind and activate
heterologous target genes.

PMCID: PMC231192
PMID: 8628271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 20;92(13):5827-31.

Molecular coevolution of mammalian ribosomal gene terminator sequences and the
transcription termination factor TTF-I.

Evers R(1), Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Both the DNA elements and the nuclear factors that direct termination of
ribosomal gene transcription exhibit species-specific differences. Even between
mammals--e.g., human and mouse--the termination signals are not identical and the
respective transcription termination factors (TTFs) which bind to the terminator 
sequence are not fully interchangeable. To elucidate the molecular basis for this
species-specificity, we have cloned TTF-I from human and mouse cells and compared
their structural and functional properties. Recombinant TTF-I exhibits
species-specific DNA binding and terminates transcription both in cell-free
transcription assays and in transfection experiments. Chimeric constructs of
mouse TTF-I and human TTF-I reveal that the major determinant for
species-specific DNA binding resides within the C terminus of TTF-I. Replacing 31
C-terminal amino acids of mouse TTF-I with the homologous human sequences relaxes
the DNA-binding specificity and, as a consequence, allows the chimeric factor to 
bind the human terminator sequence and to specifically stop rDNA transcription.

PMCID: PMC41594
PMID: 7597036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. EMBO J. 1995 Mar 15;14(6):1248-56.

Different domains of the murine RNA polymerase I-specific termination factor
mTTF-I serve distinct functions in transcription termination.

Evers R(1), Smid A, Rudloff U, Lottspeich F, Grummt I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell II, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Termination of mouse ribosomal gene transcription by RNA polymerase I (Pol I)
requires the specific interaction of a DNA binding protein, mTTF-I, with an 18 bp
sequence element located downstream of the rRNA coding region. Here we describe
the molecular cloning and functional characterization of the cDNA encoding this
transcription termination factor. Recombinant mTTF-I binds specifically to the
murine terminator elements and terminates Pol I transcription in a reconstituted 
in vitro system. Deletion analysis has defined a modular structure of mTTF-I
comprising a dispensable N-terminal half, a large C-terminal DNA binding region
and an internal domain which is required for transcription termination.
Significantly, the C-terminal region of mTTF-I reveals striking homology to the
DNA binding domains of the proto-oncogene c-Myb and the yeast transcription
factor Reb1p. Site-directed mutagenesis of one of the tryptophan residues that is
conserved in the homology region of c-Myb, Reb1p and mTTF-I abolishes specific
DNA binding, a finding which underscores the functional relevance of these
residues in DNA-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC398203
PMID: 7720715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Oncol Rep. 1994 Nov;1(6):1097-100.

Ttf1 gene-expression in human proliferating thyroid-diseases.

Perlino E(1), Maenza S, Marra E, Ciampolillo A, Marra G, Derobertis O, Giorgino
R, Quagliariello E.

Author information: 
(1)UNIV BARI,DEPT BIOCHEM & MOLEC BIOL,BARI,ITALY. UNIV BARI,INST MED ENDOCRINOL 
& METAB DIS,BARI,ITALY. GB MORGAGNI L PIERANTONI HOSP,DIV GEN SURG,FORLI,ITALY.

TTF1 mRNA expression in the thyroid gland from 30 patients with thyroid
proliferating diseases and 4 healthy donors used as normal controls was
investigated using Northern blot analysis. Six patients affected by malignant
thyroid carcinomas and six patients with adenoma were examined; moreover 18
patients with non malignant proliferating disease such as multinodular goiters
were investigated. Determination of TTF1 mRNA revealed a significant decrease of 
the steady state mRNA levels in carcinomas and adenomas as compared to normal
tissues. On the contrary, in patients affected by multinodular goiters variations
were observed that seemed not to be directly associated with the pathological
conditions.

PMID: 21607498  [PubMed]


481. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Dec;7(12):1589-95.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 activates the promoter of the thyrotropin receptor
gene.

Civitareale D(1), Castelli MP, Falasca P, Saiardi A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud,
Santa Maria Imbaro, Italy.

The TSH receptor (TSHr) is one of the most important thyroid differentiation
markers. The binding of the TSH hormone to its receptor is an essential step in
the modulation of thyroid function and differentiation. Here we report that the
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), a transcription factor essential for
thyroid-specific gene expression, binds to the TSHr minimal promoter. The
promoter, when mutated at this binding site, shows a decreased activity in
thyroid cells. In cotransfection experiments in nonthyroid cells, TTF1 is able to
trans-activate the TSHr minimal promoter. This finding strengthens the importance
of TTF1 in the maintenance of thyroid differentiation. The promoters of the main 
thyroid differentiation markers thyroglobulin, thyroperoxidase, and now TSHr, are
regulated by TTF1.

PMID: 8145764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


