
1. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.60. [Epub ahead of print]

Collagen-rich stroma in aggressive colon tumors induces mesenchymal gene
expression and tumor cell invasion.

Vellinga TT(1), den Uil S(2,)(3), Rinkes IH(1), Marvin D(1), Ponsioen B(4),
Alvarez-Varela A(4), Fatrai S(1), Scheele C(4), Zwijnenburg DA(5), Snippert H(4),
Vermeulen L(6), Medema JP(6), Stockmann HB(3), Koster J(6), Fijneman RJ(2,)(7),
de Rooij J(3), Kranenburg O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Surgery, Spaarne Gasthuis, Haarlem, The
Netherlands. (4)Department Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Oncogenomics, Academic
Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Center of Experimental
and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (7)Department of Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Gene expression-based classification systems have identified an aggressive colon 
cancer subtype with mesenchymal features, possibly reflecting
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of tumor cells. However, stromal
fibroblasts contribute extensively to the mesenchymal phenotype of aggressive
colon tumors, challenging the notion of tumor EMT. To separately study the
neoplastic and stromal compartments of colon tumors, we have generated a stroma
gene filter (SGF). Comparative analysis of stroma(high) and stroma(low) tumors
shows that the neoplastic cells in stroma(high) tumors express specific EMT
drivers (ZEB2, TWIST1, TWIST2) and that 98% of differentially expressed genes are
strongly correlated with them. Analysis of differential gene expression between
mesenchymal and epithelial cancer cell lines revealed that hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a), a transcriptional activator of intestinal (epithelial)
differentiation, and its target genes are highly expressed in epithelial cancer
cell lines. However, mesenchymal-type cancer cell lines expressed only part of
the mesenchymal genes expressed by tumor-derived neoplastic cells, suggesting
that external cues were lacking. We found that collagen-I dominates the
extracellular matrix in aggressive colon cancer. Mimicking the tumor
microenvironment by replacing laminin-rich Matrigel with collagen-I was
sufficient to induce tumor-specific mesenchymal gene expression, suppression of
HNF4a and its target genes, and collective tumor cell invasion of patient-derived
colon tumor organoids. The data connect collagen-rich stroma to mesenchymal gene 
expression in neoplastic cells and to collective tumor cell invasion. Targeting
the tumor-collagen interface may therefore be explored as a novel strategy in the
treatment of aggressive colon cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 21
March 2016; doi:10.1038/onc.2016.60.

PMID: 26996663  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Stem Cell Res. 2016 Feb 27;16(2):507-518. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2016.02.037. [Epub
ahead of print]

Re-patterning of H3K27me3, H3K4me3 and DNA methylation during fibroblast
conversion into induced cardiomyocytes.

Liu Z(1), Chen O(1), Zheng M(1), Wang L(1), Zhou Y(1), Yin C(1), Liu J(1), Qian
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States; McAllister Heart Institute, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States; Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United
States. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States; McAllister Heart Institute,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, United States; Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
United States. Electronic address: li_qian@med.unc.edu.

Direct conversion of fibroblasts into induced cardiomyocytes (iCMs) offers an
alternative strategy for cardiac disease modeling and regeneration. During iCM
reprogramming, the starting fibroblasts must overcome existing epigenetic
barriers to acquire the CM-like chromatin pattern. However, epigenetic dynamics
along this reprogramming process have not been studied. Here, we took advantage
of our recently generated polycistronic system and determined the dynamics of two
critical histone marks, H3K27me3 and H3K4me3, in parallel with gene expression at
a set of carefully selected cardiac and fibroblast loci during iCM reprogramming.
We observed reduced H3K27me3 and increased H3K4me3 at cardiac promoters as early 
as day 3, paralleled by a rapid significant increase in their mRNA expression. In
contrast, H3K27me3 at loci encoding fibroblast marker genes did not increase
until day 10 and H3K4me3 progressively decreased along the reprogramming process;
these changes were accompanied by a gradual decrease in the mRNA expression of
fibroblast marker genes. Further analyses of fibroblast-enriched transcription
factors revealed a similarly late deposition of H3K27me3 and decreased mRNA
expression of Sox9, Twist1 and Twist2, three important players in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Our data suggest early rapid activation of the
cardiac program and later progressive suppression of fibroblast fate at both
epigenetic and transcriptional levels. Additionally, we determined the DNA
methylation states of representative cardiac promoters and found that not every
single CpG was equally demethylated during early stages of iCM reprogramming.
Rather, there are specific CpGs, whose demethylation states correlated tightly
with transcription activation, that we propose are the major contributing CpGs.
Our work thus reveals a differential re-patterning of H3K27me3, H3K4me3 at
cardiac and fibroblast loci during iCM reprogramming and could provide future
genome-wide epigenetic studies with important guidance such as the appropriate
time window and loci to be utilized as positive and negative controls.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26957038  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 3;35(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s13046-016-0298-y.

HIF-2a promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition through regulating Twist2
binding to the promoter of E-cadherin in pancreatic cancer.

Yang J(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang Y(3), Zhu D(4), Zhang L(5), Li Y(6), Zhu Y(7), Li
D(8), Zhou J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. 20135232100@stu.suda.edu.cn.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. 852576430@qq.com.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. yangjian38850@163.com.
(4)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. zj0612@163.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. yangjian88lucky@163.com.
(6)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, China. suzhouyiuan@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, 215006, China. qbb24@126.com. (8)Department of General Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006,
China. dechunlisuzhou@gmail.com. (9)Department of General Surgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006,
China. zhoujian06@suda.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a dedifferentiation
process that mainly involves in mesenchymal marker upregulation, epithelial maker
downregulation and cell polarity loss. Related hypoxia factors play a crucial
role in EMT, however, it remains few evidence to clarify the role of HIF-2a in
EMT in pancreatic cancer.
METHOD: In this study, we investigated the expression of HIF-2a and E-cadherin by
immunohistochemistry in 70 pancreatic cancer patients, as well as the correlation
to the clinicopathologic characteristics. Then we regulated the expression of
HIF-2a in pancreatic cancer cells to examine the role of HIF-2a on invasion and
migration in vitro. Finally, we tested the relation of HIF-2a and EMT related
proteins by Western blot and determined whether HIF-2a regulated EMT through
Twist regulating the expression of E-cadherin by Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay.
RESULTS: We found that HIF-2a protein was expressed positively in 67.1 % (47/70) 
of pancreatic cancer tissues and 11.4 % (8/70) of adjacent non-tumor pancreatic
tissues, and there was a significant difference in the positive rate of HIF-2a
protein between two groups (<U+03C7>2<U+2009>=<U+2009>45.549, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In addition, the staining for
HIF-2a was correlated with tumor differentiation (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), clinical stage
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and lymph node metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), while E-cadherin expression was 
only correlated with lymph node metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). HIF-2a promoted cell
migration, invasion in vitro, and regulated the expression of E-cadherin and
MMPs, which are critical to EMT. Our further ChIP assay suggested that only
Twist2 could bind to the promoter of E-cadherin in -714 bp region site, but there
is no positive binding capacity in -295 bp promoter region site of E-cadherin.
Clinical tissues IHC staining showed that Twist2 and E-cadherin expression had an
obviously negative correlation in pancreatic cancer. Nevertheless, it had no
obvious correlation between Twist1 and E-cadherin.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicated that HIF-2a promotes EMT in pancreatic
cancer by regulating Twist2 binding to the promoter of E-cadherin, which meant
that HIF-2a and this pathway may be effective therapeutic targets for pancreatic 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741030
PMID: 26842802  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.434. [Epub ahead of print]

ALK inhibitor resistance in ALK(F1174L)-driven neuroblastoma is associated with
AXL activation and induction of EMT.

Debruyne DN(1), Bhatnagar N(1), Sharma B(1), Luther W(1), Moore NF(1), Cheung
NK(2), Gray NS(3,)(4), George RE(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The crizotinib-resistant ALK(F1174L) mutation arises de novo in neuroblastoma
(NB) and is acquired in ALK translocation-driven cancers, lending impetus to the 
development of novel anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors with different
modes of action. The diaminopyrimidine TAE684 and its derivative ceritinib
(LDK378), which are structurally distinct from crizotinib, are active against NB 
cells expressing ALK(F1174L). Here we demonstrate acquired resistance to TAE684
and LDK378 in ALK(F1174L)-driven human NB cells that is linked to overexpression 
and activation of the AXL tyrosine kinase and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). AXL phosphorylation conferred TAE684 resistance to NB cells
through upregulated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling.
Inhibition of AXL partly rescued TAE684 resistance, resensitizing these cells to 
this compound. AXL activation in resistant cells was mediated through increased
expression of the active form of its ligand, GAS6, that also served to stabilize 
the AXL protein. Although ectopic expression of AXL and TWIST2 individually in
TAE684-sensitive parental cells led to the elevated expression of mesenchymal
markers and invasive capacity, only AXL overexpression induced resistance to
TAE684 as well. TAE684-resistant cells showed greater sensitivity to HSP90
inhibition than did their parental counterparts, with downregulation of AXL and
AXL-mediated ERK signaling. Our studies indicate that aberrant AXL signaling and 
development of an EMT phenotype underlie resistance of ALK(F1174L)-driven NB
cells to TAE684 and its derivatives. We suggest that the combination of ALK and
AXL or HSP90 inhibitors be considered to delay the emergence of such
resistance.Oncogene advance online publication, 30 November 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.434.

PMID: 26616860  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan;35(1):89-98. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4374. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Effects of lentivirus-mediated shRNA targeting integrin-linked kinase on oral
squamous cell carcinoma in vitro and in vivo.

Que L(1), Zhao D(2), Tang XF(3), Liu JY(3), Zhang XY(1), Zhan YH(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
P.R. China. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Carcinoma, West China College of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, P.R. China.

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK), a highly conserved intracellular protein of
serine/threonine protein kinase activities, which is associated with the integrin
and growth factor receptor signaling pathway, is involved in the regulation of
cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, migration and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Findings of a previous study showed that
ILK overexpression was strongly correlated with a more aggressive tumor
phenotype, recurrence and poor survival for oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)
patients, as well as some EMT markers. In order to investigate the underlying
mechanisms involved, a lentivirus-mediated short hairpin RNA (shRNA) was employed
to downregulate ILK. The results showed that the knockdown of ILK inhibited cell 
growth, adhesion and invasion ability in vitro, and OSCC cells deficient of ILK
were blocked in the S phase and underwent apoptosis. Additionally, ILK shRNA
inhibited EMT by impairing the expression of Snail, Slug and Twist2 and enhacning
E-cadherin expression. ILK shRNA suppressed the phosphorylation of downstream
signaling targets Akt and GSk-3ß. In addition, the knockdown of ILK inhibited
tumor growth, invasion and metastasis of xenograft tumors in vivo. These results 
suggested that ILK is a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of OSCC.

PMID: 26531674  [PubMed - in process]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):269-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.115. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

3-Deazaneplanocin A suppresses aggressive phenotype-related gene expression in an
oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line.

Hatta M(1), Naganuma K(2), Kato K(3), Yamazaki J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka Dental
College, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: hatta@college.fdcnet.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Fukuoka Dental College, Fukuoka,
Japan. (3)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka
Dental College, Fukuoka, Japan.

In tumor tissues, alterations of gene expression caused by aberrant epigenetic
modifications confer phenotypic diversity on malignant cells. Although
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) has been shown to reactivate tumor suppressor genes
in several cancer cells, it remains unclear whether DZNep attenuates the
malignant phenotypes of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. In this study,
we investigated the effect of DZNep on the expression of genes related to
aggressive phenotypes, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition, in OSCC cells. 
We found that DZNep reduced the cellular levels of polycomb group proteins (EZH2,
SUZ12, BMI1, and RING1A) and the associated trimethylation of Lys27 on histone H3
and monoubiquitination of Lys119 on histone H2A in the poorly differentiated OSCC
cell line SAS. Immunocytochemical staining demonstrated that DZNep induced the
reorganization of filamentous actin and the membrane localization of E-cadherin
associated with cell-cell adhesions. We also found an inhibitory effect of DZNep 
on cell proliferation using a WST assay. Finally, quantitative RT-PCR analysis
demonstrated that genes involved in the aggressive phenotypes (TWIST2, EGFR,
ACTA2, TGFB1, WNT5B, and APLIN) were down-regulated, whereas epithelial phenotype
genes (CDH1, CLDN4, IVL, and TGM1) were up-regulated in SAS cells treated with
DZNep. Collectively, our findings suggest that DZNep reverses the aggressive
characteristics of OSCC cells through the dynamic regulation of epithelial
plasticity via the reprogramming of gene expression patterns.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26505792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 4;290(49):29593-602. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.680546. Epub
2015 Oct 20.

Twist1 Is Essential for Tooth Morphogenesis and Odontoblast Differentiation.

Meng T(1), Huang Y(2), Wang S(3), Zhang H(3), Dechow PC(3), Wang X(3), Qin C(3), 
Shi B(4), D'Souza RN(5), Lu Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Craniofacial
Research and Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas,
Texas 75246, the State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Department of Cleft
Lip and Palate Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China. (2)From the Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center
for Craniofacial Research and Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of
Dentistry, Dallas, Texas 75246, the Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of
Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510055, China, and. (3)From the
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Craniofacial Research and
Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, Texas 75246.
(4)the State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Department of Cleft Lip and
Palate Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China. (5)the University of Utah Health Sciences, Salt Lake City, Utah
84112 rena.dsouza@hsc.utah.edu. (6)From the Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Center for Craniofacial Research and Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor
College of Dentistry, Dallas, Texas 75246, ylu@bcd.tamhsc.edu.

Twist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix-containing transcription factor that is
expressed in the dental mesenchyme during the early stages of tooth development. 
To better delineate its roles in tooth development, we generated Twist1
conditional knockout embryos (Twist2(Cre) (/+);Twist1(fl/fl)) by breeding Twist1 
floxed mice (Twist1(fl/fl)) with Twist2-Cre recombinase knockin mice (Twist2(Cre)
(/+)). The Twist2(Cre) (/+);Twist1(fl/fl) embryos formed smaller tooth germs and 
abnormal cusps during early tooth morphogenesis. Molecular and histological
analyses showed that the developing molars of the Twist2(Cre) (/+);Twist1(fl/fl) 
embryos had reduced cell proliferation and expression of fibroblast growth
factors 3, 4, 9, and 10 and FGF receptors 1 and 2 in the dental epithelium and
mesenchyme. In addition, 3-week-old renal capsular transplants of embryonic day
18.5 Twist2(Cre) (/+);Twist1(fl/fl) molars showed malformed crowns and cusps with
defective crown dentin and enamel. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that the
implanted mutant molars had defects in odontoblast differentiation and delayed
ameloblast differentiation. Furthermore, in vitro ChIP assays demonstrated that
Twist1 was able to bind to a specific region of the Fgf10 promoter. In
conclusion, our findings suggest that Twist1 plays crucial roles in regulating
tooth development and that it may exert its functions through the FGF signaling
pathway.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705958 [Available on 2016-12-04]
PMID: 26487719  [PubMed - in process]


8. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32955-65. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5106.

Deciphering the molecular basis of invasiveness in Sdhb-deficient cells.

Loriot C(1,)(2), Domingues M(2,)(3), Berger A(4,)(5), Menara M(1,)(2), Ruel
M(1,)(2), Morin A(1,)(2), Castro-Vega LJ(1,)(2), Letouzé É(6), Martinelli
C(1,)(2), Bemelmans AP(7,)(8), Larue L(3), Gimenez-Roqueplo AP(1,)(2,)(9,)(10),
Favier J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR970, Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, F-75015 Paris, France.
(2)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, F-75006 
Paris, France. (3)INSERM, U1021, CNRS UMR3347, Institut Curie, F-91405 Orsay,
France. (4)INSERM, U968, Institut de la vision, F-75012 Paris, France.
(5)Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 06, F-75005 Paris, France. (6)Programme
Cartes d'Identité des Tumeurs, Ligue Nationale Contre Le Cancer, F-75013 Paris,
France. (7)CEA, DSV, I2BM, Molecular Imaging Research Center (MIRCen), F-92265
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. (8)CNRS, CEA URA 2210, F-92265 Fontenay-aux-Roses,
France. (9)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges
Pompidou, Service de Génétique, F-75015 Paris, France. (10)Rare Adrenal Cancer
Network-Cortico Médullosurrénale Tumeurs Endocrines, Institut National du Cancer,
F-75014 Paris, France.

Metastatic pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGL) are malignant
neuroendocrine tumors frequently associated with germline mutations in the SDHB
gene. SDHB-mutated PPGL display a hypermethylator phenotype associated with
hallmarks of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In the present study, we
report the characterization of a unique model of Sdhb knockout in mouse
chromaffin cells. Sdhb deficient cells exhibit a metastatic phenotype as
highlighted by increased individual cell migration (characterized by faster
motility and increased persistence) as well as high invasive and adhesion
abilities. This phenotype is associated with the modulation of Twist1, Twist2,
Tcf3, Snai1, N-cadherin or Krt19 expression, reflecting an EMT-like reprogramming
of cells. Krt19 is epigenetically silenced in Sdhb-deficient cells and
re-expressed after treatment by the demethylating agent decitabine. Krt19 rescue 
by lentiviral transduction in Sdhb-deficient cells and Krt19 inhibition by RNA
interference in wild-type cells were performed. Both studies revealed the
involvement of KRT19 in the invasive phenotype by modulating collective and
individual migration and cell/extra-cellular matrix adhesion properties. These
findings underline the role of hypermethylation and EMT in the in vitro
acquisition of metastatic properties, following SDHB loss of function.

PMCID: PMC4741742
PMID: 26460615  [PubMed - in process]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 11;10(9):e0137229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137229.
eCollection 2015.

Twist1 Is a TNF-Inducible Inhibitor of Clock Mediated Activation of Period Genes.

Meier D(1), Lopez M(1), Franken P(2), Fontana A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Activation of the immune system affects the circadian clock. Tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) and Interleukin (IL)-1ß inhibit the expression of clock
genes including Period (Per) genes and the PAR-bZip clock-controlled gene D-site 
albumin promoter-binding protein (Dbp). These effects are due to cytokine-induced
interference of E-box mediated transcription of clock genes. In the present study
we have assessed the two E-box binding transcriptional regulators Twist1 and
Twist2 for their role in cytokine induced inhibition of clock genes.
METHODS: The expression of the clock genes Per1, Per2, Per3 and of Dbp was
assessed in NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts and the mouse hippocampal neuronal cell
line HT22. Cells were treated for 4h with TNF and IL-1ß. The functional role of
Twist1 and Twist2 was assessed by siRNAs against the Twist genes and by
overexpression of TWIST proteins. In luciferase (luc) assays NIH-3T3 cells were
transfected with reporter gene constructs, which contain a 3xPer1 E-box or a Dbp 
E-box. Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed using
antibodies to TWIST1 and CLOCK, and the E-box consensus sequences of Dbp (CATGTG)
and Per1 E-box (CACGTG).
RESULTS: We report here that siRNA against Twist1 protects NIH-3T3 cells and HT22
cells from down-regulation of Period and Dbp by TNF and IL-1ß. Overexpression of 
Twist1, but not of Twist2, mimics the effect of the cytokines. TNF down-regulates
the activation of Per1-3xE-box-luc, the effect being prevented by siRNA against
Twist1. Overexpression of Twist1, but not of Twist2, inhibits Per1-3xE-box-luc or
Dbp-E-Box-luc activity. ChIP experiments show TWIST1 induction by TNF to compete 
with CLOCK binding to the E-box of Period genes and Dbp.
CONCLUSION: Twist1 plays a pivotal role in the TNF mediated suppression of E-box 
dependent transactivation of Period genes and Dbp. Thereby Twist1 may provide a
link between the immune system and the circadian timing system.

PMCID: PMC4567340
PMID: 26361389  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Hum Genet. 2015 Nov;60(11):717-22. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.103. Epub 2015 Aug 27.

Setleis syndrome due to inheritance of the 1p36.22p36.21 duplication: evidence
for lack of penetrance.

Lee BH(1,)(2), Kasparis C(3), Chen B(1), Mei H(1), Edelmann L(1), Moss C(3),
Weaver DD(4), Desnick RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of
Dermatology, Birmingham Children's Hospital, National Health Service Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK. (4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Setleis syndrome, focal facial dermal dysplasia type III (FFDD3, MIM #227260), is
characterized by scar-like bitemporal lesions and other ocular and facial
dysmorphic features. The syndrome results from recessive mutations in the TWIST2 
gene, encoding a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor or de novo genomic
duplication or triplication, which include 1.3<U+2009>Mb at 1p36.22p36.21, or other yet 
undefined lesions, emphasizing the syndrome's genetic heterogeneity. Recently,
three patients were reported with 1p36.22p36.21 duplications/triplication that
had the characteristic FFDD3 features and developmental delay or intellectual
disabilities. Here, we describe a male with this microduplication, and the
typical FFDD3 phenotype, but normal intelligence. Notably, his duplication was
inherited from his father who did not have any FFDD3 manifestations, indicating
lack of penetrance of the 1p36.22p36.21 microduplication. These findings
emphasize phenotypic heterogeneity of the 1p36.22p36.21 copy number variant and
the importance of screening the parents of patients with the 1p36.22p36.21 copy
number variant to determine whether the duplication/triplication is de novo or
inherited, for informed reproductive and genetic counseling.

PMID: 26311541  [PubMed - in process]


11. Transl Oncol. 2015 Aug;8(4):279-87. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2015.05.003.

Detection of a Distinctive Genomic Signature in Rhabdoid Glioblastoma, A Rare
Disease Entity Identified by Whole Exome Sequencing and Whole Transcriptome
Sequencing.

Koh Y(1), Park I(2), Sun CH(2), Lee S(2), Yun H(3), Park CK(4), Park SH(5), Park 
JK(6), Lee SH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799,
Korea. (2)Bioinformatics Group, Platform Development Center, CSP R&D, Samsung
SDS, East Campus, Samsung SDS Tower, 123 Olympic Ro 35 Gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul
138-240, Korea. (3)Bioinformatics Group, Platform Development Center, CSP R&D,
Samsung SDS, East Campus, Samsung SDS Tower, 123 Olympic Ro 35 Gil, Songpa-gu,
Seoul 138-240, Korea. Electronic address: hongseok.yun@samsung.com. (4)Department
of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu,
Seoul 110-744, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea. (5)Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro,
Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea. (7)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744,
Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea. Electronic address:
shlee119@snu.ac.kr.

We analyzed the genome of a rhabdoid glioblastoma (R-GBM) tumor, a very rare
variant of GBM. A surgical specimen of R-GBM from a 20-year-old woman was
analyzed using whole exome sequencing (WES), whole transcriptome sequencing
(WTS), single nucleotide polymorphism array, and array comparative genomic
hybridization. The status of gene expression in R-GBM tissue was compared with
that of normal brain tissue and conventional GBM tumor tissue. We identified 23
somatic non-synonymous small nucleotide variants with WES. We identified the BRAF
V600E mutation and possible functional changes in the mutated genes, ISL1 and
NDRG2. Copy number alteration analysis revealed gains of chromosomes 3, 7, and 9.
We found loss of heterozygosity and focal homozygous deletion on 9q21, which
includes CDKN2A and CDKN2B. In addition, WTS revealed that CDK6, MET, EZH2, EGFR,
and NOTCH1, which are located on chromosomes 7 and 9, were over-expressed,
whereas CDKN2A/2B were minimally expressed. Fusion gene analysis showed 14
candidate genes that may be functionally involved in R-GBM, including TWIST2, and
UPK3BL. The BRAF V600E mutation, CDKN2A/2B deletion, and EGFR/MET copy number
gain were observed. These simultaneous alterations are very rarely found in GBM. 
Moreover, the NDRG2 mutation was first identified in this study as it has never
been reported in GBM. We observed a unique genomic signature in R-GBM compared to
conventional GBM, which may provide insight regarding R-GBM as a distinct disease
entity among the larger group of GBMs.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4562980
PMID: 26310374  [PubMed]


12. J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;226(3):X1. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0474e.

TWIST1 and TWIST2 regulate glycogen storage and inflammatory genes in skeletal
muscle.

Mudry JM(1), Massart J(1), Szekeres FL(1), Krook A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and
SurgerySection for Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Section for 
Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgerySection for
Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Section for Integrative
PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgerySection for Integrative
PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Anna.Krook@ki.se.

Erratum for
    J Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;224(3):303-13.

PMID: 26297292  [PubMed]


13. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Sep;36(3):645-52. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2268. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

Bufalin inhibits TGF-ß-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and migration
in human lung cancer A549 cells by downregulating TGF-ß receptors.

Zhao L(1), Liu S(1), Che X(1), Hou K(1), Ma Y(1), Li C(1), Wen T(1), Fan Y(1), Hu
X(2), Liu Y(1), Qu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Respiratory
Medicine, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110001, P.R. China.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a well-known prerequisite for
cancer cells to acquire the migratory and invasive capacity, and to subsequently 
metastasize. Bufalin is one of the major active components of the traditional
Chinese medicine Chan Su, and accumulating evidence has shown its anticancer
effect in multipe types of cancer. However, the role of bufalin in transforming
growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-induced EMT and migration remains unclear. In the present
study, the effect of bufalin on TGF-ß-induced EMT and migration was investigated 
in human lung cancer A549 cells. TGF-ß induced EMT in A549 cells and increased
their migratory ability, which were markedly suppressed by bufalin. Additionally,
TGF-ß-induced upregulation of Twist2 and zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2
(ZEB2), as well as the phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3 were also inhibited by 
bufalin. However, the Smad-independent signaling pathways were not affected.
Further analysis showed that the TGF-ß receptor I (TßRI) and TGF-ß receptor II
(TßRII) were downregulated in the presence of bufalin. Pretreatment with
SB431542, a potent inhibitor of the phosphorylation of TßRI, significantly
attenuated TGF-ß-induced EMT, mimicking the effect of bufalin on A549 cells.
Taken together, these results suggest that bufalin suppresses TGF-ß-induced EMT
and migration by downregulating TßRI and TßRII in A549 cells.

PMCID: PMC4533784
PMID: 26133118  [PubMed - in process]


14. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jun 22;8:1543-52. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S77373. eCollection
2015.

Roles of dopamine receptors and their antagonist thioridazine in hepatoma
metastasis.

Lu M(1), Li J(1), Luo Z(2), Zhang S(3), Xue S(1), Wang K(1), Shi Y(4), Zhang
C(3), Chen H(3), Li Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, The 10th People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. (2)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal
Transduction, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute/Hospital, The Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China ; Institution
of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Institution of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, The 10th People's Hospital,
Tongji University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (5)Central Laboratory,
The 10th People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China ; Zhangjiang Center for Translational Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic
of China.

Tumor metastasis is the most common cause of death and poor prognosis for cancer 
patients. Therapeutics that prevent tumor metastasis are the key to prolonging
the lifespan of cancer patients. Cancer stem cells are believed to be critical in
the metastatic process. Recently, drug screening for cancer stem cells reports
that antipsychotic drugs displayed potential anticancer activity. Thioridazine,
one of the antipsychotic drugs for dopamine receptors (DRs), is shown to induce
the differentiation of cancer stem cells in leukemic disease and breast cancer,
but it is not known if this drug would affect liver cancer. In this study,
expression of DR5 was higher in tumors than in nontumor adjacent tissues, while
DR1 was lower in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) than those in the adjacent 
tissues. Other DRs were very low or undetectable. Treatment of HCC cells with
thioridazine displays a dose-dependent response in HCC cell lines SNU449, LM3,
and Huh7. Thioridazine treatment reduced cell viability and sphere formation of
HCC cell lines through induction of G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and suppression of
stemness genes CD133, OCT4, and EpCam. It also inhibited cell migration via
suppression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related genes such as
twist2 and E-cadherin. Thioridazine-pretreated LM3 cells decreased the capacity
of tumorigenesis in nude mice. Taken together, our data suggest that thioridazine
may have the potential role in treatment of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4482370
PMID: 26124671  [PubMed]


15. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jul 2;97(1):99-110. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.05.017. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Recurrent Mutations in the Basic Domain of TWIST2 Cause Ablepharon Macrostomia
and Barber-Say Syndromes.

Marchegiani S(1), Davis T(2), Tessadori F(3), van Haaften G(4), Brancati F(5),
Hoischen A(6), Huang H(7), Valkanas E(2), Pusey B(2), Schanze D(8), Venselaar
H(6), Vulto-van Silfhout AT(6), Wolfe LA(9), Tifft CJ(9), Zerfas PM(10), Zambruno
G(11), Kariminejad A(12), Sabbagh-Kermani F(13), Lee J(14), Tsokos MG(15), Lee
CC(15), Ferraz V(16), da Silva EM(16), Stevens CA(17), Roche N(18), Bartsch
O(19), Farndon P(20), Bermejo-Sanchez E(21), Brooks BP(22), Maduro V(2),
Dallapiccola B(23), Ramos FJ(24), Chung HY(25), Le Caignec C(26), Martins F(27), 
Jacyk WK(28), Mazzanti L(29), Brunner HG(30), Bakkers J(3), Lin S(7), Malicdan
MC(31), Boerkoel CF(2), Gahl WA(32), de Vries BB(6), van Haelst MM(4), Zenker
M(8), Markello TC(2).

Author information: 
(1)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the Director, NIH and
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. (2)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the
Director, NIH and National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre Utrecht,
3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (4)Department of Medical Genetics, University
Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, the Netherlands. (5)Department of
Medical, Oral, and Biotechnological Sciences, University of G. d' Annunzio Chieti
and Pescara, Chieti 66100, Italy. (6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (7)Department of
Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (8)Medizinische Fakultät und
Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Institute of Human Genetics, 39120 Magdeburg,
Germany. (9)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the
Director, NIH and National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA; Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research
Institute/NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (10)Office of Research Services, Division
of Veterinary Resources, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (11)Laboratory of
Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata IDI-IRCCS, Rome 
00167, Italy. (12)Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran
14667, Iran. (13)Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman 76175, Iran.
(14)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. (15)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (16)Departamento de Genetica, Faculdade de Medicina de
Ribeirao Preto, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo 14049, Brazil.
(17)Department of Medical Genetics, T.C. Thompson Children's Hospital,
Chattanooga, TN 37403, USA. (18)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent 9000, Belgium. (19)Institute of Human
Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz 55131, Germany. (20)Clinical
Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Healthcare Trust, Birmingham B15 2TG, UK.
(21)ECEMC (Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations), CIAC,
Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras (IIER), Instituto de Salud
Carlos III; and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER)-U724, Madrid 28029, Spain. 
(22)Unit on Pediatric, Developmental, and Genetic Eye Disease, National Eye
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (23)Department of Medical Genetics,
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome 00165, Italy. (24)Unidad de
Genética Médica, Servicio de Pediatría, GCV-CIBERER Hospital Clínico
Universitario "Lozano Blesa," Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Zaragoza,
50009 Zaragoza, Spain. (25)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
Centre for Genomic Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (26)Service de genetique medicale, CHU Nantes, 44093 
Nantes, France and Inserm, UMR957, Faculté de Médecine, 44093 Nantes, France.
(27)Special Care Dentistry Center, Department of Stomatology, School of
Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São Paulo 05508-070, Brazil. (28)Department
of Dermatology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0028, Republic of South Africa. 
(29)Department of Pediatrics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital University of Bologna, 
40138 Bologna, Italy. (30)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University
Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands; Department of Clinical
Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, PO Box 5800, 6202AZ Maastricht,
the Netherlands. (31)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office of the
Director, NIH and National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA; Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research
Institute/NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
malicdanm@mail.nih.gov. (32)NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Office
of the Director, NIH and National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA; Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome Research
Institute/NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: gahlw@helix.nih.gov.

Ablepharon macrostomia syndrome (AMS) and Barber-Say syndrome (BSS) are rare
congenital ectodermal dysplasias characterized by similar clinical features. To
establish the genetic basis of AMS and BSS, we performed extensive clinical
phenotyping, whole exome and candidate gene sequencing, and functional
validations. We identified a recurrent de novo mutation in TWIST2 in seven
independent AMS-affected families, as well as another recurrent de novo mutation 
affecting the same amino acid in ten independent BSS-affected families. Moreover,
a genotype-phenotype correlation was observed, because the two syndromes differed
based solely upon the nature of the substituting amino acid: a lysine at TWIST2
residue 75 resulted in AMS, whereas a glutamine or alanine yielded BSS. TWIST2
encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that regulates the
development of mesenchymal tissues. All identified mutations fell in the basic
domain of TWIST2 and altered the DNA-binding pattern of Flag-TWIST2 in HeLa
cells. Comparison of wild-type and mutant TWIST2 expressed in zebrafish
identified abnormal developmental phenotypes and widespread transcriptome
changes. Our results suggest that autosomal-dominant TWIST2 mutations cause AMS
or BSS by inducing protean effects on the transcription factor's DNA binding.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4572501
PMID: 26119818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Respir Res. 2015 Jun 18;16:72. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0232-4.

Fibroblast-epithelial cell interactions drive epithelial-mesenchymal transition
differently in cells from normal and COPD patients.

Nishioka M(1), Venkatesan N(2), Dessalle K(3), Mogas A(4), Kyoh S(5), Lin
TY(6,)(7), Nair P(8), Baglole CJ(9), Eidelman DH(10), Ludwig MS(11), Hamid Q(12).

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health
Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada.
michiyoshi117@gmail.com. (2)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research
Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E,
Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. venkinaryan@yahoo.com. (3)Meakins-Christie
Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie
Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. kevin.dessalle@gmail.com.
(4)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health
Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada.
andrea.mogas@mail.mcgill.ca. (5)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research
Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E,
Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. shigekyoh@gmail.com. (6)Meakins-Christie
Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie
Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. yuebaoyuebao@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taipei, Taiwan. yuebaoyuebao@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
parames@mcmaster.ca. (9)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill 
University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1,
Canada. carolyn.baglole@mcgill.ca. (10)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research
Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E,
Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. david.eidelman@mcgill.ca. (11)Meakins-Christie
Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Decarie
Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada. mara.ludwig@mcgill.ca.
(12)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Research Institute-McGill University Health
Centre, 1001 Decarie Boulevard, Block E, Montreal, QC, H4A 3J1, Canada.
qutayba.hamid@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which involves changes in
cellular morphology of highly polarized epithelial cells and the gain of
mesenchymal cell phenotype with migratory and invasive capacities, is implicated 
in smoking-related chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). However, the
interactions of fibroblasts and epithelial cells and the participation of
fibroblasts in the EMT processes in COPD are poorly understood. Here, we
investigated the hypothesis that EMT is active in human bronchial epithelial
(HBE) cells of COPD patients, and that mediators secreted by lung fibroblasts
from COPD patients induce EMT.
METHODS: Primary HBE cells from normal subjects and COPD patients were purchased 
from LONZA. HLFs were derived from resected lung obtained from normal (N) and
COPD (D) subjects and their conditioned medium (CM) was collected after 2-day
culture in serum-free medium. The expression of epithelial and mesenchymal
markers as well as EMT-related transcription factors in lung biopsies, and in HBE
cells following stimulation with CM from both normal human lung fibroblasts
(NHLF) and COPD human lung fibroblasts (DHLF) was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR and western blot.
RESULTS: Basal mRNA expression of mesenchymal markers and EMT-related
transcription factors were increased in DHBE cells compared to normal human
bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) cells as well as in COPD lungs. CM from NHLF
significantly induced vimentin expression in both NHBE and COPD human bronchial
epithelial cells (DHBE) cells, but only increased N-cadherin expression in DHBE
cells. CM from NHLF significantly induced Twist1 and Twist2 expression in NHBE
cells and increased Snai2 (Slug) expression in DHBE cells. While CM from NHLF had
no effect on such EMT markers, CM from DHLF significantly increased the protein
expression of E-cadherin and vimentin in NHBE cells compared to control.
N-cadherin expression was upregulated to a greater degree in NHBE cells than DHBE
cells. Only CM from DHLF significantly increased E-/N-cadherin ratio in DHBE
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that DHBE cells have partially undergone EMT
under baseline conditions. DHLF-CM promoted EMT in NHBE, suggesting that
interactions between fibroblast and epithelial cells may play an important role
in the EMT process in COPD.

PMCID: PMC4473826
PMID: 26081431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Immunol. 2015 Jul 1;195(1):217-26. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402808. Epub 2015 May
27.

Twist1 and Twist2 Contribute to Cytokine Downregulation following Chronic NOD2
Stimulation of Human Macrophages through the Coordinated Regulation of
Transcriptional Repressors and Activators.

Zheng S(1), Hedl M(1), Abraham C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520
clara.abraham@yale.edu.

Proper regulation of microbial-induced cytokines is critical to intestinal immune
homeostasis. Acute stimulation of nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2
(NOD2), the Crohn's disease-associated sensor of bacterial peptidoglycan, induces
cytokines. However, chronic NOD2 stimulation in macrophages decreases cytokines
upon pattern recognition receptor (PRR) restimulation; cytokine attenuation to
PRR stimulation is similarly observed in intestinal macrophages. The role for the
transcriptional repressors Twist1 and Twist2 in regulating PRR-induced cytokine
outcomes is poorly understood and has not been reported for NOD2. We found that
Twist1 and Twist2 were required for optimal cytokine downregulation during acute 
and, particularly, chronic NOD2 stimulation of human macrophages. Consistently,
Twist1 and Twist2 expression was increased after chronic NOD2 stimulation; this
increased expression was IL-10 and TGF-ß dependent. Although Twist1 and Twist2
did not coregulate each other's expression, they cooperated to enhance binding to
cytokine promoters after chronic NOD2 stimulation. Moreover, Twist1 and Twist2
contributed to enhance expression and promoter binding of the proinflammatory
inhibitor c-Maf and the transcriptional repressor Bmi1. Restoring c-Maf and Bmi1 
expression in Twist-deficient macrophages restored NOD2-induced cytokine
downregulation. Furthermore, with chronic NOD2 stimulation, Twist1 and Twist2
contributed to the decreased expression and cytokine promoter binding of the
transcriptional activators activating transcription factor 4, C/EBPa, Runx1, and 
Runx2. Knockdown of these transcriptional activators in Twist-deficient
macrophages restored cytokine downregulation after chronic NOD2 stimulation.
Finally, NOD2 synergized with additional PRRs to increase Twist1 and Twist2
expression and Twist-dependent pathways. Therefore, after chronic NOD2
stimulation Twist1 and Twist2 coordinate the regulation of both transcriptional
activators and repressors, thereby mediating optimal cytokine downregulation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4501480 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26019273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Bone Miner Metab. 2016 Mar;34(2):161-70. doi: 10.1007/s00774-015-0666-2. Epub
2015 May 9.

Immediate effects of retinoic acid on gene expression in primary murine
osteoblasts.

Yorgan TA(1), Heckt T(1), Rendenbach C(1), Helmis C(1), Seitz S(1), Streichert
T(2), Amling M(1), Schinke T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg
Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University
Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (3)Department of Osteology
and Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. 
schinke@uke.de.

Consistent with clinical observations demonstrating that hypervitaminosis A is
associated with increased skeletal fracture risk, we have previously found that
dietary retinol deprivation partially corrects the bone mineralization defects in
a mouse model of X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. That retinol-dependent
signaling pathways impact the skeleton is further supported by various findings
demonstrating a negative influence of retinoic acid (RA) on bone-forming
osteoblasts. We hypothesized that RA would directly regulate the expression of
specific target genes in osteoblasts, and we aimed to identify these by
genome-wide expression analyses. Here we show that high dietary retinol intake in
mice causes low bone mass associated with increased osteoclastogenesis and
decreased osteoblastogenesis, but intact bone matrix mineralization. We
additionally found that short-term treatment of primary osteoblasts with RA
causes a rapid induction of specific genes involved in either retinol-dependent
signaling (i.e. Rara, Crabp2) or skeletal remodeling (i.e. Twist2, Tnfsf11). In
contrast, neither expression of established osteoblast differentiation markers
nor the proliferation rate was immediately affected by RA administration.
Collectively, our data suggest that the negative effects of vitamin A on skeletal
integrity are explainable by an immediate influence of RA signaling on specific
genes in osteoblasts that in turn influence bone remodeling.

PMID: 25956707  [PubMed - in process]


19. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11492-506.

Metastasis-associated in colon cancer-1 promotes vasculogenic mimicry in gastric 
cancer by upregulating TWIST1/2.

Wang L(1), Lin L(1), Chen X(1), Sun L(1), Liao Y(2), Huang N(1), Liao W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

Vasculogenic mimicry (VM) is a blood supply modality that is strongly associated 
with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), TWIST1 activation and tumor
progression. We previously reported that metastasis-associated in colon cancer-1 
(MACC1) induced the EMT and was associated with a poor prognosis of patients with
gastric cancer (GC), but it remains unknown whether MACC1 promotes VM and
regulates the TWIST signaling pathway in GC. In this study, we investigated MACC1
expression and VM by immunohistochemistry in 88 patients with stage IV GC, and
also investigated the role of TWIST1 and TWIST2 in MACC1-induced VM by using nude
mice with GC xenografts and GC cell lines. We found that the VM density was
significantly increased in the tumors of patients who died of GC and was
positively correlated with MACC1 immunoreactivity (p < 0.05). The 3-year survival
rate was only 8.6% in patients whose tumors showed double positive staining for
MACC1 and VM, whereas it was 41.7% in patients whose tumors were negative for
both MACC1 and VM. Moreover, nuclear expression of MACC1, TWIST1, and TWIST2 was 
upregulated in GC tissues compared with matched adjacent non-tumorous tissues (p 
< 0.05). Overexpression of MACC1 increased TWIST1/2 expression and induced
typical VM in the GC xenografts of nude mice and in GC cell lines. MACC1 enhanced
TWIST1/2 promoter activity and facilitated VM, while silencing of TWIST1 or
TWIST2 inhibited VM. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) increased the nuclear
translocation of MACC1, TWIST1, and TWIST2, while a c-Met inhibitor reduced these
effects. These findings indicate that MACC1 promotes VM in GC by regulating the
HGF/c-Met-TWIST1/2 signaling pathway, which means that MACC1 and this pathway are
potential new therapeutic targets for GC.

PMCID: PMC4484471
PMID: 25895023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 May;167A(5):1061-70. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36973. Epub 2015 
Feb 27.

Chromosome 1p36.22p36.21 duplications/triplication causes Setleis syndrome (focal
facial dermal dysplasia type III).

Weaver DD(1), Norby AR, Rosenfeld JA, Proud VK, Spangler BE, Ming JE, Chisholm E,
Zackai EH, Lee BH, Edelmann L, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Focal facial dermal dysplasias (FFDD) are characterized by congenital bitemporal 
or preauricular atrophic skin lesions, and either autosomal dominant or autosomal
recessive inheritance. Setleis syndrome (SS), FFDD type III, is a severe form of 
FFDD with the ectodermal lesions plus other striking facial features. Autosomal
recessive nonsense and frameshift mutations in TWIST2 have been found to cause SS
in some but not all individuals. Here, we report on four unrelated individuals,
one with an unclassified FFDD and the other three with classic SS. Chromosomal
microarray analyses revealed unique copy number variants of 1p36 in two
individuals with duplications at 1p36.22p36.21 and one with a triplication at
1p36.22p36.21. The fourth patient had normal chromosomes by microarray analysis. 
All four patients had normal TWIST2 exonic sequences. We propose that a dosage
effect of one or more of the 30 genes in the 1.3 Mb 1p36.22p36.21 region of
overlap is responsible for FFDD/SS manifestations in some individuals, and this
mechanism would be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. In patients with no 
duplication/triplication of the 1p36.22p36.21 region and no mutations in TWIST2, 
there are mutation(s) in one of the 30 genes in this region or mutations in other
as yet unidentified genes at different locations that may affect the expressions 
of genes in this region or act independently to cause this developmental disease 
phenotype.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25728400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;224(3):303-13. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0474.

TWIST1 and TWIST2 regulate glycogen storage and inflammatory genes in skeletal
muscle.

Mudry JM(1), Massart J(1), Szekeres FL(1), Krook A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and
SurgerySection for Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Section for 
Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgerySection for
Integrative PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Section for Integrative
PhysiologyDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgerySection for Integrative
PhysiologyDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden Anna.Krook@ki.se.

Erratum in
    J Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;226(3):X1.

TWIST proteins are important for development of embryonic skeletal muscle and
play a role in the metabolism of tumor and white adipose tissue. The impact of
TWIST on metabolism in skeletal muscle is incompletely studied. Our aim was to
assess the impact of TWIST1 and TWIST2 overexpression on glucose and lipid
metabolism. In intact mouse muscle, overexpression of Twist reduced total
glycogen content without altering glucose uptake. Expression of TWIST1 or TWIST2 
reduced Pdk4 mRNA, while increasing mRNA levels of Il6, Tnfa, and Il1ß.
Phosphorylation of AKT was increased and protein abundance of acetyl CoA
carboxylase (ACC) was decreased in skeletal muscle overexpressing TWIST1 or
TWIST2. Glycogen synthesis and fatty acid oxidation remained stable in C2C12
cells overexpressing TWIST1 or TWIST2. Finally, skeletal muscle mRNA levels
remain unaltered in ob/ob mice, type 2 diabetic patients, or in healthy subjects 
before and after 3 months of exercise training. Collectively, our results
indicate that TWIST1 and TWIST2 are expressed in skeletal muscle. Overexpression 
of these proteins impacts proteins in metabolic pathways and mRNA level of
cytokines. However, skeletal muscle levels of TWIST transcripts are unaltered in 
metabolic diseases.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25663706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Yi Chuan. 2015 Jan;37(1):17-24. doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.2015.01.003.

Biological function and molecular mechanism of Twist2.

Chengxiao Z(1), Ze Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)1. Institute of Geriatrics, Chinese Ministry of Health, Beijing Hospital,
Beijing 100730, China; 2. Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100730, China; 3. School of Pharmaceutical, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan 030001, China; (2)1. Institute of Geriatrics, Chinese Ministry of Health,
Beijing Hospital, Beijing 100730, China; 2. Graduate School of Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100730, China;

Twist2, one of the basic helix-loop-helix protein (bHLH) family members, is
responsible for the transcriptional regulation in mesenchymal cell lineages
during its development. Twist2 functions as a molecular switch to activate or
repress target genes by direct or indirect mechanisms. Twist2 can directly bind
with conserved E-box on DNA sequence, to recruit co-activators or repressors, and
interfere with the activation or inhibition function through protein-protein
interactions with E-protein modulators. Nonsense mutations of Twist2 cause
Setleis syndrome. Early research on Twist2 focused on osteogenesis, and then
expression differences were found in a wide variety of tumors. Further studies
showed that Twist2 plays an important role in cancer epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Regulation function of Twist2 is controlled by temporal and
spatial expression, phosphorylation, dimerization and cell positioning
adjustment. The involvement of Twist2 in a broad spectrum of regulatory pathways 
highlights the importance of understanding its role in normal development,
homeostasis and disease. In this review, we summarize the role of Twist2 in
osteogenesis differentiation, tumor formation and EMT, and its molecular
mechanism. It is helpful to have a thorough understanding of the biological
functions of Twist2, and facilitate the transformation and application in
diagnosis, development and therapy.

PMID: 25608809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):874-85.

TWIST1 and TWIST2 promoter methylation and protein expression in tumor stroma
influence the epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like tumor budding phenotype in
colorectal cancer.

Galván JA(1), Helbling M(1), Koelzer VH(1,)(2), Tschan MP(3), Berger MD(4),
Hädrich M(5), Schnüriger B(5), Karamitopoulou E(1,)(2), Dawson H(1,)(2),
Inderbitzin D(5,)(6), Lugli A(1,)(2), Zlobec I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Unit (TRU), Institute of Pathology, University of Bern,
Bern 3010, Switzerland. (2)Clinical Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology,
University of Bern, Switzerland. (3)Experimental Pathology Division, Institute of
Pathology, University of Bern, Switzerland. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (5)Departments of Visceral Surgery
and Medicine, Bern University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. (6)Department of
Surgery, Tiefenau Hospital, Bern, Switzerland.

Tumor budding in colorectal cancer is likened to an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) characterized predominantly by loss of E-cadherin and
up-regulation of E-cadherin repressors like TWIST1 and TWIST2. Here we
investigate a possible epigenetic link between TWIST proteins and the tumor
budding phenotype. TWIST1 and TWIST2 promoter methylation and protein expression 
were investigated in six cell lines and further correlated with tumor budding in 
patient cohort 1 (n = 185). Patient cohort 2 (n = 112) was used to assess
prognostic effects. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) of tumor epithelium and
stroma from low- and high-grade budding cancers was performed. In colorectal
cancers, TWIST1 and TWIST2 expression was essentially restricted to stromal
cells. LCM results of a high-grade budding case show positive TWIST1 and TWIST2
stroma and no methylation, while the low-grade budding case was characterized by 
negative stroma and strong hypermethylation. TWIST1 stromal cell staining was
associated with adverse features like more advanced pT (p = 0.0044), lymph node
metastasis (p = 0.0301), lymphatic vessel invasion (p = 0.0373), perineural
invasion (p = 0.0109) and worse overall survival time (p = 0.0226). Stromal cells
may influence tumor budding in colorectal cancers through expression of TWIST1.
Hypermethylation of the tumor stroma may represent an alternative mechanism for
regulation of TWIST1.

PMCID: PMC4359262
PMID: 25528769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Nov 30;14(1):129. doi: 10.1186/s12935-014-0129-1.
eCollection 2014.

Acidic extracellular pH promotes epithelial mesenchymal transition in Lewis lung 
carcinoma model.

Suzuki A(1), Maeda T(2), Baba Y(3), Shimamura K(4), Kato Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Function and Molecular Biology, Ohu University School of
Dentistry, Koriyama, Japan ; Department of Oral Physiology and Biochemistry, Ohu 
University Graduate School of Dentistry, Koriyama, Japan. (2)Department of Oral
Function and Molecular Biology, Ohu University School of Dentistry, Koriyama,
Japan. (3)Department of General Clinical Medicine, Ohu University School of
Dentistry, Koriyama, Japan. (4)Department of Oral Growth and Development, Ohu
University School of Dentistry, Koriyama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is thought to be an essential
feature of malignant tumor cells when they spread into the stroma. Despite the
extracellular acidity of tumor tissues, the effect of acidic extracellular pH (pH
e ) on EMT in carcinoma models, including the Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) model,
remains unclear.
METHODS: High and low metastatic LLC variants were generated by repeated tail
vein injection of metastatic cells. DMEM/F12 medium, which has been supplemented 
with 15 mM HEPES, 4 mM phosphoric acid, and 1 g/L NaHCO3 and adjusted to the
desire pH with HCl or NaOH, was used for cell culture. EMT marker gene expression
was determined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Migration and invasion activities were analyzed by wound healing assay and the
Boyden chamber assay through Matrigel®, respectively.
RESULTS: Low metastatic variant LLCm1 cells showed a cobble-stone like morphology
at pH e 7.4. At pH e 6.8, however, their morphology became fibroblastic, similar 
in shape to high metastatic variant LLCm4 cells. Steady state levels of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (Mmp9) mRNA were induced by acidic pH e , maximizing at
pH 6.8, with the levels of Mmp9 mRNA higher in LLCm4 than in LLCm1 cells. Both
variants showed decreased levels of E-cadherin and increased levels of vimentin
at pH e 6.8. Acidic pH e also induced expression of mRNAs encoding the E-cadherin
repressors, Zeb2, Twist1 and Twist2, as well as enhancing cell motility and in
vitro invasion through Matrigel®.
CONCLUSIONS: Acidic pH e can induce EMT in some types of carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4260188
PMID: 25493076  [PubMed]


25. Bone. 2015 Feb;71:76-88. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.005. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Connective Tissue Growth Factor reporter mice label a subpopulation of
mesenchymal progenitor cells that reside in the trabecular bone region.

Wang W(1), Strecker S(1), Liu Y(1), Wang L(1), Assanah F(1), Smith S(1), Maye
P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Connecticut Health Center, USA. (2)Department of Reconstructive Sciences,
School of Dental Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, USA.
Electronic address: pmaye@neuron.uchc.edu.

Few gene markers selectively identify mesenchymal progenitor cells inside the
bone marrow. We have investigated a cell population located in the mouse bone
marrow labeled by Connective Tissue Growth Factor reporter expression
(CTGF-EGFP). Bone marrow flushed from CTGF reporter mice yielded an EGFP+ stromal
cell population. Interestingly, the percentage of stromal cells retaining CTGF
reporter expression decreased with age in vivo and was half the frequency in
females compared to males. In culture, CTGF reporter expression and endogenous
CTGF expression marked the same cell types as those labeled using Twist2-Cre and 
Osterix-Cre fate mapping approaches, which previously had been shown to identify 
mesenchymal progenitors in vitro. Consistent with this past work, sorted CTGF+
cells displayed an ability to differentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and
adipocytes in vitro and into osteoblast, adipocyte, and stromal cell lineages
after transplantation into a parietal bone defect. In vivo examination of CTGF
reporter expression in bone tissue sections revealed that it marked cells highly 
localized to the trabecular bone region and was not expressed in the
perichondrium or periosteum. Mesenchymal cells retaining high CTGF reporter
expression were adjacent to, but distinct from mature osteoblasts lining bone
surfaces and endothelial cells forming the vascular sinuses. Comparison of CTGF
and Osterix reporter expression in bone tissue sections indicated an inverse
correlation between the strength of CTGF expression and osteoblast maturation.
Down-regulation of CTGF reporter expression also occurred during in vitro
osteogenic differentiation. Collectively, our studies indicate that CTGF reporter
mice selectively identify a subpopulation of bone marrow mesenchymal progenitor
cells that reside in the trabecular bone region.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4274218
PMID: 25464947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncol Rep. 2015 Feb;33(2):639-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3620. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

The indicative function of Twist2 and E-cadherin in HPV oncogene-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cervical cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Qian W(2), Zhang J(3), Dong Y(1), Shi C(1), Liu Z(4), Wu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, Kunshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated to
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Shanghai Tongji
University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (4)Division of Cancer Medicine, Department of
Lymphoma and Myeloma, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infections are among the most important
factors for cervical carcinogenesis. However, whether patients infected with
HR-HPV eventually develop a malignant tumor, largely depends on
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which plays an extraordinary role in the
process of carcinogenesis and metastasis. Therefore, we evaluated the protein
levels of EMT-related genes in normal cervical squamous epithelium, cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), and cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) by
tissue microarray and immunohistochemical staining. By comparing the expression
of EMT-related proteins in 31 cases of cervical tumors and tumor adjacent tissues
and exploring the relationship between HPV16 oncogenes and EMT in vitro, we found
that Twist2 protein levels were significantly higher in CIN and cervical cancer
than in normal cervical squamous epithelial samples (p<0.01 and p<0.001,
respectively). This finding corresponded with the decreased expression of
E-cadherin in cervical cancer. The difference in the expression of Twist2 and
E-cadherin between 31 cases of cervical tumors and tumor adjacent tissues was
statistically significant (p<0.01). HPV16 oncogenes were able to induce
morphological alterations in the SiHa cell line, upregulate the expression of
Twist2 and vimentin, downregulate E-cadherin in vitro, and exert an effect on
invasion. Thus, joint detection of Twist2 and E-cadherin expression can help
evaluate and provide greater insight into cervical carcinogenesis and
progression.

PMID: 25420506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Clin Genet. 2015 Nov;88(5):489-93. doi: 10.1111/cge.12539. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Setleis syndrome: clinical, molecular and structural studies of the first TWIST2 
missense mutation.

Rosti RO(1), Uyguner ZO(2), Nazarenko I(3), Bekerecioglu M(4), Cadilla CL(5),
Ozgur H(2), Lee BH(3,)(6), Aggarwal AK(7), Pehlivan S(8), Desnick RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty,
Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Plastic,
Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgery, Necmettin Erbakan University, Meram Faculty
of Medicine, Konya, Turkey. (5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Puerto
Rico School of Medicine, San Juan, PR, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (8)Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul
University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey.

Setleis syndrome is characterized by bitemporal scar-like lesions and other
characteristic facial features. It results from recessive mutations that truncate
critical functional domains in the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor, TWIST2, which regulates expression of genes for facial development. To
date, only four nonsense or small deletion mutations have been reported. In the
current report, the clinical findings in a consanguineous Turkish family were
characterized. Three affected siblings had the characteristic features of Setleis
syndrome. Homozygosity for the first TWIST2 missense mutation, c.326T>C
(p.Leu109Pro), was identified in the patients. In silico analyses predicted that 
the secondary structure of the mutant protein was sustained, but the empirical
force field energy increased to an unfavorable level with the proline
substitution (p.Leu109Pro). On a crystallographically generated dimer, p.Leu109
lies near the dimer interface, and the proline substitution is predicted to
hinder dimer formation. Therefore, p.Leu109Pro-TWIST2 alters the three
dimensional structure and is unable to dimerize, thereby hindering the binding of
TWIST2 to its target genes involved in facial development.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4769376 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 25410422  [PubMed - in process]


28. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Jan;167A(1):185-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36428. Epub 2014
Nov 17.

The first familial case of inherited 2q37.3 interstitial deletion with isolated
skeletal abnormalities including brachydactyly type E and short stature.

Jean-Marçais N(1), Decamp M, Gérard M, Ribault V, Andrieux J, Kottler ML, Plessis
G.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique, Hôpital Universitaire de la Côte de Nacre, Caen, France;
Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Universitaire de la Côte de Nacre, Caen, France.

Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO)-like syndrome is also known as
brachydactyly-mental retardation syndrome (BDMR; OMIM 60040). This disorder
includes intellectual disability in all patients, skeletal abnormalities,
including brachydactyly E (BDE) in approximately half, obesity, and facial
dysmorphism. Patients with 2q37 microdeletion or HDAC4 mutation are defined as
having an AHO-like phenotype with normal stimulatory G (Gs) function. HDAC4 is
involved in neurological, cardiac, and skeletal function. This paper reports the 
first familial case of 2q37.3 interstitial deletion affecting two genes, HDAC4
and TWIST2. Patients presented with BDE and short stature without intellectual
disability, showing that haploinsufficiency of the HDAC4 critical region may lead
to a spectrum of phenotypes, ranging from isolated brachydactyly type E to BDMR.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25402011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Reproduction. 2015 Feb;149(2):203-12. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0445. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Requirement of the transcription factor USF1 in bovine oocyte and early embryonic
development.

Datta TK(1), Rajput SK(2), Wee G(2), Lee K(1), Folger JK(2), Smith GW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (2)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea smithge7@msu.edu.

Upstream stimulating factor 1 (USF1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that specifically binds to E-box DNA motifs, known cis-elements of key
oocyte expressed genes essential for oocyte and early embryonic development.
However, the functional and regulatory role of USF1 in bovine oocyte and embryo
development is not understood. In this study, we demonstrated that USF1 mRNA is
maternal in origin and expressed in a stage specific manner during the course of 
oocyte maturation and preimplantation embryonic development. Immunocytochemical
analysis showed detectable USF1 protein during oocyte maturation and early
embryonic development with increased abundance at 8-16-cell stage of embryo
development, suggesting a potential role in embryonic genome activation.
Knockdown of USF1 in germinal vesicle stage oocytes did not affect meiotic
maturation or cumulus expansion, but caused significant changes in mRNA abundance
for genes associated with oocyte developmental competence. Furthermore,
siRNA-mediated depletion of USF1 in presumptive zygote stage embryos demonstrated
that USF1 is required for early embryonic development to the blastocyst stage. A 
similar (USF2) yet unique (TWIST2) expression pattern during oocyte and early
embryonic development for related E-box binding transcription factors known to
cooperatively bind USF1 implies a potential link to USF1 action. This study
demonstrates that USF1 is a maternally derived transcription factor required for 
bovine early embryonic development, which also functions in regulation of JY1,
GDF9, and FST genes associated with oocyte competence.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMCID: PMC4286489
PMID: 25385722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31433-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593004. Epub 2014
Sep 26.

MicroRNA-141 and microRNA-146b-5p inhibit the prometastatic mesenchymal
characteristics through the RNA-binding protein AUF1 targeting the transcription 
factor ZEB1 and the protein kinase AKT.

Al-Khalaf HH(1), Aboussekhra A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Oncology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Centre, MBC 03, P.O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia and the Joint 
Center for Genomics Research, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (2)From the Department of Molecular Oncology, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, MBC 03, P.O. Box 3354, Riyadh
11211, Saudi Arabia and aboussekhra@kfshrc.edu.sa.

miR-141 and miR-146b-5p are two important tumor suppressor microRNAs, which
control several cancer-related genes and processes. In the present report, we
have shown that these microRNAs bind specific sites at the 3'-untranslated region
(UTR) of the mRNA-binding protein AUF1, leading to its down-regulation. This
inverse correlation between the levels of these microRNAs and AUF1 has been
identified in various osteosarcoma cell lines. Additionally, we present clear
evidence that AUF1 promotes mesenchymal features in osteosarcoma cells and that
miR-141 and miR-146b-5p suppress this prometastatic process through AUF1
repression. Indeed, both microRNAs suppressed the invasion/migration and
proliferation abilities of osteosarcoma cells through inhibiting the AKT protein 
kinase in an AUF1-dependent manner. We have also shown that AUF1 binds to and
stabilizes the mRNA of the AKT activator phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1
(PDK1). Furthermore, miR-141 and miR-146b-5p positively regulate the epithelial
markers (E-cadherin and Epcam) and repress the mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin,
Vimentin, Twist2, and ZEB1). These effects were mediated via the repression of
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal inducer ZEB1 through targeting AUF1, which binds
the 3'-UTR of the ZEB1 mRNA and reduces its turnover. These results indicate that
at least some tumor suppressor functions of miR-141 and miR-146b-5p are mediated 
through the repression of the oncogenic potentials of AUF1. Therefore, these
3'-UTR-directed post-transcriptional gene expression regulators constitute
promising new targets for diagnostic and/or therapeutic interventions.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223342
PMID: 25261470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:129-52. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00003-8.

The Hand2 gene dosage effect in developmental defects and human congenital
disorders.

Tamura M(1), Amano T(2), Shiroishi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Technology and Development Team for Mouse Phenotyping Analysis, RIKEN
BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. Electronic address:
matamura@brc.riken.jp. (2)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains Research
Center, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Mammalian
Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains Research Center, National Institute of
Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan. Electronic address: tshirois@nig.ac.jp.

Heart- and neural crest derivatives-expressed (Hand) proteins belong to the Twist
family of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, and play
crucial roles in the development of several organs. They form heterodimers with
Twist1 via their HLH domain. Disruption of the expression balance between Hand2
and Twist1 causes limb malformation, indicating that the expression level of
Hand2 relative to Twist1 is essential for limb development. Mutations of the
TWIST1 and TWIST2 genes are involved in human diseases. Although, the functions
of the Hand proteins are indispensable for limb, heart, and craniofacial
development, mutations of the Hand genes that are causative of human diseases
remain elusive. Recently, comparative analyses of a human chromosomal disorder,
partial trisomy distal 4q, and its mouse model, which is a spontaneously
occurring mutant, clearly demonstrated that over dosage of Hand2 results in
developmental defects of limbs, craniofacial, and lumbar vertebrae, and that
trisomy of the Hand2 gene directly causes a human congenital disorder. In this
review, we focus on gene dosage effect of Hand2 in limb, heart, and craniofacial 
development, and discuss its implication in human diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Bone. 2014 Nov;68:131-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.08.008. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

The effect of conditional inactivation of beta 1 integrins using twist 2 Cre,
Osterix Cre and osteocalcin Cre lines on skeletal phenotype.

Shekaran A(1), Shoemaker JT(2), Kavanaugh TE(2), Lin AS(3), LaPlaca MC(2), Fan
Y(4), Guldberg RE(3), García AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and
Emory University, 313 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA; Petit Institute for
Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, 315 Ferst Drive, 
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology and Emory University, 313 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332,
USA. (3)Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 315 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA; School of Mechanical
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 801 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332,
USA. (4)Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of
Technology, 315 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA; School of Biology, Georgia
Institute of Technology, 310 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. (5)Petit
Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, 315
Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA; School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia
Institute of Technology, 801 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. Electronic
address: andres.garcia@me.gatech.edu.

Skeletal development and growth are complex processes regulated by multiple
microenvironmental cues, including integrin-ECM interactions. The ß1 sub-family
of integrins is the largest integrin sub-family and constitutes the main integrin
binding partners of collagen I, the major ECM component of bone. As complete ß1
integrin knockout results in embryonic lethality, studies of ß1 integrin function
in vivo rely on tissue-specific gene deletions. While multiple in vitro studies
indicate that ß1 integrins are crucial regulators of osteogenesis and
mineralization, in vivo osteoblast-specific perturbations of ß1 integrins have
resulted in mild and sometimes contradictory skeletal phenotypes. To further
investigate the role of ß1 integrins on skeletal phenotype, we used the
Twist2-Cre, Osterix-Cre and osteocalcin-Cre lines to generate conditional ß1
integrin deletions, where Cre is expressed primarily in mesenchymal condensation,
pre-osteoblast, and mature osteoblast lineage cells respectively within these
lines. Mice with Twist2-specific ß1 integrin disruption were smaller, had
impaired skeletal development, especially in the craniofacial and vertebral
tissues at E19.5, and did not survive beyond birth. Osterix-specific ß1 integrin 
deficiency resulted in viable mice which were normal at birth but displayed early
defects in calvarial ossification, incisor eruption and growth as well as femoral
bone mineral density, structure, and mechanical properties. Although these
defects persisted into adulthood, they became milder with age. Finally, a lack of
ß1 integrins in mature osteoblasts and osteocytes resulted in minor alterations
to femur structure but had no effect on mineral density, biomechanics or fracture
healing. Taken together, our data indicate that ß1 integrin expression in early
mesenchymal condensations play an important role in skeletal ossification, while 
ß1 integrin-ECM interactions in pre-osteoblast, odontoblast- and hypertrophic
chondryocyte-lineage cells regulate incisor eruption and perinatal bone formation
in both intramembranously and endochondrally formed bones in young, rapidly
growing mice. In contrast, the osteocalcin-specific ß1 integrin deletion had only
minor effects on skeletal phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4189988
PMID: 25183373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Oncogene. 2015 Jun 4;34(23):3000-10. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.241. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Regulation of p21 by TWIST2 contributes to its tumor-suppressor function in human
acute myeloid leukemia.

Zhang X(1), Ma W(1), Cui J(2), Yao H(2), Zhou H(3), Ge Y(4), Xiao L(4), Hu X(3), 
Liu BH(5), Yang J(5), Li YY(5), Chen S(6), Eaves CJ(7), Wu D(6), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic
of China [2] Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University,
Suzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)1] Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow
University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China [2] The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Suzhou, People's Republic of China. (3)The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key
Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.
(4)Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of
China. (5)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (6)1] Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow
University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China [2] The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Soochow University, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Suzhou, People's Republic of China. (7)Terry Fox
Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

TWIST2 has a dual function in tumors. Its implication in the initiation and
metastasis of various solid tumors is well established, and its tumor-suppressor 
role in murine osteosarcoma cells has been reported recently. However, the
function of TWIST2 and its underlying mechanisms in human normal and malignant
hematopoiesis remain unclear. In the present study, we found that TWIST2 directly
regulated p21 in human hematopoietic cells and whose silence promoted cell
proliferation and cell cycle progression. Hypermethylation of TWIST2 occurred to 
23 out of the 75 adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and resulted in the 
impaired expression of both TWIST2 and p21. Conversely, TWIST2 overexpression
inhibited the growth of AML cells partially through its direct activation of p21 
with intact HLH (helix-loop-helix) domain. The microarray data and gene
expression validation showed that TWIST2 was sufficient to activate known
tumor-suppressor genes, whereas suppress known oncogenes, which further supported
its inhibitory effect against AML cells. Taken together, our data have identified
a novel TWIST2-p21 axis that modulates the cell cycle of both normal and leukemic
cells and demonstrated that the direct regulation of p21 by TWIST2 has a role in 
its tumor-suppressor function in AML.

PMID: 25088197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Oral Pathol Med. 2015 May;44(5):337-44. doi: 10.1111/jop.12237. Epub 2014 Jul
22.

Hyperthermia inhibited the migration of tongue squamous cell carcinoma through
TWIST2.

Tang YL(1), Jiang J, Liu J, Zheng M, He YW, Chen W, Fan YL, Chen QM, Liao CH,
Liang XH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
(Sichuan University), Chengdu, Sichuan, China; Department of Oral Pathology, West
China Hospital of Stomatology, (Sichuan University), Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

BACKGROUND: Hyperthermia has been shown promising in the treatment of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC); however, the mechanism underlying
hyperthermia reducing tumor metastasis is poorly elucidated. TWIST2, an important
transcription factor of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), plays a critical
role in the tumor progression and metastasis. The role of TWIST2 in tongue
squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) and its association with hyperthermia still have
not been reported.
METHOD: The correlations between TWIST2 expression and the clinical-pathologic
characteristics of 89 patients with TSCC were evaluated by immunohistochemical
staining. TSCC cell lines transfected with siRNA against TWIST2 were heated for
40 min at 42.5°C, and the migration capability of cells was examined by migration
assay. Xenograft tumors in nude mice were treated by hyperthermia, and TWIST2
expression was measured.
RESULTS: Our data showed that TWIST2 expression was associated with the
metastasis of human TSCC. In Tca8113 and Cal-27 cells, TWIST2-siRNA treatment can
reduce cell migration ability and has no effect on the cell proliferation and
apoptosis. Hyperthermia can decrease the level of TWIST2 in TSCC and inhibit the 
migration of cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This demonstrated that hyperthermia might decrease the migration of 
Tca8113 and Cal-27 cells by reducing TWIST2 expression. Altogether, these
findings suggest an as yet undescribed link between TWIST2 and hyperthermia in
TSCC.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25048179  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22980-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.573089. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

LPS induces the degradation of programmed cell death protein 4 (PDCD4) to release
Twist2, activating c-Maf transcription to promote interleukin-10 production.

van den Bosch MW(1), Palsson-Mcdermott E(2), Johnson DS(3), O'Neill LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences
Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland and vandenbm@tcd.ie. (2)From
the School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute,
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland and. (3)the Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

Programmed cell death protein 4 (PDCD4) is a tumor suppressor and has also been
shown to suppress production of the immunomodulatory cytokine IL-10. The precise 
role of PDCD4 in IL-10 induction in macrophages is still not fully understood.
Incubation of macrophages with inhibitors of PI3K and mTOR blocked LPS-stimulated
PDCD4 degradation and expression of c-Maf and IL-10 production. PDCD4 and the
transcription factor Twist2 were shown to form a complex in untreated cells. LPS 
disrupted the complex allowing Twist2 to bind to the c-Maf promoter. PI3K and
mTOR inhibitors prevented this disruption by stabilizing PDCD4 and thereby
decreased Twist2 binding to the c-Maf promoter and induction of c-Maf mRNA. These
results indicate a regulatory role for PDCD4 and Twist2 in LPS-induced IL-10
production in macrophages. LPS promotes PDCD4 degradation via a pathway involving
PI3K and mTOR, releasing Twist2, which induces IL-10 via c-Maf.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132798
PMID: 24982420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1839-46. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.001. Epub 2014
May 24.

Twist2, the key Twist isoform related to prognosis, promotes invasion of cervical
cancer by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition and blocking senescence.

Wang T(1), Li Y(1), Wang W(1), Tuerhanjiang A(1), Wu Z(1), Yang R(2), Yuan M(1), 
Ma D(3), Wang W(4), Wang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, PR 
China. (2)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Tumor Hospital of Hubei Provincial,
Wuhan, Hubei, 430079, PR China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, PR China. Electronic address:
dingma424@yahoo.com. (4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510515, PR China.
Electronic address: smilenn66@126.com. (5)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, PR China. Electronic address:
sxwang2012@hotmail.com.

In response to tumor development, cells initially undergo invasion and metastasis
followed by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT, a process by which cells
acquire motility) and overriding senescence (an endogenous defense mechanism
against tumor progression). Oncogenic activation of Twist1 and Twist2 is
essential for EMT and senescence; however, little is known about the specific
contributions of Twist1 versus Twist2 to prognosis, metastasis, and the mechanism
underlying cervical carcinoma. Here, we investigated the similarities and
differences between Twist1 and Twist2 in assessing prognosis and promoting
invasion and metastasis of cervical carcinoma as well as their roles in the
underlying molecular mechanisms. By monitoring the survival of 144 clinical
cervical cancer patients, we demonstrated that Twist2 shows more effective
predictive performance compared with Twist1 and is more closely correlated with
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage and lymph node
metastasis. Compared with Twist1, Twist2 more strongly promotes invasivity and
motility by inducing EMT and overriding senescence. Differences between Twist1
and Twist2 in regulating senescence and the cell cycle might be due to their
individual roles in regulating the cyclin D1/cyclin dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4)
pathway. Overall, our data indicate that Twist2 is the key Twist isoform coupling
aberrant signals from EMT to senescence and is an important candidate biomarker
for cervical cancer prognosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24974259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 27;9(6):e99331. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099331. eCollection
2014.

Twist1- and Twist2-haploinsufficiency results in reduced bone formation.

Huang Y(1), Meng T(2), Wang S(2), Zhang H(2), Mues G(2), Qin C(2), Feng JQ(2),
D'Souza RN(3), Lu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Craniofacial Research and
Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, Texas,
United States of America; The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science
of Stomatology (Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine, Ministry of
Education, School & Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Craniofacial Research and
Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, Texas,
United States of America. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for
Craniofacial Research and Diagnosis, Texas A&M University Baylor College of
Dentistry, Dallas, Texas, United States of America; The University of Utah School
of Dentistry, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Twist1 and Twist2 are highly homologous bHLH transcription factors
that exhibit extensive highly overlapping expression profiles during development.
While both proteins have been shown to inhibit osteogenesis, only Twist1
haploinsufficiency is associated with the premature synostosis of cranial sutures
in mice and humans. On the other hand, biallelic Twist2 deficiency causes only a 
focal facial dermal dysplasia syndrome or additional cachexia and perinatal
lethality in certain mouse strains. It is unclear how these proteins cooperate to
synergistically regulate bone formation.
METHODS: Twist1 floxed mice (Twist1(f/f)) were bred with Twist2-Cre knock-in mice
(Twist2(Cre/+)) to generate Twist1 and Twist2 haploinsufficient mice
(Twist1(f/+); Twist2(Cre/+)). X-radiography, micro-CT scans, alcian blue/alizarin
red staining, trap staining, BrdU labeling, immunohistochemistry, in situ
hybridizations, real-time PCR and dual luciferase assay were employed to
investigate the overall skeletal defects and the bone-associated molecular and
cellular changes of Twist1(f/+);Twist2(Cre/+) mice.
RESULTS: Twist1 and Twist2 haploinsufficient mice did not present with premature 
ossification and craniosynostosis; instead they displayed reduced bone formation,
impaired proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitors. These mice
exhibited decreased expressions of Fgf2 and Fgfr1-4 in bone, resulting in a
down-regulation of FGF signaling. Furthermore, in vitro studies indicated that
both Twist1 and Twist2 stimulated 4.9 kb Fgfr2 promoter activity in the presence 
of E12, a Twist binding partner.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrated that Twist1- and Twist2-haploinsufficiency
caused reduced bone formation due to compromised FGF signaling.

PMCID: PMC4074031
PMID: 24971743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncol Lett. 2014 Apr;7(4):1102-1108. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Twist2 contributes to cisplatin-resistance of ovarian cancer through the
AKT/GSK-3ß signaling pathway.

Wang T(1), Li Y(1), Tuerhanjiang A(1), Wang W(1), Wu Z(1), Yuan M(1),
Maitituoheti M(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R.
China.

Cisplatin is regularly used in the treatment of ovarian cancer. However, the drug
only provides a modest survival advantage, primarily due to chemoresistance and
the upregulation of antiapoptotic machineries in ovarian cancer cells. Therefore,
targeting the mechanisms responsible for cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer
cells may improve the therapeutic outcomes. Twist basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor 2 (Twist2) is a novel zinc finger transcription factor that 
has been indicated to be an important inducer of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, which has been shown to be involved in various phases of
tumorigenicity and progression. However, whether Twist2 suppression increases the
chemosensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to chemotherapeutic agents remains
unclear. In the present study, Twist2 expression was found to differ between
human ovarian cisplatin-sensitive cancer cell line, OV2008, and the resistant
variant, C13K cells. Twist2 plasmids or RNA interference were then utilized to
alter Twist2 expression in OV2008 or C13K cells, respectively, to further assess 
apoptosis, cell viability and cell growth, as well as a possible mechanism. The
results of the present study indicated that Twist2 plays a crucial role in the
chemoresistance of ovarian cancer. In addition, the downregulation of Twist2
expression may facilitate apoptosis and recover the sensitivity of chemoresistant
ovarian cancer through the protein kinase B/glycogen synthase kinase-3ß pathway. 
Therefore, Twist2 depletion may be a promising approach to ovarian cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3961411
PMID: 24944676  [PubMed]


39. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):3261-72. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246173. Epub 2014 May 22.

DNA methylation abnormalities at gene promoters are extensive and variable in the
elderly and phenocopy cancer cells.

Gautrey HE(1), van Otterdijk SD(1), Cordell HJ(2); Newcastle 85+ Study Core Team,
Mathers JC(3), Strathdee G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research. (2)Institute for Genetic Medicine,
and. (3)Human Nutrition Research Centre, Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus 
for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK; and.
(4)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, gordon.strathdee@ncl.ac.uk.

Abnormal patterns of DNA methylation are one of the hallmarks of cancer cells.
The process of aging has also been associated with similar, albeit less dramatic,
changes in methylation patterns, leading to the hypothesis that age-related
changes in DNA methylation may partially underlie the increased risk of cancer in
the elderly. Here we studied 377 participants aged 85 yr from the Newcastle 85+
Study to investigate the extent of, and interindividual variation in, age-related
changes in DNA methylation at specific CpG islands. Using highly quantitative
pyrosequencing analysis, we found extensive and highly variable methylation of
promoter-associated CpG islands with levels ranging from 4% to 35%, even at known
tumor suppressor genes such as TWIST2. Furthermore, the interindividual
differences in methylation seen across this elderly population phenocopies
multiple features of the altered methylation patterns seen in cancer cells. Both 
aging- and cancer-related methylation can occur at similar sets of genes, both
result in the formation of densely methylated, and likely transcriptionally
repressed, alleles, and both exhibit coordinate methylation across multiple loci.
In addition, high methylation levels were associated with subsequent diagnosis of
leukemia or lymphoma during a 3-yr follow-up period (P=0.00008). These data
suggest that the accumulation of age-related changes in promoter-associated CpG
islands may contribute to the increased cancer risk seen during aging.-Gautrey,
H. E., van Otterdijk, S. D., Cordell, H. J., Newcastle 85+ study core team,
Mathers, J. C., Strathdee, G. DNA methylation abnormalities at gene promoters are
extensive and variable in the elderly and phenocopy cancer cells.

© FASEB.

PMID: 24858281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Manag Res. 2014 Apr 25;6:205-16. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S38156. eCollection
2014.

Role of microRNA in epithelial to mesenchymal transition and metastasis and
clinical perspectives.

Díaz-López A(1), Moreno-Bueno G(2), Cano A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM),
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. (2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto 
Sols" (CSIC-UAM), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain ; Fundación MDAnderson Internacional,
Madrid, Spain.

The microRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small, 20-22 nucleotides in length,
endogenously expressed noncoding RNAs that regulate multiple targets
posttranscriptionally. Interestingly, miRNAs have emerged as regulators of most
physiological and pathological processes, including metastatic tumor progression,
in part by controlling a reversible process called epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The activation of EMT increases the migratory and invasive
properties fundamental for tumor cell spread while activation of the reverse
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition is required for metastasis outgrowth. The
EMT triggering leads to the activation of a core of transcription factors
(EMT-TFs) - SNAIL1/SNAIL2, bHLH (E47, E2-2, and TWIST1/TWIST2), and ZEB1/ZEB2 -
that act as E-cadherin repressors and, ultimately, coordinate EMT. Recent
evidence indicates that several miRNAs regulate the expression of EMT-TFs or
EMT-activating signaling pathways. Interestingly, some miRNAs and EMT-TFs form
tightly interconnected negative feedback loops that control epithelial cell
plasticity, providing self-reinforcing signals and robustness to maintain the
epithelial or mesenchymal cell status. Among the most significant feedback loops,
we focus on the ZEB/miR-200 and the SNAIL1/miR-34 networks that hold a clear
impact in the regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal state. Recent insights
into the p53 modulation of the EMT-TF/miRNA loops and epigenetic regulatory
mechanisms in the context of metastasis dissemination will also be discussed.
Understanding the regulation of EMT by miRNAs opens new avenues for the diagnosis
and prognosis of tumors and identifies potential therapeutic targets that might
help to negatively impact on metastasis dissemination and increasing patient
survival.

PMCID: PMC4008290
PMID: 24812525  [PubMed]


41. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Apr 25;4:e206. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2014.22.

The emerging role of Twist proteins in hematopoietic cells and hematological
malignancies.

Merindol N(1), Riquet A(1), Szablewski V(2), Eliaou JF(3), Puisieux A(4),
Bonnefoy N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon and INSERM U1111, Lyon, France. (2)1] IRCM, Institut de
Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, INSERM U896, Université Montpellier 1, 
Montpellier, France [2] Département de Biopathologie, Centre Hospitalier Régional
Universitaire de Montpellier et Faculté de Médecine, Université Montpellier 1,
Montpellier, France. (3)1] IRCM, Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Montpellier, INSERM U896, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France [2]
Département d'Immunologie, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de
Montpellier et Faculté de Médecine, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier,
France. (4)Centre de Receherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, INSERM UMR-S1052, Centre
Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (5)IRCM, Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Montpellier, INSERM U896, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France.

Erratum in
    Blood Cancer J. 2014 Oct;4:e254.

Twist1 and Twist2 (Twist1-2) are two transcription factors, members of the basic 
helix-loop-helix family, that have been well established as master
transcriptional regulators of embryogenesis and developmental programs of
mesenchymal cell lineages. Their role in oncogenesis in epithelium-derived cancer
and in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition has also been thoroughly
characterized. Recently, emerging evidence also suggests a key role for Twist1-2 
in the function and development of hematopoietic cells, as well as in survival
and development of numerous hematological malignancies. In this review, we
summarize the latest data that depict the role of Twist1-2 in monocytes, T cells 
and B lymphocyte activation, and in associated hematological malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4003416
PMID: 24769647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 21;9(4):e95043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095043. eCollection
2014.

Gankyrin is frequently overexpressed in cervical high grade disease and is
associated with cervical carcinogenesis and metastasis.

Liu Y(1), Zhang J(2), Qian W(3), Dong Y(1), Yang Y(1), Liu Z(4), Feng Y(1), Ma
D(5), Zhang Z(1), Wu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Shanghai Tongji University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kunshan Hospital of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated to Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, Jiangsu, China. (4)Division of Cancer Medicine, Department of Lymphoma 
and Myeloma, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Cancer
Biology Medical Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Our previous studies have showed that Gankyrin expression is correlated with a
malignant phenotype in endometrial carcinoma. Here, we investigated the possible 
role of Gankyrin in cervical disease. The increasing protein level of Gankyrin
was observed in high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma
compared with benign cervical tissues and low-grade cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia. In para-carcinoma tissues, it was found interestingly that there was
no lymph node metastasis when nuclei Gankyrin was positively expressed, but lymph
node metastasis rate was 30% (6/20) when nuclei Gankyrin was negatively
expressed. In vitro, the transfection of Gankyrin resulted in markedly
up-regulating of Vimentin, ß-catenin and Twist2, as well as down-regulating of
E-cadherin in cervical carcinoma cells. Our results suggested that Gankyrin may
be functional in cervical carcinogenesis and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3994022
PMID: 24751719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Pediatr Neurol. 2014 Apr;50(4):389-91. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2013.12.009. 
Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Setleis syndrome: genetic and clinical findings in a new case with epilepsy.

Giordano L(1), Desnick RJ(2), Molinaro A(3), Uliana V(4), Forzano F(4), Edelmann 
L(2), Nazarenko I(2), Pinelli L(5), Accorsi P(1), Faravelli F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neuropsychiatric Division, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York. (3)Pediatric Neuropsychiatric Division, Spedali Civili,
Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: anna.molinaro@gmail.com. (4)Division of
Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy. (5)Department of
Neuroradiology, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Focal facial dermal dysplasias are a group of inherited ectodermal
disorders characterized by congenital bitemporal or periauricular scar-like
depressions as well as other facial and nonfacial developmental defects. Four
subtypes have been delineated, and mutations in the TWIST2 gene have been
identified in type III focal facial dermal dysplasia (Setleis syndrome).
PATIENTS: We describe a sporadic patient with the hallmark bitemporal scar-like
lesions, severe intellectual disability, and focal epilepsy.
RESULTS: The boy has typical features of Setleis syndrome, and he developed focal
epilepsy, a previously unreported feature of this syndrome. No mutations in the
TWIST2 gene were found, and there were no pathologic copy number abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: Epilepsy could represent a new manifestation, and the patient
described broadens the spectrum of clinical features associated with Setleis
syndrome, including central nervous system involvement.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24486222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):109-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.11.018. Epub 2014
Jan 10.

Sox17 is required for normal pulmonary vascular morphogenesis.

Lange AW(1), Haitchi HM(2), LeCras TD(1), Sridharan A(1), Xu Y(1), Wert SE(1),
James J(3), Udell N(4), Thurner PJ(4), Whitsett JA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, The University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, United States. (2)Clinical and
Experimental Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, and National Institute for Health
Research Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Southampton General Hospital,
United Kingdom. (3)Heart Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, United States. (4)Bioengineering Sciences
Research Group, Faculty of Engineering and the Environment, University of
Southampton, United Kingdom. (5)Perinatal Institute, Division of Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, The University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039,
United States. Electronic address: Jeffrey.Whitsett@cchmc.org.

The SRY-box containing transcription factor Sox17 is required for endoderm
formation and vascular morphogenesis during embryonic development. In the lung,
Sox17 is expressed in mesenchymal progenitors of the embryonic pulmonary
vasculature and is restricted to vascular endothelial cells in the mature lung.
Conditional deletion of Sox17 in splanchnic mesenchyme-derivatives using
Dermo1-Cre resulted in substantial loss of Sox17 from developing pulmonary
vascular endothelial cells and caused pulmonary vascular abnormalities before
birth, including pulmonary vein varices, enlarged arteries, and decreased
perfusion of the microvasculature. While survival of Dermo1-Cre;Sox17<U+0394>/<U+0394> mice
(herein termed Sox17<U+0394>/<U+0394>) was unaffected at E18.5, most Sox17<U+0394>/<U+0394> mice died by 3
weeks of age. After birth, the density of the pulmonary microvasculature was
decreased in association with alveolar simplification, biventricular cardiac
hypertrophy, and valvular regurgitation. The severity of the postnatal cardiac
phenotype was correlated with the severity of pulmonary vasculature
abnormalities. Sox17 is required for normal formation of the pulmonary
vasculature and postnatal cardiovascular homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4422074
PMID: 24418654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):358-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301397. Epub 2013 Dec
6.

The p53 transcription factor modulates microglia behavior through
microRNA-dependent regulation of c-Maf.

Su W(1), Hopkins S, Nesser NK, Sopher B, Silvestroni A, Ammanuel S, Jayadev S,
Möller T, Weinstein J, Garden GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.

Neuroinflammation occurs in acute and chronic CNS injury, including stroke,
traumatic brain injury, and neurodegenerative diseases. Microglia are specialized
resident myeloid cells that mediate CNS innate immune responses. Disease-relevant
stimuli, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS), can influence microglia
activation. Previously, we observed that p53, a ROS-responsive transcription
factor, modulates microglia behaviors in vitro and in vivo, promoting
proinflammatory functions and suppressing downregulation of the inflammatory
response and tissue repair. In this article we describe a novel mechanism by
which p53 modulates the functional differentiation of microglia both in vitro and
in vivo. Adult microglia from p53-deficient mice have increased expression of the
anti-inflammatory transcription factor c-Maf. To determine how p53 negatively
regulates c-Maf, we examined the impact of p53 on known c-Maf regulators. MiR-155
is a microRNA that targets c-Maf. We observed that cytokine-induced expression of
miR-155 was suppressed in p53-deficient microglia. Furthermore, Twist2, a
transcriptional activator of c-Maf, is increased in p53-deficient microglia. We
identified recognition sites in the 3' untranslated region of Twist2 mRNA that
are predicted to interact with two p53-dependent microRNAs: miR-34a and miR-145. 
In this article, we demonstrate that miR-34a and -145 are regulated by p53 and
negatively regulate Twist2 and c-Maf expression in microglia and the RAW
macrophage cell line. Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that 
p53 activation induced by local ROS or accumulated DNA damage influences
microglia functions and that one specific molecular target of p53 in microglia is
c-Maf.

PMCID: PMC4195583
PMID: 24319262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 11;8(11):e78200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078200.
eCollection 2013.

The role of nuclear ß-catenin accumulation in the Twist2-induced ovarian cancer
EMT.

Mao Y(1), Xu J, Li Z, Zhang N, Yin H, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology in Basic Science, Medical College of Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian, China.

BACKGROUND: Twist2 has been shown to promote human tumor invasion as in breast
cancer and cervical cancer. However, whether Twist2 promotes human ovarian cancer
progression remains to be elucidated. Here, we investigate the role of Twist2 in 
ovarian cancer invasion and metastasis as well as the underlying molecular
mechanisms.
METHODS: Twist2 expression was detected by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue
microarray of human ovarian cancers with scoring procedure according to the
staining intensity and pattern. Twist2 gene was stably introduced into SKOV-3
ovarian cancer cells to examine the changes of cellular morphology, motility,
invasiveness, and EMT molecular markers.
RESULTS: Twist2 expression is significantly increased in ovarian cancers along
with the FIGO disease stage, indicating that Twist2 may be associated with
ovarian cancer metastasis. Overexpression of Twist2 induced the EMT phenotype
including downregulation of E-cadherin, and upregulation of N-cadherin and
ß-catenin in human ovarian cancer cells, suggesting that Twist2 might promote
ß-catenin release from the E-cadherin/ß-catenin complex through inhibition of
E-cadherin. Thus, ß-catenin degradation was inhibited due to inhibition of APC,
and the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway was then activated by nuclear ß-catenin
accumulation, which may activate transcription of downstream target genes to
promote tumor invasion and metastasis. Collectively, these data indicated that
ß-catenin is involved in Twist2-induced EMT in ovarian cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicates that upregulation of Twist2 is correlated with the
FIGO stage in human ovarian cancers. In this report, we demonstrated that nuclear
ß-catenin is accumulated in Twist2-induced EMT cells to facilitates ovarian
cancer invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3823872
PMID: 24244294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Mar;35(3):537-45. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt364. Epub 2013 Nov 
5.

Twist2 promotes self-renewal of liver cancer stem-like cells by regulating CD24.

Liu AY(1), Cai Y, Mao Y, Lin Y, Zheng H, Wu T, Huang Y, Fang X, Lin S, Feng Q,
Huang Z, Yang T, Luo Q, Ouyang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen 361102, China.

Twist2 is a highly conserved basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that
plays a critical role in embryogenesis. Recent evidence has revealed that
aberrant Twist2 expression contributes to tumor progression; however, the role of
Twist2 in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its underlying mechanisms
remain undefined. In this report, we demonstrate that Twist2 is overexpressed in 
human HCC tumors. We show that ectopic expression of Twist2 induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotypes, augments cell migration and
invasion and colony-forming abilities in human HCC cells in vitro, and promotes
tumor growth in vivo. Moreover, we found a higher percentage of CD24(+) liver
cancer stem-like cells in Twist2-transduced HCC cells. Twist2-expressing cells
exhibited an increased expression of stem cell markers Bmi-1, Sox2, CD24 and
Nanog and an increased capacity for self-renewal. Knockdown of CD24 in
HepG2/Twist2 cells decreased the levels of Sox2, pSTAT3 and Nanog, and reversed
the cancer stem-like cell phenotypes induced by ectopic expression of Twist2.
Furthermore, Twist2 regulated the CD24 expression by directly binding to the
E-box region in CD24 promoter. Therefore, our data demonstrated that Twist2
augments liver cancer stem-like cell self-renewal in a CD24-dependent manner.
Twist2-CD24-STAT3-Nanog pathway may play a critical role in regulating liver
cancer stem-like cell self-renewal. The identification of the Twist2-CD24
signaling pathway provides a potential therapeutic approach to target cancer stem
cells in HCCs.

PMID: 24193512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Transl Med. 2013 Oct 30;11:275. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-275.

Down-regulation of miR-138 promotes colorectal cancer metastasis via directly
targeting TWIST2.

Long L(1), Huang G, Zhu H, Guo Y, Liu Y, Huo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, PR China. hjr_198@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common digestive system
malignancy. The molecular events involved in the development and progression of
CRC remain unclear. Recently, more and more evidences have showed that
deregulated miRNAs participate in colorectal carcinogenesis.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-138 were first examined in CRC cell lines
and tumor tissues by real-time PCR. The in vitro and in vivo functional effects
of miR-138 were examined further. Luciferase reporter assays were conducted to
confirm the targeting associations. Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank tests were
performed to estimate the overall survival and disease free survival rate.
RESULTS: miR-138 was found to be down-regulated in human colorectal cancer
tissues and cell lines. Ectopic expression of miR-138 resulted in a dramatic
inhibition of CRC migration and invasion in vitro and in vivo. Twist basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor 2 gene (TWIST2) was identified as one of
the functional target. Restoration of miR-138 resulted in a dramatic reduction of
the expression of TWIST2 at both mRNA and protein levels by directly targeting
its 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR). Up-regulation of TWIST2 was detected in CRC
tumors compared with adjacent normal tissues (P < 0.001) and is inversely
correlated with miR-138 expression. We also identified that down-regulation of
miR-138 was associated with lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, and always
predicted poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: These data highlight a pivotal role for miR-138 in the regulation of 
CRC metastasis by targeting TWIST2, and suggest a potential application of
miR-138 in prognosis prediction and CRC treatment.

PMCID: PMC4228492
PMID: 24171926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014 Mar;31(3):367-77. doi: 10.1007/s10585-013-9621-6. Epub 
2013 Oct 26.

The roles of HLH transcription factors in epithelial mesenchymal transition and
multiple molecular mechanisms.

Teng Y(1), Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, People's Republic of China,
navimoon@126.com.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is presently recognized as an
important event and the initiating stage for tumor invasion and metastasis.
Several EMT inducers have been identified, among which the big family of
helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are rising as a novel and promising 
family of proteins in EMT mediation, such as Twist1, Twist2, E47, and HIFs, etc. 
Due to the variety and complexities of HLH members, the pathways and mechanisms
they employ to promote EMT are also complex and characteristic. In this review,
we will discuss the roles of various HLH proteins in the regulation and
sustenance of the EMT and multiple cellular mechanisms, attempting to provide a
novel and broadened view towards the link between HLH proteins and EMT.

PMID: 24158354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Indian J Pediatr. 2014 Mar;81(3):302-4. doi: 10.1007/s12098-013-1253-y. Epub 2013
Oct 15.

A novel frameshift mutation in TWIST2 gene causing Setleis syndrome.

Girisha KM(1), Bidchol AM, Sarpangala MK, Satyamoorthy K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical
College, Manipal University, Manipal, 576104, India, girish.katta@manipal.edu.

The authors report on a child with Setleis syndrome (OMIM 227260). She is born to
a consanguineous couple with bitemporal scar like defects resembling forceps
marks. She had other classical features resembling autosomal recessive Setleis
syndrome. The authors identified a novel homozygous deletion of a single
nucleotide (c.91delC) in TWIST2 gene leading to the premature truncation of
protein (p.R31GfsX71). Umbilical hernia and genital anomalies are being reported 
for the first time with this condition. This is the fourth mutation proven family
of Setleis syndrome.

PMID: 24127007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Pathol. 2014 Feb;232(3):319-29. doi: 10.1002/path.4289.

A core microRNA signature associated with inducers of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Díaz-Martín J(1), Díaz-López A, Moreno-Bueno G, Castilla MÁ, Rosa-Rosa JM, Cano
A, Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, CSIC-Universidad
de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.

Although it is becoming clear that certain miRNAs fulfil a fundamental role in
the regulation of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a comprehensive
study of the miRNAs associated with this process has yet to be performed. Here,
we profiled the signature of miRNA expression in an in vitro model of EMT,
ectopically expressing in MDCK cells one of seven EMT transcription factors
(SNAI1, SNAI2, ZEB1, ZEB2, TWIST1, TWIST2 or E47) or the EMT inducer LOXL2. In
this way, we identified a core subset of deregulated miRNAs that were further
validated in vivo, studying endometrial carcinosarcoma (ECS), a tumour entity
that represents an extreme example of phenotypic plasticity. Moreover, epigenetic
silencing through DNA methylation of miRNA genes of the miR-200 family and
miR-205 that are down-regulated during EMT was evident in both the in vitro (MDCK
transfectants) and in vivo (ECS) models of EMT. The strong correlation between
expression and DNA methylation suggests a major role for this epigenetic mark in 
the regulation of the miR-141-200c locus.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24122292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Inflammation. 2014 Feb;37(1):55-64. doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9711-2.

The effects of Twist-2 on liver endotoxin tolerance induced by a low dose of
lipopolysaccharide.

Li P(1), Li M, He K, Zhong K, Gong J, You H.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobiliary Surgery and Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, 400010, People's Republic of China.

Endotoxin tolerance is an important mechanism for preventing uncontrolled
inflammatory cytokine production in bacterial sepsis. However, its molecular
mechanisms remain largely unknown. It was reported that Twist-2 protein was a
negative regulator for cytokine signaling by repressing the nuclear factor
(NF)-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokine pathway. However, the relationship between Twist-2 and
endotoxin tolerance is unclear. Endotoxin tolerance models of BABL/c mice and
isolated Kupffer cells (KCs) were established to observe the changes of Twist-2
during endotoxin tolerance. Then, Twist-2 shRNA was used to specifically inhibit 
Twist-2 gene in KCs to further explore the role of Twist-2 in endotoxin
tolerance. The expression of Twist-2 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry,
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and Western blotting,
respectively. The responses to lipopolysaccharide were assessed by the activation
of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and the production of tumor necrosis factor-a. The
histopathologic changes in the liver of the non-endotoxin tolerance group were
more serious than those of the endotoxin tolerance group. Endotoxin tolerance
also led to less activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B, lower expression levels of
tumor necrosis factor-a mRNA, and more expression of Twist-2 than those of
non-endotoxin tolerance group in liver and KCs. Moreover, the inhibitive effects 
partly weaken in KCs transfected with Twist-2 shRNA. Twist-2 was involved in
endotoxin tolerance through inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B trans-activation and cytokines
transcriptional activities. It may be a new target for the clinical treatment of 
sepsis and other inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 24005898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 13;8(8):e72490. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072490. eCollection
2013.

Modulation of oxidative stress by twist oncoproteins.

Floc'h N(1), Kolodziejski J, Akkari L, Simonin Y, Ansieau S, Puisieux A, Hibner
U, Lassus P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 5535, Montpellier, 
France.

Expression of developmental genes Twist1 and Twist2 is reactivated in many human 
tumors. Among their oncogenic activities, induction of epithelial to mesenchymal 
transition is believed to increase cell motility and invasiveness and may be
related to acquisition of cancer stem cell phenotype. In addition, Twist proteins
promote malignant conversion by overriding two oncogene-induced failsafe
programs: senescence and apoptosis. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are also
important mediators of apoptosis, senescence and motility and are tightly linked 
to disease, notably to cancer. We report here that Twist factors and ROS are
functionally linked. In wild type cells both Twist1 and Twist2 exhibit
antioxidant properties. We show that Twist-driven modulation of oncogene-induced 
apoptosis is linked to its effects on oxidative stress. Finally, we identify
several targets that mediate Twist antioxidant activity. These findings unveil a 
new function of Twist factors that could be important in explaining their
pleiotropic role during carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3742535
PMID: 23967308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncol Lett. 2013 Jul;6(1):169-174. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Twist2 promotes ovarian cancer cell survival through activation of Akt.

Mao Y(1), Xu J, Song G, Zhang N, Yin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology in Basic Science, Medical College of Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, P.R. China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 a (HIF-1a) is an important prognostic factor in
ovarian carcinoma. Hypoxia contributes to tumor progression and is involved in
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Twist2 is an EMT regulator, however,
it remains poorly understood in ovarian carcinoma. The present study evaluated
the expression of HIF-1a and Twist2 and further investigated whether Twist2 is
involved in hypoxia-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer. A series of matched
paraffin-embedded tissue sections from human primary ovarian cancer and normal
ovarian tissues were examined through immunohistochemical analysis, a
Twist2-overexpressing stable ovarian cancer cell line was established and
deferoxamine (DFO) was introduced to simulate hypoxic conditions. DFO-induced
apoptosis was examined by fluorescence microscopy, MTT assays and flow cytometry.
In addition, a western blot analysis was performed to examine the molecular
mechanism(s) of action. Twist2 increased in epithelial ovarian cancers associated
with HIF-1a expression. The acquired expression of Twist2 was able to promote the
survival of ovarian cancer cells through Akt phosphorylation under DFO-induced
hypoxic stress. The results suggest that Twist2 activates the PI-3K-Akt pathway
to protect cells from apoptosis in a hypoxic environment. Moreover, Twist2 may be
involved in the HIF-1a signaling pathway in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3742652
PMID: 23946798  [PubMed]


56. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2859-72. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0693. Epub 2013 
Jul 20.

Low osteogenic differentiation potential of placenta-derived mesenchymal stromal 
cells correlates with low expression of the transcription factors Runx2 and
Twist2.

Ulrich C(1), Rolauffs B, Abele H, Bonin M, Nieselt K, Hart ML, Aicher WK.

Author information: 
(1)1 ZRM, Center for Regenerative Medicine, University of Tuebingen , Tuebingen, 
Germany .

Recent studies indicated that mesenchymal stromal cells from bone marrow (bmMSC) 
differ in their osteogenic differentiation capacity compared to MSC from term
placenta (pMSC). We extended these studies and investigated the expression of
factors involved in regulation of bone metabolism in both cell types. To this
end, MSC were expanded in vitro and characterized. The total transcriptome was
investigated by microarrays, and for selected genes, the differences in gene
expression were explored by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction, immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry. We report that bmMSC and pMSC 
share expression of typical lineage surface markers, including CD73, CD90, CD105,
and lack of CD14, CD34, and CD45. However, according to transcriptome analyses,
they differ significantly in their expression of more than 590 genes. Factors
involved in bone metabolism, including alkaline phosphatase (P<0.05), osteoglycin
(P<0.05), osteomodulin (P<0.05), runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2)
(P<0.04), and WISP2 (P<0.05), were expressed at significantly lower levels in
pMSC, but twist-related protein 2 (Twist2) (P<0.0002) was expressed at
significantly higher levels. The osteogenic differentiation capacity of pMSC was 
very low. The adipogenic differentiation was somewhat more prominent in bmMSC,
while the chondrogenic differentiation seemed not to differ between bmMSC and
pMSC, as determined by histochemical staining. However, expression and induction 
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) and Sox9, factors 
involved in early adipogenesis and chondrogenesis, respectively, were higher in
bmMSC. We conclude that despite many similarities between bmMSC and pMSC, when
expanded under identical conditions, they vary considerably with respect to their
in vitro differentiation potential. For regenerative purposes, the choice of MSC 
may therefore influence the outcome of a treatment considerably.

PMCID: PMC3804084
PMID: 23763516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e66070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066070. Print 2013.

The proto-oncogene TWIST1 is regulated by microRNAs.

Nairismägi ML(1), Füchtbauer A, Labouriau R, Bramsen JB, Füchtbauer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.

Upregulation of the proto-oncogene Twist1 is highly correlated with acquired drug
resistance and poor prognosis in human cancers. Altered expression of this
multifunctional transcription factor is also associated with inherited skeletal
malformations. The mammalian Twist1 3'UTRs are highly conserved and contain a
number of potential regulatory elements including miRNA target sites. We analyzed
the translational regulation of TWIST1 using luciferase reporter assays in a
variety of cell lines. Among several miRNAs tested, miR-145a-5p, miR-151-5p and a
combination of miR-145a-5p + miR-151-5p and miR-151-5p + miR-337-3p were able to 
significantly repress Twist1 translation. This phenomena was confirmed with both 
exogenous and endogenous miRNAs and was dependent on the presence of the
predicted target sites in the 3'UTR. Furthermore, the repression was sensitive to
LNA-modified miRNA antagonists and resulted in decreased migratory potential of
murine embryonic fibroblast cells. Understanding the in vivo mechanisms of this
oncogene's regulation might open up a possibility for therapeutic interference by
gene specific cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3669147
PMID: 23741524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Sep;34(9):2000-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt171. Epub 2013 May 
20.

Aneuploidy facilitates oncogenic transformation via specific genetic alterations,
including Twist2 upregulation.

Högnäs G(1), Hämälistö S, Rilla K, Laine JO, Vilkki V, Murumägi A, Edgren H,
Kallioniemi O, Ivaska J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland.

Aneuploidy, deviation from the normal chromosome number, and other chromosomal
aberrations are commonly observed in cancer. Integrin-mediated adhesion and
dynamic turnover of adhesion sites are required for successful cytokinesis of
normal adherent cells and impaired cell division can lead to the generation of
cells with abnormal chromosome contents. We find that repeated cytokinesis
failure, due to impaired integrin traffic alone, is sufficient to induce
chromosome aberrations resulting in the generation of aneuploid cells with
malignant properties. Here, we have compared isogenic aneuploid and euploid cell 
lines with unravel aneuploidy-induced changes in cellular signaling. Euploid,
non-transformed, and aneuploid, transformed, cell lines were investigated using
genome-wide gene expression profiling, analysis of deregulated biological
pathways and array-comparative genomic hybridization. We find that aneuploidy
drives malignancy via inducing marked changes in gene and micro RNA expression
profiles and thus imposing specific growth and survival promoting alterations in 
cellular signaling. Importantly, we identify Twist2 as a key regulator of
survival, invasion and anchorage-independent growth in the aneuploid cells. In
addition, alterations in lipid biosynthetic pathways and miR-10b upregulation are
likely contributors to the malignant phenotype.

PMID: 23689353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Apr 21;19(15):2404-11. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i15.2404.

Twist2 is a valuable prognostic biomarker for colorectal cancer.

Yu H(1), Jin GZ, Liu K, Dong H, Yu H, Duan JC, Li Z, Dong W, Cong WM, Yang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laparoscopy, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, the Second 
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China.

AIM: To investigate the significance of Twist2 for colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: In this study, 93 CRC patients were included who received curative
surgery in Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital from January 1999 to December
2010. Records of patients' clinicopathological characteristics and follow up data
were reviewed. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were used to
observe the protein expression of Twist2 and E-cadherin by immunohistochemistry. 
Two independent pathologists who were blinded to the clinical information
performed semiquantitative scoring of immunostaining. A total score of 3-6 (sum
of extent + intensity) was considered as Twist2-positive expression. The
expression of E-cadherin was divided into two levels (preserved and reduced). An 
exploratory statistical analysis was conducted to determine the association
between Twist2 expression and clinicopathological parameters, as well as
E-cadherin expression. Furthermore, the variables associated with prognosis were 
analyzed by Cox's proportional hazards model. Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to
plot survival curves according to different expression levels of Twist2.
RESULTS: Twist2-positive expression was observed in 66 (71.0%) samples and mainly
located in the cytoplasm. Forty-three (46.2%) samples showed reduced expression
of E-cadherin. There were no significant correlations between Twist2 expression
and any of the clinicopathological parameters. However, Twist2-positive
expression was significantly associated with reduced expression of E-cadherin (P 
= 0.040). Multivariate analysis revealed that bad M-stage [hazard ratio (HR) =
7.694, 95%CI: 2.927-20.224, P < 0.001] and Twist2-positive (HR = 5.744, 95%CI:
1.347-24.298, P = 0.018) were the independent risk factors for poor overall
survival (OS), while Twist2-positive (HR = 3.264, 95%CI: 1.455-7.375, P = 0.004),
bad N-stage (HR = 2.149, 95%CI: 1.226-3.767, P = 0.008) and bad M-stage (HR =
10.907, 95%CI: 4.937-24.096, P < 0.001) were independently associated with poor
disease-free survival (DFS). Survival curves showed a definite trend for
Twist2-negative patients to have longer OS and DFS than Twist2-negative patients,
not only overall, but also for patients in different stages, especially for DFS
of patients in stage III (P = 0.033) and IV (P = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: Our data suggests, for the first time, that Twist2 is a valuable
prognostic biomarker for CRC, particularly for patients in stage III and IV.

PMCID: PMC3631994
PMID: 23613636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jul;104(7):880-8. doi: 10.1111/cas.12163. Epub 2013 May 9.

Twist2 functions as a tumor suppressor in murine osteosarcoma cells.

Ishikawa T(1), Shimizu T, Ueki A, Yamaguchi SI, Onishi N, Sugihara E, Kuninaka S,
Miyamoto T, Morioka H, Nakayama R, Kobayashi E, Toyama Y, Mabuchi Y, Matsuzaki Y,
Yamaguchi R, Miyano S, Saya H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School
of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to the malignant
progression of cancer cells including acquisition of the ability to undergo
metastasis. However, whereas EMT-related transcription factors (EMT-TF) are known
to play an important role in the malignant progression of epithelial tumors,
their role in mesenchymal tumors remains largely unknown. We show that expression
of the gene for Twist2 is downregulated in human osteosarcoma and correlates
inversely with tumorigenic potential in mouse osteosarcoma. Forced expression of 
Twist2 in highly tumorigenic murine osteosarcoma cells induced a slight
inhibition of cell growth in vitro but markedly suppressed tumor formation in
vivo. Conversely, knockdown of Twist2 in osteosarcoma cells with a low
tumorigenic potential promoted tumor formation in vivo, suggesting that Twist2
functions as a tumor suppressor in osteosarcoma cells. Furthermore, Twist2
induced expression of fibulin-5, which has been reported as a tumor suppressor.
Medium conditioned by mouse osteosarcoma cells overexpressing Twist2 inhibited
expression of the MMP9 gene as well as invasion in mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
and forced expression of Twist2 in osteosarcoma cells suppressed MMP9 gene
expression in tumor tissue. Data from the present study suggest that Twist2
inhibits formation of a microenvironment conducive to tumor growth and thereby
attenuates tumorigenesis in osteosarcoma.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23557174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Feb 15;22(4):696-703. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds477. Epub 2012 Nov 
16.

Focal facial dermal dysplasia, type IV, is caused by mutations in CYP26C1.

Slavotinek AM(1), Mehrotra P, Nazarenko I, Tang PL, Lao R, Cameron D, Li B, Chu
C, Chou C, Marqueling AL, Yahyavi M, Cordoro K, Frieden I, Glaser T, Prescott T, 
Morren MA, Devriendt K, Kwok PY, Petkovich M, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0316, USA. slavotia@peds.ucsf.edu

Focal facial dermal dysplasia (FFDD) Type IV is a rare syndrome characterized by 
facial lesions resembling aplasia cutis in a preauricular distribution along the 
line of fusion of the maxillary and mandibular prominences. To identify the
causative gene(s), exome sequencing was performed in a family with two affected
siblings. Assuming autosomal recessive inheritance, two novel sequence variants
were identified in both siblings in CYP26C1-a duplication of seven base pairs,
which was maternally inherited, c.844_851dupCCATGCA, predicting p.Glu284fsX128
and a missense mutation, c.1433G>A, predicting p.Arg478His, that was paternally
inherited. The duplication predicted a frameshift mutation that led to a
premature stop codon and premature chain termination, whereas the missense
mutation was not functional based on its in vitro expression in mammalian cells. 
The FFDD skin lesions arise along the sites of fusion of the maxillary and
mandibular prominences early in facial development, and Cyp26c1 was expressed
exactly along the fusion line for these facial prominences in the first branchial
arch in mice. Sequencing of four additional, unrelated Type IV FFDD patients and 
eight Type II or III TWIST2-negative FFDD patients revealed that three of the
Type IV patients were homozygous for the duplication, whereas none of the Type II
or III patients had CYP26C1 mutations. The seven base pairs duplication was
present in 0.3% of healthy controls and 0.3% of patients with other birth
defects. These findings suggest that the phenotypic manifestations of FFDD Type
IV can be non-penetrant or underascertained. Thus, FFDD Type IV results from the 
loss of function mutations in CYP26C1.

PMCID: PMC3554199
PMID: 23161670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048178. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Significance of heterogeneous Twist2 expression in human breast cancers.

Mao Y(1), Zhang N, Xu J, Ding Z, Zong R, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology in Basic Science, Medical College of Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian, China. maoyubin@xmu.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Twist2 (Dermo1) has been shown to mediate the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) to promote tumor invasion and even metastasis. However, the
involvement of EMT in breast cancer progression is highly debated, partially due 
to clinical observations showing that the majority of human breast carcinoma
metastases express E-cadherin and maintain their epithelial morphology. The
molecular mechanism by which Twist2 participates in EMT of breast cancer in vivo 
remains poorly understood.
METHODS: We examined Twist2 expression pattern in human breast carcinomas by
western blot and tissue microarray, and analyzed Twist2 cellular localization by 
confocal microscopy, cell fractionation and other approaches.
RESULTS: Twist2 expression was significantly increased in breast cancer.
Cytoplasmic Twist2 positive cancer cells expressing E-cadherin on the cellular
membrane were mainly located at tumor center of primary carcinomas and lymph
metastases, while cancer cells with nuclear Twist2 clearly showed loss of
E-cadherin and were detected at the invasive front in ductal breast carcinomas.
In addition, ectopically stable-expressed Twist2 was found to localize in the
cytoplasm of cancer cells. Collectively, these data indicate that upregulation of
cytoplasmic Twist2 is correlated with tumor histological type and tumor
metastasis in human breast cancers.
CONCLUSION: The differential cellular distribution of Twist2 may be associated
with tumor progression. The cytoplasmic Twist2 in cancer cells at tumor center of
primary carcinomas and lymph metastases contributes to the maintenance of
epithelial cancer characteristics expressing E-cadherin in a noninvasive state,
while the nuclear Twist2 at the cancer invasion front activates EMT to deprive
epithelial property of neoplastic cells, thus facilitating invasion and
metastasis. These findings suggest that heterogeneous expression of Twist2 in
tumors may have a functional link to tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3485060
PMID: 23133563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun;21(6):602-12. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.230. Epub 2012 Oct
17.

The 2q37-deletion syndrome: an update of the clinical spectrum including
overweight, brachydactyly and behavioural features in 14 new patients.

Leroy C(1), Landais E, Briault S, David A, Tassy O, Gruchy N, Delobel B, Grégoire
MJ, Leheup B, Taine L, Lacombe D, Delrue MA, Toutain A, Paubel A, Mugneret F,
Thauvin-Robinet C, Arpin S, Le Caignec C, Jonveaux P, Beri M, Leporrier N, Motte 
J, Fiquet C, Brichet O, Mozelle-Nivoix M, Sabouraud P, Golovkine N, Bednarek N,
Gaillard D, Doco-Fenzy M.

Author information: 
(1)CHU-Reims, HMB, Service de génétique, Reims, France.

The 2q37 locus is one of the most commonly deleted subtelomeric regions. Such a
deletion has been identified in >100 patients by telomeric fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis and, less frequently, by array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (array-CGH). A recognizable '2q37-deletion syndrome' or
Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy-like syndrome has been previously described.
To better map the deletion and further refine this deletional syndrome, we formed
a collaboration with the Association of French Language Cytogeneticists to
collect 14 new intellectually deficient patients with a distal or interstitial
2q37 deletion characterized by FISH and array-CGH. Patients exhibited facial
dysmorphism (13/14) and brachydactyly (10/14), associated with behavioural
problems, autism or autism spectrum disorders of varying severity and overweight 
or obesity. The deletions in these 14 new patients measured from 2.6 to 8.8<U+2009>Mb.
Although the major role of HDAC4 has been demonstrated, the phenotypic
involvement of several other genes in the deleted regions is unknown. We further 
refined the genotype-phenotype correlation for the 2q37 deletion. To do this, we 
examined the smallest overlapping deleted region for candidate genes for skeletal
malformations (facial dysmorphism and brachydactyly), overweight, behavioural
problems and seizures, using clinical data, a review of the literature, and the
Manteia database. Among the candidate genes identified, we focus on the roles of 
PRLH, PER2, TWIST2, CAPN10, KIF1A, FARP2, D2HGDH and PDCD1.

PMCID: PMC3658200
PMID: 23073310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46391. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046391. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Hypoxia induces EMT in low and highly aggressive pancreatic tumor cells but only 
cells with cancer stem cell characteristics acquire pronounced migratory
potential.

Salnikov AV(1), Liu L, Platen M, Gladkich J, Salnikova O, Ryschich E, Mattern J, 
Moldenhauer G, Werner J, Schemmer P, Büchler MW, Herr I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular OncoSurgery Group, Department of General Surgery, University of
Heidelberg and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Tumor hypoxia induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which induces
invasion and metastasis, and is linked to cancer stem cells (CSCs). Whether EMT
generates CSCs de novo, enhances migration of existing CSCs or both is unclear.
We examined patient tissue of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) along with
carcinomas of breast, lung, kidney, prostate and ovary. For in vitro studies,
five established PDA cell lines classified as less (CSC(low)) and highly
aggressive CSC-like cells (CSC(high)) were examined by single and double
immunofluorescence microscopy, wound-, transwell-, and time-lapse microscopy.
HIF-1a and Slug, as well as HIF-2a and CD133 were co-expressed pointing to a
putative co-existence of hypoxia, EMT and CSCs in vivo. CSC(high) cells exhibited
high basal expression of the mesenchymal Vimentin protein but low or absent
expression of the epithelial marker E-cadherin, with the opposite result in
CSC(low) cells. Hypoxia triggered altering of cell morphology from an epithelial 
to a mesenchymal phenotype, which was more pronounced in CSC(high) cells.
Concomitantly, E-cadherin expression was reduced and expression of Vimentin,
Slug, Twist2 and Zeb1 enhanced. While hypoxia caused migration in all cell lines,
velocity along with the percentage of migrating, polarized and
pseudopodia-forming cells was significantly higher in CSC(high) cells. These data
indicate that hypoxia-induced EMT occurs in PDA and several other tumor entities.
However although hypoxia-induced EMT signaling occurs in all tumor cell
populations, only the stem-like cells acquire high migratory potential and thus
may be responsible for invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3458836
PMID: 23050024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Cell. 2012 Sep 11;22(3):404-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.08.003.

A "twist box" code of p53 inactivation: twist box: p53 interaction promotes p53
degradation.

Piccinin S(1), Tonin E, Sessa S, Demontis S, Rossi S, Pecciarini L, Zanatta L,
Pivetta F, Grizzo A, Sonego M, Rosano C, Dei Tos AP, Doglioni C, Maestro R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology 1, CRO National Cancer Institute, Aviano 33081, Italy.
spiccinin@cro.it

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Sep 11;22(3):283-5.

Twist proteins have been shown to contribute to cancer development and
progression by impinging on different regulatory pathways, but their mechanism of
action is poorly defined. By investigating the role of Twist in sarcomas, we
found that Twist1 acts as a mechanism alternative to TP53 mutation and MDM2
overexpression to inactivate p53 in mesenchymal tumors. We provide evidence that 
Twist1 binds p53 C terminus through the Twist box. This interaction hinders key
posttranslational modifications of p53 and facilitates its MDM2-mediated
degradation. Our study suggests the existence of a Twist box code of p53
inactivation and provides the proof of principle that targeting the Twist box:p53
interaction might offer additional avenues for cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22975381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 29;12:377. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-377.

The T-box transcription factor Brachyury regulates epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in association with cancer stem-like cells in adenoid cystic carcinoma
cells.

Shimoda M(1), Sugiura T, Imajyo I, Ishii K, Chigita S, Seki K, Kobayashi Y,
Shirasuna K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Maxillofacial Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of Dental Science, Kyushu University, 
3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The high frequencies of recurrence and distant metastasis of adenoid 
cystic carcinoma (AdCC) emphasize the need to better understand the biological
factors associated with these outcomes. To analyze the mechanisms of AdCC
metastasis, we established the green fluorescence protein (GFP)-transfected
subline ACCS-GFP from the AdCC parental cell line and the metastatic ACCS-M GFP
line from an in vivo metastasis model.
METHODS: Using these cell lines, we investigated the involvement of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cell (CSCs) in AdCC
metastasis by real-time RT-PCR for EMT related genes and stem cell markers.
Characteristics of CSCs were also analyzed by sphere-forming ability and
tumorigenicity. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) silencing of target gene was also
performed.
RESULTS: ACCS-M GFP demonstrated characteristics of EMT and additionally
displayed sphere-forming ability and high expression of EMT-related genes (Snail,
Twist1, Twist2, Slug, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 and 2 [Zeb1 and Zeb2],
glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta [Gsk3ß and transforming growth factor beta 2
[Tgf-ß2]), stem cell markers (Nodal, Lefty, Oct-4, Pax6, Rex1, and Nanog), and
differentiation markers (sex determining region Y [Sox2], Brachyury, and alpha
fetoprotein [Afp]). These observations suggest that ACCS-M GFP shows the
characteristics of CSCs and CSCs may be involved in the EMT of AdCC.
Surprisingly, shRNA silencing of the T-box transcription factor Brachyury (also a
differentiation marker) resulted in downregulation of the EMT and stem cell
markers. In addition, sphere-forming ability, EMT characteristics, and
tumorigenicity were simultaneously lost. Brachyury expression in clinical samples
of AdCC was extremely high and closely related to EMT. This finding suggests that
regulation of EMT by Brachyury in clinical AdCC may parallel that observed in
vitro in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of a single cell line is a limitation of this study.
However, parallel data from in vitro and clinical samples suggest the possibility
that EMT is directly linked to CSCs and that Brachyury is a regulator of EMT and 
CSCs.

PMCID: PMC3492149
PMID: 22931165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):145-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.025. Epub 2012
Aug 1.

Twist2 contributes to termination of limb bud outgrowth and patterning through
direct regulation of Grem1.

Wade C(1), Brinas I, Welfare M, Wicking C, Farlie PG.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, University of Melbourne and Royal
Children's Hospital, Flemington Rd Parkville 3052, VIC, Australia.

Twist1 has been demonstrated to play critical roles in the early development of
neural crest and mesodermally derived tissues including the limb. Twist2 has been
less well characterised but its relatively late onset of expression suggests
specific roles in the development of a number of organs. Expression of Twist2
within the developing limbs begins after formation of the limb bud and persists
within the peripheral mesenchyme until digital rays condense. We have used
RCAS-mediated overexpression in chick to investigate the function of Twist2 in
limb development. Viral misexpression following injection into the lateral plate 
mesoderm results in a spectrum of hypoplastic limb phenotypes. These include
generalized shortening of the entire limb, fusion of the autopod skeletal
elements, loss of individual digits or distal truncation resulting in complete
loss of the autopod. These phenotypes appear to result from a premature
termination of limb outgrowth and manifest as defective growth in both the
proximal-distal and anterior-posterior axes. In situ hybridisation analysis
demonstrates that many components of the Shh/Grem1/Fgf regulatory loop that
controls early limb growth and patterning are downregulated by Twist2
overexpression. Grem1 has a complementary expression pattern to Twist2 within the
limb primordia and co-expression of both Grem1 and Twist2 results in a rescue of 
the Twist2 overexpression phenotype. We demonstrate that Twist proteins directly 
repress Grem1 expression via a regulatory element downstream of the open reading 
frame. These data indicate that Twist2 regulates early limb morphogenesis through
a role in terminating the Shh/Grem1/Fgf autoregulatory loop.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2013 Feb;101(2):358-67. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.34332. Epub 2012
Jul 30.

Surface-bound orientated Jagged-1 enhances osteogenic differentiation of human
periodontal ligament-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Osathanon T(1), Ritprajak P, Nowwarote N, Manokawinchoke J, Giachelli C, Pavasant
P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Mineralized Tissue, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Notch signaling plays critical roles in various cell types by regulating cell
fate determination and differentiation. Here, we investigated the ability to
control differentiation of human periodontal ligament derived mesenchymal stem
cells using modified surfaces containing the affinity immobilized Notch ligand,
Jagged-1. After seeding human periodontal ligament derived mesenchymal stem cells
(HPDLs) on Jagged-1 modified surfaces, expression of Notch signaling target
genes, Hes-1 and Hey-1, was higher than those exposed to soluble Jagged-1 or
control surfaces. Upregulation of Notch signaling target genes was attenuated
after treatment with the <U+03B3> secretase inhibitor. Upon seeding the cells on
Jagged-1 immobilized surface and maintained in osteogenic medium, alkaline
phosphatase enzymatic activity and mineralization as well as mRNA expression of
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), collagen type I (COL I) and osteopontin (OPN) were
significantly increased compared to those of controls. However, osteocalcin (OCN)
mRNA expression level was decreased when cells were exposed to Jagged-1 modified 
surfaces. HPDLs on Jagged-1 modified surfaces expressed lower TWIST2 mRNA levels 
than the control, suggesting that the mechanism whereby Jagged-1 enhances
osteogenic differentiation of HPDLs may occur through Notch signaling and TWIST
regulation. In summary, an alteration of biomaterial interface using Notch
ligands illustrates a promising system to control HPDLs differentiation toward
osteogenic lineage.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22847978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Oct;33(10):1965-75. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs227. Epub 2012
Jul 12.

c-Myc expression and MEK1-induced Erk2 nuclear localization are required for
TGF-beta induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasion in prostate
cancer.

Amatangelo MD(1), Goodyear S, Varma D, Stearns ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department ofPathology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA 19102, USA. mda27@drexel.edu

Understanding the initial mechanisms by which epithelial cells transform to an
invasive phenotype is critical to the development of diagnostics that can
identify the metastatic potential of cancers as well as therapeutic agents that
can prevent metastases. Changes in cellular response to the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-ß) cytokine are known to promote epithelial cell invasion and
metastasis in part through induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions
(EMTs). In this report, we demonstrate that non-metastatic human prostate cancer 
cell lines of increasing Gleason score can be induced to undergo EMT when treated
with TGF-ß in combination with epidermal growth factor. Mechanistic studies
revealed that in cells stably transfected with activated Ras, TGF-ß alone induced
EMT and that a Ras-Raf-MEK1, but not MEK2, signaling cascade is necessary and
sufficient for Erk2 nuclear localization that works in concert with TGF-ß to
promote EMT. Furthermore, we show for the first time that expression of the
transcription factor c-myc, which is phosphorlyated by Erk2, is required for EMT.
Characteristically, EMT involved adoption of a spindle-shaped morphology, loss of
E-cadherin and increased expression of Vimentin, Fibronectin and Fibroblast
Specific Protein-1 (S100A4). Prostate cells undergoing EMT became invasive and
expressed several genes associated with metastasis, including MT-MMP1, MMP-2/9,
the MMP-9 homodimer, Slug and Twist2. In sum, we demonstrate a novel mechanism by
which non-invasive primary prostate tumor cells transition to an invasive
phenotype characteristic of malignant tumor cells in response to TGF-ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC3463154
PMID: 22791812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Hepatol. 2012 Nov;57(5):1021-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.06.027. Epub 2012 Jun 
28.

Hepatitis C viral protein NS5A induces EMT and participates in oncogenic
transformation of primary hepatocyte precursors.

Akkari L(1), Grégoire D, Floc'h N, Moreau M, Hernandez C, Simonin Y, Rosenberg
AR, Lassus P, Hibner U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire de Montpellier, CNRS UMR5535, Montpellier,
France.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2012 Nov;57(5):935-6.
    J Hepatol. 2013 Mar;58(3):637-8.
    J Hepatol. 2013 Mar;58(3):636-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Apicobasal polarity, which is essential for epithelial
structure and function, is targeted by several tumour-related pathogens and is
generally perturbed in the course of carcinogenesis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection is associated with a strong risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, typically
preceded by dysplastic alterations of cell morphology. We investigated the
molecular mechanisms and the functional consequences of HCV-driven perturbations 
of epithelial polarity.
METHODS: We used biochemical, genetic, and cell biology approaches to assess the 
impact of hepatitis C viral protein NS5A on the polarity and function of
hepatocytes and hepatic progenitors. Transgenic animals and xenograft models
served for in vivo validation of the results obtained in cell culture.
RESULTS: We found that expression of HCV-NS5A in primary hepatic precursors and
in immortalized hepatocyte cell lines gave rise to profound modifications of cell
polarity, leading to epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). NS5A, either
alone or in the context of the full complement of viral proteins in the course of
infection, acted through activating Twist2, a transcriptional regulator of EMT.
The effects of NS5A were additive to those of TGF-ß, a cytokine abundant in
diseased liver and highly relevant to HCV-related pathology. Moreover, NS5A
cooperates with oncogenic Ras, giving rise to transformed, invasive cells that
are highly tumorigenic in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that in the context of HCV infection, NS5A favors
formation of preneoplastic lesions by disrupting cell polarity and additional
oncogenic events cooperate with the viral protein to give rise to motile and
invasive tumour cells.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Aug 1;318(13):1492-507. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.04.002. Epub
2012 Apr 10.

Direct conversion of tenocytes into chondrocytes by Sox9.

Takimoto A(1), Oro M, Hiraki Y, Shukunami C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Sox9 is a high-mobility group box-containing transcription factor that functions 
as a key regulator of chondrogenesis. We here report that Sox9 mediates the
direct conversion of tenocytes to chondrocytes through an intermediate state in
which both differentiation programs are active. Sox9 is abundantly expressed in
cartilage but is undetectable in limb tendons that express Scleraxis (Scx) and
Tenomodulin (Tnmd), tendon-specific early and late molecular markers,
respectively. Upon forced expression of Sox9 in the chick forelimb, ectopic
cartilage formation is preferentially observed in fibrous tissues including the
tendons, ligaments, perichondrium/periosteum, dermis, and muscle connective
tissues. Tnmd expression in tenocytes isolated from leg tendons was markedly
upregulated by forced expression of basic helix-loop-helix (b-HLH) activators
including Scx, Paraxis, Twist1 and Twist2. In contrast, the overexpression of
Sox9 in monolayer tenocytes resulted in the downregulation of Tnmd and Scx
expressions during passaging in culture, and the induction of cartilage molecular
markers such as type II collagen (Col2a1) and Chondromodulin-I (ChM-I). This
Sox9-driven switching from a tenocytic to a chondrocytic gene expression profile 
was associated with a dramatic change from a spindle to a polygonal cellular
morphology. The extracellular accumulation of cartilage-characteristic
proteoglycans was also observed. These data suggest that tenocytes have a strong 
potential for conversion into chondrocytes through the activities of Sox9 both in
vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22510437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Clin Invest. 2012 May;122(5):1849-68. doi: 10.1172/JCI59218. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition can suppress major attributes of human
epithelial tumor-initiating cells.

Celià-Terrassa T(1), Meca-Cortés O, Mateo F, Martínez de Paz A, Rubio N,
Arnal-Estapé A, Ell BJ, Bermudo R, Díaz A, Guerra-Rebollo M, Lozano JJ, Estarás
C, Ulloa C, Álvarez-Simón D, Milà J, Vilella R, Paciucci R, Martínez-Balbás M, de
Herreros AG, Gomis RR, Kang Y, Blanco J, Fernández PL, Thomson TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Barcelona Institute of Molecular Biology, Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jun;12(6):378.

Malignant progression in cancer requires populations of tumor-initiating cells
(TICs) endowed with unlimited self renewal, survival under stress, and
establishment of distant metastases. Additionally, the acquisition of invasive
properties driven by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is critical for the 
evolution of neoplastic cells into fully metastatic populations. Here, we
characterize 2 human cellular models derived from prostate and bladder cancer
cell lines to better understand the relationship between TIC and EMT programs in 
local invasiveness and distant metastasis. The model tumor subpopulations that
expressed a strong epithelial gene program were enriched in highly metastatic
TICs, while a second subpopulation with stable mesenchymal traits was
impoverished in TICs. Constitutive overexpression of the transcription factor
Snai1 in the epithelial/TIC-enriched populations engaged a mesenchymal gene
program and suppressed their self renewal and metastatic phenotypes. Conversely, 
knockdown of EMT factors in the mesenchymal-like prostate cancer cell
subpopulation caused a gain in epithelial features and properties of TICs. Both
tumor cell subpopulations cooperated so that the nonmetastatic mesenchymal-like
prostate cancer subpopulation enhanced the in vitro invasiveness of the
metastatic epithelial subpopulation and, in vivo, promoted the escape of the
latter from primary implantation sites and accelerated their metastatic
colonization. Our models provide new insights into how dynamic interactions among
epithelial, self-renewal, and mesenchymal gene programs determine the plasticity 
of epithelial TICs.

PMCID: PMC3366719
PMID: 22505459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 May 24;19(3):409-21. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0387. Print
2012 Jun.

Novel candidate genes of thyroid tumourigenesis identified in Trk-T1 transgenic
mice.

Heiliger KJ(1), Hess J, Vitagliano D, Salerno P, Braselmann H, Salvatore G,
Ugolini C, Summerer I, Bogdanova T, Unger K, Thomas G, Santoro M, Zitzelsberger
H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Radiation Cytogenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

For an identification of novel candidate genes in thyroid tumourigenesis, we have
investigated gene copy number changes in a Trk-T1 transgenic mouse model of
thyroid neoplasia. For this aim, 30 thyroid tumours from Trk-T1 transgenics were 
investigated by comparative genomic hybridisation. Recurrent gene copy number
alterations were identified and genes located in the altered chromosomal regions 
were analysed by Gene Ontology term enrichment analysis in order to reveal gene
functions potentially associated with thyroid tumourigenesis. In thyroid
neoplasms from Trk-T1 mice, a recurrent gain on chromosomal bands 1C4-E2.3 (10.0%
of cases), and losses on 3H1-H3 (13.3%), 4D2.3-E2 (43.3%) and 14E4-E5 (6.7%) were
identified. The genes Twist2, Ptma, Pde6d, Bmpr1b, Pdlim5, Unc5c, Srm, Trp73,
Ythdf2, Taf12 and Slitrk5 are located in these chromosomal bands. Copy number
changes of these genes were studied by fluorescence in situ hybridisation on 30
human papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) samples and altered gene expression was
studied by qRT-PCR analyses in 67 human PTC. Copy number gains were detected in
83% of cases for TWIST2 and in 100% of cases for PTMA and PDE6D. DNA losses of
SLITRK1 and SLITRK5 were observed in 21% of cases and of SLITRK6 in 16% of cases.
Gene expression was significantly up-regulated for UNC5C and TP73 and
significantly down-regulated for SLITRK5 in tumours compared with normal tissue. 
In conclusion, a global genomic copy number analysis of thyroid tumours from
Trk-T1 transgenic mice revealed a number of novel gene alterations in thyroid
tumourigenesis that are also prevalent in human PTCs.

PMID: 22454401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Cancer. 2012 Mar 19;12:91. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-91.

EMT transcription factors snail and slug directly contribute to cisplatin
resistance in ovarian cancer.

Haslehurst AM(1), Koti M, Dharsee M, Nuin P, Evans K, Geraci J, Childs T, Chen J,
Li J, Weberpals J, Davey S, Squire J, Park PC, Feilotter H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a molecular process
through which an epithelial cell undergoes transdifferentiation into a
mesenchymal phenotype. The role of EMT in embryogenesis is well-characterized and
increasing evidence suggests that elements of the transition may be important in 
other processes, including metastasis and drug resistance in various different
cancers.
METHODS: Agilent 4 × 44 K whole human genome arrays and selected reaction
monitoring mass spectrometry were used to investigate mRNA and protein expression
in A2780 cisplatin sensitive and resistant cell lines. Invasion and migration
were assessed using Boyden chamber assays. Gene knockdown of snail and slug was
done using targeted siRNA. Clinical relevance of the EMT pathway was assessed in 
a cohort of primary ovarian tumours using data from Affymetrix GeneChip Human
Genome U133 plus 2.0 arrays.
RESULTS: Morphological and phenotypic hallmarks of EMT were identified in the
chemoresistant cells. Subsequent gene expression profiling revealed upregulation 
of EMT-related transcription factors including snail, slug, twist2 and zeb2.
Proteomic analysis demonstrated up regulation of Snail and Slug as well as the
mesenchymal marker Vimentin, and down regulation of E-cadherin, an epithelial
marker. By reducing expression of snail and slug, the mesenchymal phenotype was
largely reversed and cells were resensitized to cisplatin. Finally, gene
expression data from primary tumours mirrored the finding that an EMT-like
pathway is activated in resistant tumours relative to sensitive tumours,
suggesting that the involvement of this transition may not be limited to in vitro
drug effects.
CONCLUSIONS: This work strongly suggests that genes associated with EMT may play 
a significant role in cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer, therefore
potentially leading to the development of predictive biomarkers of drug response 
or novel therapeutic strategies for overcoming drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC3342883
PMID: 22429801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Transl Res. 2012;4(1):1-13. Epub 2012 Jan 1.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cervical carcinoma.

Lee MY, Shen MR.

During the progression of epithelial cancer, cells usually lose epithelial
characteristic features and gain a mesenchymal phenotype. Cervical cancer is a
common female malignancy worldwide. Despite the generally good prognosis for
early-stage cervical cancer patients, many patients still die as a result of
metastasis and recurrence. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been
implicated in the metastasis of primary tumors and provides molecular mechanisms 
for cervical cancer metastasis. Here we provide an up-to-date overview regarding 
the program of EMT in cervical cancer. In the stepwise progression of cervical
cancer, human papilloma viral proteins contribute to the cell transformation and 
the conversion of typical epithelial cells to the epithelial carcinoma cells with
hybrid epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics. Molecules related to the EMT
program of cervical cancer cells are summarized in this review paper. Several
soluble factors acting on their cognate receptors stimulate the mesenchymal
transition of cervical epithelial cells. Ion transport system as well as
cytoskeletal modulators also stimulate the progression of EMT program in cervical
carcinoma cells. Transcriptional factors such as Snail, Twist1, Twist2, and six1 
homeoproteins are involved in the complicated regulation and cervical cancer
metastasis. Among the various signalings associated with EMT program, Snail is a 
central transcription factor which governs EMT program. In contrast to tumor
promoters, several tumor suppressors such as SFRP1/2 and LMX-1A have been
reported to suppress tumorigenesis as well as metastatic spread through
inhibiting the EMT program.

PMCID: PMC3276374
PMID: 22347518  [PubMed]


76. Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1165-75.

Overexpression of TWIST2 correlates with poor prognosis in head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas.

Gasparotto D(1), Polesel J, Marzotto A, Colladel R, Piccinin S, Modena P, Grizzo 
A, Sulfaro S, Serraino D, Barzan L, Doglioni C, Maestro R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Experimental Oncology 1, CRO National Cancer Institute, Aviano, Italy.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) are a heterogeneous group of
tumors with variable presentation and clinical behavior. Despite improvements in 
surgical and radiation therapy techniques, the 5-year survival rate has not
improved significantly over the past decades. Thus, there is an urgent need to
identify novel markers that may allow for the development of personalized
therapeutic approaches. In the present study we evaluated the prognostic role of 
the expression of genes related to the induction of epithelial mesenchymal
transition (EMT). To this aim, a consecutive series of 69 HNSCC were analyzed for
the expression of TWIST1, TWIST2, SNAI1, SNAI2, E-Cadherin, N-Cadherin and
Vimentin.TWIST1, TWIST2, SNAI1 and SNAI2 were significantly overexpressed in
HNSCC, with TWIST2, SNAI1 and SNAI2 being more markedly increased in tumors
compared to normal mucosae. The expression of TWIST1 and SNAI2 was associated
with upregulation of mesenchymal markers, but failed to correlate with
pathological parameters or clinical behaviour. In contrast, we found that
upregulation of TWIST2, which was independent of the activation of a mesenchymal 
differentiation program, correlated with poor differentiation grade (p=0.016) and
shorter survival (p=0.025), and identifies a subset of node-positive oral
cavity/pharynx cancer patients with very poor prognosis (p less than 0.001).
Overall our study suggests that the assessment of TWIST2 expression might help to
stratify HNSCC patients for risk of disease progression, pointing to TWIST2 as a 
potential prognostic marker.

PMCID: PMC3282075
PMID: 22201613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Reproduction. 2012 Mar;143(3):377-87. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0364. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Expression of mesenchymal-related genes by the bovine trophectoderm following
conceptus attachment to the endometrial epithelium.

Yamakoshi S(1), Bai R, Chaen T, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Sakurai T, Konno T, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

In the course of experiments to identify and characterize the factors that
function in bovine conceptuses during peri-attachment periods, various
transcripts related to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) were found. In
this study, RNA was extracted from different sets of days 17, 20, and 22 (day
0=day of estrous) bovine conceptuses and subjected to real-time PCR analysis as
well as Western blotting, from which abundances of N-cadherin (CDH2), vimentin,
matrix metalloproteinase 2 (gelatinase A, 72 kDa gelatinase, 72 kDa type IV
collagenase) (MMP2), and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (gelatinase B, 92 kDa
gelatinase, 92 kDa type IV collagenase) (MMP9) mRNAs were determined on day 22,
concurrent with (CDH1) mRNA and protein downregulation. Transcription factors in 
EMT processes were then analyzed and changes in snail homolog 2 (Drosophila)
(SNAI), zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1), zinc finger E-box binding
homeobox 2 (ZEB2), twist homolog 1 (Drosophila) (TWIST1), twist homolog 2
(Drosophila) (TWIST2), and Kruppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) transcripts were found in
day 22 conceptuses, while confirming SNAI2 expression by Western blotting.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the day 22 trophectoderm expressed the
mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin as well as the epithelial marker
cytokeratin. In attempts to identify the molecular mechanisms by which the
trophectoderm expressed EMT-related genes, growth factor receptors associated
with EMT were analyzed. Upregulation of the growth factor receptor transcripts,
fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), platelet-derived growth factor
receptor, alpha polypeptide (PDGFRA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor,
beta polypeptide (PDGFRB), and transforming growth factor, beta receptor II
(70/80 kDa) (TGFBR2) mRNAs, was found on day 22. The analysis was extended to
determine the integrin (ITG) transcripts and found high levels of integrin, alpha
4 (antigen CD49D, alpha 4 subunit of VLA-4 receptor) (ITGA4), integrin, alpha 8
(ITGA8), integrin, beta 3 (platelet glycoprotein IIIa, antigen CD61) (ITGB3), and
integrin, beta 5 (ITGB5) mRNAs on day 22. These observations indicate that after 
the conceptus-endometrium attachment, EMT-related transcripts as well as the
epithelial marker cytokeratin were present in the bovine trophectoderm and
suggest that the implantation process for noninvasive trophoblasts requires not
only extracellular matrix expression but also partial EMT.

PMID: 22157247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Oral Pathol Med. 2012 May;41(5):424-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2011.01114.x. 
Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Coexpression of hypoxia-inducible factor-2a, TWIST2, and SIP1 may correlate with 
invasion and metastasis of salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Zhou C(1), Liu J, Tang Y, Zhu G, Zheng M, Jiang J, Yang J, Liang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan,
China.

BACKGROUND: Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of salivary gland is characterized by 
advanced local invasion and distant metastasis. Intratumoral hypoxia was reported
to be associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) regulators. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship between hypoxia-inducible 
factor (HIF)-2a, TWIST2, and SIP1 expression and the invasion and metastasis in
ACC of salivary gland.
METHOD: In vitro we first detected the expression of HIF-2a, TWIST2, and SIP1 in 
two ACC cell lines by Western blot and real-time RT-PCR. Then, in vivo, a
retrospective investigation of 121 patients with ACC from Department of Oral and 
Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University
between 1996 and 2005 was carried out using immunohistochemistry to analyze the
association between the expression of these three factors and
clinical-pathological factors of patients.
RESULTS: The protein and mRNA levels of HIF-2a, TWIST2, and SIP1 in the
high-metastasis cell line (ACC-M) were much higher than those of the
low-metastasis cell line (ACC-2). The positive expression of HIF-2a, TWIST2, and 
SIP1 (71.07%, 42.98%, and 38.02%, respectively) was associated with the
perineural invasion, the local recurrence, and distant metastasis of patients
with ACC (P < 0.05). The patients with the positive coexpression of the three
factors had a lower survival rate than those with the negative expression (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: It is proposed that the elevated expression of HIF-2a, TWIST2, and
SIP1 can contribute to invasion and metastasis of ACC, and there might be some
correlation between the hypoxia microenvironment and EMT in ACC.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22103974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027324. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Twist controls skeletal development and dorsoventral patterning by regulating
runx2 in zebrafish.

Yang DC(1), Tsai CC, Liao YF, Fu HC, Tsay HJ, Huang TF, Chen YH, Hung SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Twist1a and twist1b are the principal components of twists that
negatively regulate a number of cellular signaling events. Expression of runx2
and downstream targets is essential for skeletal development and ventral
organizer formation and specification in early vertebrate embryos, but what
controls ventral activity of maternal runx2 and how twists function in zebrafish 
embryogenesis still remain unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By studying the loss of twist induced by
injection of morpholino-oligonucleotide in zebrafish, we found that twist1a and
twist1b, but not twist2 or twist3, were required for proper skeletal development 
and dorsoventral patterning in early embryos. Overexpression of twist1a or
twist1b following mRNA injection resulted in deteriorated skeletal development
and formation of typical dorsalized embryos, whereas knockdown of twist1a and
twist1b led to the formation of abnormal embryos with enhanced skeletal formation
and typical ventralized patterning. Overexpression of twist1a or twist1b
decreased the expression of runx2b, whereas twist1a and twist1b knockdown
increased runx2b expression. We have further demonstrated that phenotypes induced
by twist1a and twist1b knockdown were rescued by runx2b knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these results suggest that twist1a and
twist1b control skeletal development and dorsoventral patterning by regulating
runx2b in zebrafish and provide potential targets for the treatment of diseases
or syndromes associated with decreased skeletal development.

PMCID: PMC3210159
PMID: 22087291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Haematologica. 2012 Mar;97(3):371-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.049593. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Epigenetic inactivation of TWIST2 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia modulates
proliferation, cell survival and chemosensitivity.

Thathia SH(1), Ferguson S, Gautrey HE, van Otterdijk SD, Hili M, Rand V, Moorman 
AV, Meyer S, Brown R, Strathdee G.

Author information: 
(1)Crucible Laboratory, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Altered regulation of many transcription factors has been shown to be
important in the development of leukemia. TWIST2 modulates the activity of a
number of important transcription factors and is known to be a regulator of
hematopoietic differentiation. Here, we investigated the significance of
epigenetic regulation of TWIST2 in the control of cell growth and survival and in
response to cytotoxic agents in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
DESIGN AND METHODS: TWIST2 promoter methylation status was assessed
quantitatively, by combined bisulfite and restriction analysis (COBRA) and
pyrosequencing assays, in multiple types of leukemia and TWIST2 expression was
determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
analysis. The functional role of TWIST2 in cell proliferation, survival and
response to chemotherapy was assessed in transient and stable expression systems.
RESULTS: We found that TWIST2 was inactivated in more than 50% of cases of
childhood and adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia through promoter
hypermethylation and that this epigenetic regulation was especially prevalent in 
RUNX1-ETV6-driven cases. Re-expression of TWIST2 in cell lines resulted in a
dramatic reduction in cell growth and induction of apoptosis in the Reh cell
line. Furthermore, re-expression of TWIST2 resulted in increased sensitivity to
the chemotherapeutic agents etoposide, daunorubicin and dexamethasone and TWIST2 
hypermethylation was almost invariably found in relapsed adult acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (91% of samples hypermethylated).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests a dual role for epigenetic inactivation of
TWIST2 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, initially through altering cell growth
and survival properties and subsequently by increasing resistance to
chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3291591
PMID: 22058208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Jan;124(1):112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.09.003. Epub 2011
Oct 22.

Correlation of TWIST2 up-regulation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition during 
tumorigenesis and progression of cervical carcinoma.

Li Y(1), Wang W, Wang W, Yang R, Wang T, Su T, Weng D, Tao T, Li W, Ma D, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Globally, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer among
women, and determining potential targets involved in tumor progression is
necessary. This study investigated the clinic-pathological significance of twist 
homolog 2 (TWIST2), a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, and correlated
TWIST2 and E-cadherin expression in cervical cancer.
METHODS: A series of 142 samples, including 14 cases of normal cervical tissues, 
58 cases of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and 70 cases of squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC), were examined TWIST2 and E-cadherin immunohistochemical
staining and statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Increased cytoplasmic and nuclear expression levels of TWIST2 were
associated with the malignant transformation of cervical epithelium and the
histological progression of cervical cancer. A logistic test showed that TWIST2
was a relatively independent predictor of lymph node metastasis of SCC. Further, 
increased levels of TWIST2 were also associated with aberrant expression of
E-cadherin, an important EMT indicator.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data suggest that TWIST2 overexpression was
significantly linked to cervical cancer progression, which makes it a promising
marker for determining the metastatic potential of cervical cancer, and
up-regulation of TWIST2, in combination with aberrant E-cadherin expression in
primary cervical cancer tissues, may predict the malignant transformation and
distal metastasis of carcinomas.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;43(12):1782-91. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.08.017. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Linoleic acid induces an EMT-like process in mammary epithelial cells MCF10A.

Espinosa-Neira R(1), Mejia-Rangel J, Cortes-Reynosa P, Salazar EP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Cinvestav-IPN, Av. IPN # 2508, San Pedro
Zacatenco, Mexico, DF 07360, Mexico.

Epidemiological studies and animal models suggest an association between high
levels of dietary fat intake and an increased risk of developing breast cancer.
Epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) is a process, by which epithelial cells
are transdifferentiated to a mesenchymal state, and it has been implicated in
cancer progression, including invasion and metastasis. Linoleic acid (LA) induces
proliferation and invasion in breast cancer cells. However, the role of LA on the
EMT process in human mammary epithelial cells remains to be studied. In the
present study, we demonstrate that LA induces a transient down-regulation of
E-cadherin expression, accompanied with an increase of Snail1, Snail2, Twist1,
Twist2 and Sip1 expressions. Furthermore, LA induces FAK and NF<U+03BA>B activation,
MMP-2 and -9 secretions, migration and invasion. In summary, our findings
demonstrate, for the first time, that LA promotes an EMT-like process in MCF10A
human mammary epithelial cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Med Genet. 2011 Oct;48(10):716-20. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100251.

Setleis syndrome in Mexican-Nahua sibs due to a homozygous TWIST2 frameshift
mutation and partial expression in heterozygotes: review of the focal facial
dermal dysplasias and subtype reclassification.

Cervantes-Barragán DE(1), Villarroel CE, Medrano-Hernández A, Durán-McKinster C, 
Bosch-Canto V, Del-Castillo V, Nazarenko I, Yang A, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, National Institute of Pediatrics of Mexico,
Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: The focal facial dermal dysplasias (FFDDs) are a group of inherited
disorders of facial development, characterised by bitemporal or preauricular
scar-like defects, the former resembling 'forceps marks'. Recently, different
homozygous TWIST2 nonsense mutations were reported in unrelated Setleis syndrome 
(FFDD Type III) patients from consanguineous families, consistent with autosomal 
recessive inheritance. Mexican-Nahua sibs with facial and ophthalmologic features
of FFDD type III were evaluated.
METHODS: Genomic DNAs were isolated for sequencing of the TWIST2 gene. The
clinical features and inheritance of all previously reported FFDD patients were
reviewed.
RESULTS: The affected sibs were homozygous for a novel TWIST2 frameshift
mutation, c.168delC (p.S57AfsX45). Notably, both parents and two heterozygous
sibs had distichiasis and partial absence of lower eyelashes. The FFDD subtypes
were reclassified: the 'Brauer-Setleis' phenotype (autosomal dominant with
variable expressivity) as FFDD type II; and patients with preauricular lesions as
a new subtype, FFDD type IV.
CONCLUSIONS: FFDD type III heterozygotes with TWIST2 mutations may have syndromic
manifestations. Review of previous FFDD patients resulted in reclassification of 
the subtypes.

PMID: 21931173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):70-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23329.

The basic helix loop helix transcription factor Twist1 is a novel regulator of
ATF4 in osteoblasts.

Danciu TE(1), Li Y, Koh A, Xiao G, McCauley LK, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School of
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1245, USA. tdanciu@umich.edu

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is an essential regulator of endochondral bone
formation and an important anabolic agent for the reversal of bone loss. PTH
mediates its functions in part by regulating binding of the bone-related
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) to the osteoblast-specific gene,
osteocalcin. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors Twist1 and Twist2 also
regulate osteocalcin transcription in part through the interaction of the
C-terminal "box" domain in these factors and Runx2. In this study, we discovered 
a novel function of PTH: its ability to dramatically decrease Twist1
transcription. Since ATF4 is a major regulator of the PTH response in
osteoblasts, we assessed the mutual regulation between these factors and
determined that Twist proteins and ATF4 physically interact in a manner that
affects ATF4 DNA binding function. We mapped the interaction domain of Twist
proteins to the C-terminal "box" domain and of ATF4, to the N-terminus.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Twist1 overexpression in osteoblasts attenuates 
ATF4 binding to the osteocalcin promoter in response to PTH. This study thus
identifies Twist proteins as novel inhibitory binding partners of ATF4 and
explores the functional significance of this interaction.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3414260
PMID: 21866569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Cell Int. 2011 Aug 16;11:28. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-11-28.

Murine mammary tumor cells with a claudin-low genotype.

Campbell CI(1), Thompson DE, Siwicky MD, Moorehead RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G2W1, Canada. rmoorehe@uoguelph.ca.

BACKGROUND: Molecular classification of human breast cancers has identified at
least 5 distinct tumor subtypes; luminal A, luminal B, Her2-enriched, basal-like 
and claudin-low. The claudin-low subtype was identified in 2007 and is
characterized by low expression of luminal differentiation markers and claudins
3, 4 and 7 and high levels of mesenchymal markers. Claudin-low tumors have a
reported prevalence of 7-14% and these tumors have a poor prognosis.
RESULTS: In this study we report the characterization of several cell lines
established from mammary tumors that develop in MTB-IGFIR transgenic mice. Two
lines, RM11A and RJ348 present with histological features and gene expression
patterns that resemble claudin-low breast tumors. Specifically, RM11A and RJ348
cells express high levels of the mesenchymal genes Zeb1, Zeb2, Twist1 and Twist2 
and very low levels of E-cadherin and claudins 3, 4 and 7. The RM11A and RJ348
cells are also highly tumorigenic when re-introduced into the mammary fat pad of 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Mammary tumor cells established from MTB-IGFIR transgenic mice can
be used as in vitro and in vivo model systems to further our understanding of the
poorly characterized, claudin-low, breast cancer subtype.

PMCID: PMC3170246
PMID: 21846397  [PubMed]


86. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;43(10):1523-31. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.07.003. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Nonsense mutations of the bHLH transcription factor TWIST2 found in Setleis
Syndrome patients cause dysregulation of periostin.

Franco HL(1), Casasnovas JJ, Leon RG, Friesel R, Ge Y, Desnick RJ, Cadilla CL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, UPR School of
Medicine, San Juan, PR 00936, USA.

Setleis Syndrome (OMIM ID: 227260) is a rare autosomal recessive disease
characterized by abnormal facial development. Recently, we have reported that two
nonsense mutations (c.486C>T [Q119X] and c.324C>T [Q65X]) of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor TWIST2 cause Setleis Syndrome. Here 
we show that periostin, a cell adhesion protein involved in connective tissue
development and maintenance, is down-regulated in Setleis Syndrome patient
fibroblast cells and that periostin positively responds to manipulations in
TWIST2 levels, suggesting that TWIST2 is a transactivator of periostin.
Functional analysis of the TWIST2 mutant form (Q119X) revealed that it maintains 
the ability to localize to the nucleus, forms homo and heterodimers with the
ubiquitous bHLH protein E12, and binds to dsDNA. Reporter gene assays using
deletion constructs of the human periostin promoter also reveal that TWIST2 can
activate this gene more specifically than Twist1, while the Q119X mutant results 
in no significant transactivation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that
both wild-type TWIST2 and the Q119X mutant bind the periostin promoter, however
only wild-type TWIST2 is associated with higher levels of histone acetylation
across the 5'-regulatory region of periostin. Taken together, these data suggest 
that the C-terminal domain of TWIST2, which is missing in the Q119X mutant form
of TWIST2, is responsible for proper transactivation of the periostin gene.
Improper regulation of periostin by the mutant form of TWIST2 could help explain 
some of the soft tissue abnormalities seen in these patients therefore providing 
a genotype-phenotype relationship for Setleis Syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163740
PMID: 21801849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021433. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Discordant gene expression signatures and related phenotypic differences in lamin
A- and A/C-related Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS).

Plasilova M(1), Chattopadhyay C, Ghosh A, Wenzel F, Demougin P, Noppen C, Schaub 
N, Szinnai G, Terracciano L, Heinimann K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Human Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel,
and Division of Medical Genetics, University Children's Hospital, Basel,
Switzerland. martina.plasilova@unibas.ch

Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a genetic disorder displaying
features reminiscent of premature senescence caused by germline mutations in the 
LMNA gene encoding lamin A and C, essential components of the nuclear lamina. By 
studying a family with homozygous LMNA mutation (K542N), we showed that HGPS can 
also be caused by mutations affecting both isoforms, lamin A and C. Here, we
aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis in both, 
lamin A- (sporadic) and lamin A and C-related (hereditary) HGPS. For this, we
performed detailed molecular studies on primary fibroblasts of hetero- and
homozygous LMNA K542N mutation carriers, accompanied with clinical examinations
related to the molecular findings. By assessing global gene expression we found
substantial overlap in altered transcription profiles (13.7%; 90/657) in sporadic
and hereditary HGPS, with 83.3% (75/90) concordant and 16.7% (15/90) discordant
transcriptional changes. Among the concordant ones we observed down-regulation of
TWIST2, whose inactivation in mice and humans leads to loss of subcutaneous fat
and dermal appendages, and loss of expression in dermal fibroblasts and
periadnexial cells from a LMNA(K542N/K542N) patient further confirming its
pivotal role in skin development. Among the discordant transcriptional profiles
we identified two key mediators of vascular calcification and bone metabolism,
ENPP1 and OPG, which offer a molecular explanation for the major phenotypic
differences in vascular and bone disease in sporadic and hereditary HGPS.
Finally, this study correlates reduced TWIST2 and OPG expression with increased
osteocalcin levels, thereby linking altered bone remodeling to energy homeostasis
in hereditary HGPS.

PMCID: PMC3124505
PMID: 21738662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Surg Res. 2012 Jan;172(1):40-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.04.043. Epub 2011 May
17.

Mesenchymal-specific inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
attenuates growth in neonatal mice.

Matthews JA(1), Sala FG, Speer AL, Li Y, Warburton D, Grikscheit TC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine Program, Saban Research
Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key mediator of
angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. However, the role of VEGF in the regulation of
neonatal mouse development is not completely defined. We sought to determine the 
effect of VEGF inhibition on the development of the neonatal mouse using a
transgenic approach.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We generated triple transgenic mice that express the
soluble VEGF receptor, (sFlt-1), specifically in the mesenchyme (dermo-1(Cre)-
tetracycline reverse transcriptional activator (rtTA)(flox/flox)-tet(0)-sflt-1). 
Mothers of the pups (transgenic and littermate controls) were fed doxycycline
chow at birth for transgene activation via breast milk, and the pups were
sacrificed at various time points. To test reversibility of the phenotype, mice
from both groups (n = 6) were switched to normal chow at P50 and monthly weights 
were measured for 9 mo.
RESULTS: Dermo-1(Cre)-rtTA(flox/flox)-tet(0)-sflt-1 mice were smaller compared
with littermate controls at P21. There was a significant reduction in tissue VEGF
levels following sFlt-1 expression. The rate of growth was reduced but did not
impact overall survival after 1 y. A significant reduction in organ size as a
percentage body weight was seen in the kidney and stomach, whereas the weight of 
the colon and spleen were relatively increased; however, no gross histologic
difference was observed. After 6 mo on normal diet, the
dermo-1(Cre)-rtTA(flox/flox)-tet(0)-sflt-1 mouse's weight doubled, indicating
reversibility of phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Mesenchymal-specific inhibition of VEGF in neonatal mice results in a
severe but reversible arrest in somatic growth that does not affect overall
survival at 1 yr. This mouse is a useful tool to test the function of VEGF in
somatic growth.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21696760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Differentiation. 2011 Sep;82(2):77-88. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.05.010.

Isolation and cellular properties of mesenchymal cells derived from the decidua
of human term placenta.

Kanematsu D(1), Shofuda T, Yamamoto A, Ban C, Ueda T, Yamasaki M, Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka
National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, 2-1-14 Hoenzaka, Chuo-ku,
Osaka 540-0006, Japan.

The clinical promise of cell-based therapies is generally recognized, and has
driven an intense search for good cell sources. In this study, we isolated
plastic-adherent cells from human term decidua vera, called
decidua-derived-mesenchymal cells (DMCs), and compared their properties with
those of bone marrow-derived-mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs). The DMCs strongly 
expressed the mesenchymal cell marker vimentin, but not cytokeratin 19 or HLA-G, 
and had a high proliferative potential. That is, they exhibited a typical
fibroblast-like morphology for over 30 population doublings. Cells phenotypically
identical to the DMCs were identified in the decidua vera, and genotyping
confirmed that the DMCs were derived from the maternal components of the fetal
adnexa. Flow cytometry analysis showed that the expression pattern of CD antigens
on the DMCs was almost identical to that on BM-MSCs, but some DMCs expressed the 
CD45 antigen, and over 50% of them also expressed anti-fibroblast antigen. In
vitro, the DMCs showed good differentiation into chondrocytes and moderate
differentiation into adipocytes, but scant evidence of osteogenesis, compared
with the BM-MSCs. Gene expression analysis showed that, compared with BM-MSCs,
the DMCs expressed higher levels of TWIST2 and RUNX2 (which are associated with
early mesenchymal development and/or proliferative capacity), several matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP1, 3, 10, and 12), and cytokines (BMP2 and TGFB2), and
lower levels of MSX2, interleukin 26, and HGF. Although DMCs did not show the
full multipotency of BM-MSCs, their higher proliferative ability indicates that
their cultivation would require less maintenance. Furthermore, the use of DMCs
avoids the ethical concerns associated with the use of embryonic tissues, because
they are derived from the maternal portion of the placenta, which is otherwise
discarded. Thus, the unique properties of DMCs give them several advantages for
clinical use, making them an interesting and attractive alternative to MSCs for
regenerative medicine.

2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21684674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Stem Cells. 2011 Jul;29(7):1102-11. doi: 10.1002/stem.661.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (Fgf2) inhibits differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells by inducing Twist2 and Spry4, blocking extracellular regulated kinase
activation, and altering Fgf receptor expression levels.

Lai WT(1), Krishnappa V, Phinney DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Tulane University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are known to differentiate into connective tissue
lineages but intracellular signaling pathways that maintain cells in an
undifferentiated state remain largely unexplored. Previously, we reported that
fibroblast growth factor 2 (Fgf2) reversibly inhibited multilineage
differentiation of primary mouse MSCs and now identify a unique compliment of
signaling proteins that are dynamically regulated by this mitogen and whose
expression levels are strongly correlated with inhibition of cell
differentiation. Fgf2 selectively induced expression of Twist2 and Sprouty4
(Spry4) and repressed expression of soluble frizzled related receptor 2 (Sfrp2), 
runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), and peroxisome proliferation
activated receptor gamma (Pparg). In contrast, Wnt3a induced expression of Twist 
but not Twist2 or Spry4 and bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2) failed to alter
expression of all three genes. Moreover, pretreatment of MSCs with Fgf2 delayed
extracellular regulated kinase 1 (Erk1) and Erk2 phosphorylation and repressed
bone-specific gene expression during an osteoinduction time course.
Alternatively, pretreatment with Wnt3a had no effect, whereas Bmp2 pretreatment
augmented Erk1/2 activation and bone-specific gene expression. Fgf2 also induced 
expression of Fgf receptor 1 (Fgfr1) and Fgfr4 and repressed Fgfr2 and Fgfr3
expression in MSCs, whereas Wnt3a and Bmp2 had the opposite effect. Finally,
immunostaining revealed that Twist and Spry4 were coexpressed in MSCs and that
Fgf2 treatment altered their subcellular distribution in a manner consistent with
their mode of action. Collectively, these studies demonstrate that inhibition of 
mouse MSC differentiation by Fgf2 is strongly correlated with upregulation of
Twist2 and Spry4 and suppression of Erk1/2 activation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3410557
PMID: 21608080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oncogene. 2011 Nov 24;30(47):4707-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.181. Epub 2011 May
23.

Twist2 contributes to breast cancer progression by promoting an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem-like cell self-renewal.

Fang X(1), Cai Y, Liu J, Wang Z, Wu Q, Zhang Z, Yang CJ, Yuan L, Ouyang G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Stress Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, China.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a highly conserved cellular
programme that has an important role in normal embryogenesis and in cancer
invasion and metastasis. We report here that Twist2, a tissue-specific basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is overexpressed in human breast cancers
and lymph node metastases. In mammary epithelial cells and breast cancer cells,
ectopic overexpression of Twist2 results in morphological transformation,
downregulation of epithelial markers and upregulation of mesenchymal markers.
Moreover, Twist2 enhances the cell migration and colony-forming abilities of
mammary epithelial cells and breast cancer cells in vitro and promotes tumour
growth in vivo. Ectopic expression of Twist2 in mammary epithelial cells and
breast cancer cells increases the size and number of their CD44(high)/CD24(low)
stem-like cell sub-populations, promotes the expression of stem cell markers and 
enhances the self-renewal capabilities of stem-like cells. In addition, exogenous
expression of Twist2 leads to constitutive activation of STAT3 (signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3) and downregulation of E-cadherin. Thus, the
overexpression of Twist2 may contribute to breast cancer progression by
activating the EMT programme and enhancing the self-renewal of cancer stem-like
cells.

PMID: 21602879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oral Oncol. 2011 Feb;47(2):92-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.11.014. Epub
2010 Dec 16.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha, in association with TWIST2 and SNIP1, is a
critical prognostic factor in patients with tongue squamous cell carcinoma.

Liang X(1), Zheng M, Jiang J, Zhu G, Yang J, Tang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China College of
Stomatology, Sichuan University, No. 14, Sec. 3, Renminnan Road, Chengdu Sichuan 
610041, People's Republic of China.

It has become apparent that hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)
activation have the potential of modulating the activity of major
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-triggering pathways by regulating the
expression and activity levels of major transcriptional repressors. The aim of
our study was to elucidate the role of HIF-1a and HIF-2a, and EMT regulators
TWIST2 and SMAD nuclear interacting protein-1 (SNIP1) in tongue squamous cell
carcinoma (TSCC). A retrospective analysis of 89 patients with TSCC from
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University between 2002 and 2005 was performed using immunohistochemistry
in paraffin-embedded and formalin-fixed tissues to analyze HIF-1a, HIF-2a, TWIST2
and SNIP1 expression. The association between HIF-1a, HIF-2a, TWIST2 and SNIP1
expression and patient survivals was investigated. Our results showed that
overexpression of HIF-1a, HIF-2a, TWIST2 and SNIP1 were shown in 49.44% (44/89), 
55.06% (49/89), 44.94% (40/89) and 34.83% (31/89) of TSCC, respectively.
Overexpression of HIF-1a, TWIST2 and SNIP1 in TSCC was associated with a shorter 
disease-free survival (P=0.003, P=0.001, P=0.040, respectively), and HIF-2a had
no significant association with either overall survival (P=0.195) or disease-free
survival (P=0.356). Co-expression of more than two markers of HIF-1a, TWIST2 and 
SNIP1 was an independent prognostic indicator for both overall survival and
disease-free survival by multivariate Cox proportional hazards model. It is
proposed that co-expression of more than two markers from HIF-1a, TWIST2 and
SNIP1 might be a significant prognostic predictor in patients with TSCC.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncol Rep. 2011 Jan;25(1):107-11.

Differential methylation of CpG islands within the dermo1 gene promoter in
several cancer cell lines.

Mao Y(1), Toh HB, Ding Z, Sun L, Hong L, Chen CS, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R. China.

Inactivation of tumor-related genes by promoter hypermethylation is a common
epigenetic event in the development of variety of tumors. Dermo1 (also called
twist2) is a novel cancer-related gene which belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family. Herein, we report that
dermo1 expression was sporadically abrogated in human cancer cells by
transcriptional silencing associated with CpG island promoter hypermethylation.
Direct sequencing of bisulfite-modified DNA from a panel of seven human cancer
cell lines (HL60, Molm14, MV4-11, RS4:11, MDM-BA231, H358, and H1299) revealed
that CpG dinucleotides in the dermo1 promoter were methylated. RT-PCR results
demonstrated that dermo1 CpG island hypermethylation was accompanied by a low
basal dermo1 expression level. Our data implicate dermo1 as a tumor suppressor
gene and a valuable molecular marker for human cancer.

PMID: 21109964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2010;2010:658954. doi: 10.1155/2010/658954. Epub 2010 Oct
17.

The availability of a recombinant anti-SNAP antibody in VHH format amplifies the 
application flexibility of SNAP-tagged proteins.

Aliprandi M(1), Sparacio E, Pivetta F, Ossolengo G, Maestro R, de Marco A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Chemistry Unit, Cogentech, IFOM-IEO Campus for Oncogenomics, Via
Adamello 16, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Antibodies are indispensable reagents in basic research, and those raised against
tags constitute a useful tool for the evaluation of the biochemistry and biology 
of novel proteins. In this paper, we describe the isolation and characterization 
of a single-domain recombinant antibody (VHH) specific for the SNAP-tag, using
Twist2 as a test-protein. The antibody was efficient in western blot,
immunoprecipitation, immunopurification, and immunofluorescence. The sequence
corresponding to the anti-SNAP has been subcloned for large-scale expression in
vectors that allow its fusion to either a 6xHis-tag or the Fc domain of rabbit
IgG2 taking advantage of a new plasmid that was specifically designed for VHH
antibodies. The two different fusion antibodies were compared in
immunopurification and immunofluorescence experiments, and the recombinant
protein SNAP-Twist2 was accurately identified by the anti-SNAP Fc-VHH construct
in the nuclear/nucleolar subcellular compartment. Furthermore, such localization 
was confirmed by direct Twist2 identification by means of anti-Twisit2 VHH
antibodies recovered after panning of the same naïve phage display library used
to isolate the anti-SNAP binders. Our successful localization of Twist2 protein
using the SNAP-tag-based approach and the anti-Twist2-specific recombinant
single-domain antibodies opens new research possibilities in this field.

PMCID: PMC2963136
PMID: 20981296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3973-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.056473. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Role of canonical Wnt signaling/ß-catenin via Dermo1 in cranial dermal cell
development.

Tran TH(1), Jarrell A, Zentner GE, Welsh A, Brownell I, Scacheri PC, Atit R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106,
USA.

Cranial dermis develops from cephalic mesoderm and neural crest cells, but what
signal(s) specifies the dermal lineage is unclear. Using genetic tools to fate
map and manipulate a cranial mesenchymal progenitor population in the
supraorbital region, we show that the dermal progenitor cells beneath the surface
ectoderm process canonical Wnt signaling at the time of specification. We show
that Wnt signaling/ß-catenin is absolutely required and sufficient for Dermo1
expression and dermal cell identity in the cranium. The absence of the Wnt
signaling cue leads to formation of cartilage in craniofacial and ventral trunk
regions at the expense of dermal and bone lineages. Dermo1 can be a direct
transcription target and may mediate the functional role of Wnt signaling in
dermal precursors. This study reveals a lineage-specific role of canonical Wnt
signaling/ß-catenin in promoting dermal cell fate in distinct precursor
populations.

PMCID: PMC2976281
PMID: 20980404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Lett. 2011 Jan 1;300(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.09.007. Epub
2010 Oct 25.

ZEB1-responsive genes in non-small cell lung cancer.

Gemmill RM(1), Roche J, Potiron VA, Nasarre P, Mitas M, Coldren CD, Helfrich BA, 
Garrett-Mayer E, Bunn PA, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine and the Hollings
Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a developmental process
enabling epithelial cells to gain a migratory mesenchymal phenotype. In cancer,
this process contributes to metastases; however the regulatory signals and
mechanistic details are not fully elucidated. Here, we sought to identify the
subset of genes regulated in lung cancer by ZEB1, an E-box transcriptional
repressor known to induce EMT. Using an Affymetrix-based expression database of
38 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, we identified 324 genes that
correlated negatively with ZEB1 and 142 that were positively correlated. A
mesenchymal gene pattern (low E-cadherin, high Vimentin or N-cadherin) was
significantly associated with ZEB1 and ZEB2, but not with Snail, Slug, Twist1 or 
Twist2. Among eight genes selected for validation, seven were confirmed to
correlate with ZEB1 by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in a series of 22 NSCLC cell
lines, either negatively (CDS1, EpCAM, ESRP1, ESRP2, ST14) or positively (FGFR1, 
Vimentin). In addition, over-expression or knockdown of ZEB1 led to corresponding
changes in gene expression, demonstrating that these genes are also regulated by 
ZEB1, either directly or indirectly. Of note, the combined knockdown of ZEB1 and 
ZEB2 led to apparent synergistic responses in gene expression. Furthermore, these
responses were not restricted to artificial settings, since most genes were
similarly regulated during a physiologic induction of EMT by TGF-ß plus EGF.
Finally, the absence of ST14 (matriptase) was linked to ZEB1 positivity in lung
cancer tissue microarrays, implying that the regulation observed in vitro applies
to the human disease. In summary, this study identifies a new set of
ZEB-regulated genes in human lung cancer cells and supports the hypothesis that
ZEB1 and ZEB2 are key regulators of the EMT process in this disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3337721
PMID: 20980099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Mar;39(4):1177-86. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq890. Epub 2010 Oct
8.

Redundant or separate entities?--roles of Twist1 and Twist2 as molecular switches
during gene transcription.

Franco HL(1), Casasnovas J, Rodríguez-Medina JR, Cadilla CL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Lab, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine
University of Puerto Rico, Medical Sciences Campus, PO Box 365067, San Juan, PR
00936, USA.

Twist1 and Twist2 are highly conserved members of the Twist subfamily of bHLH
proteins responsible for the transcriptional regulation of the developmental
programs in mesenchymal cell lineages. The regulation of such processes requires 
that Twist1 and Twist2 function as molecular switches to activate and repress
target genes by employing several direct and indirect mechanisms. Modes of action
by these proteins include direct DNA binding to conserved E-box sequences and
recruitment of coactivators or repressors, sequestration of E-protein modulators,
and interruption of proper activator/repressor function through protein-protein
interactions. Regulatory outcomes of Twist1 and Twist2 are themselves controlled 
by spatial-temporal expression, phosphoregulation, dimer choice and cellular
localization. Although these two proteins are highly conserved and exhibit
similar functions in vitro, emerging literature have demonstrated different roles
in vivo. The involvement of Twist1 and Twist2 in a broad spectrum of regulatory
pathways highlights the importance of understanding their roles in normal
development, homeostasis and disease. Here we focus on the mechanistic models of 
transcriptional regulation and summarize the similarities and differences between
Twist1 and Twist2 in the context of myogenesis, osteogenesis, immune system
development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3045590
PMID: 20935057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 11;5(8):e12103. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012103.

Tumorigenic WAP-T mouse mammary carcinoma cells: a model for a self-reproducing
homeostatic cancer cell system.

Wegwitz F(1), Kluth MA, Mänz C, Otto B, Gruner K, Heinlein C, Kühl M, Warnecke G,
Schumacher U, Deppert W, Tolstonog GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Heinrich-Pette-Institute for Experimental
Virology and Immunology, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In analogy to normal stem cell differentiation, the current cancer
stem cell (CSC) model presumes a hierarchical organization and an irreversible
differentiation in tumor tissue. Accordingly, CSCs should comprise only a small
subset of the tumor cells, which feeds tumor growth. However, some recent
findings raised doubts on the general applicability of the CSC model and asked
for its refinement.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we analyzed the CSC properties of
mammary carcinoma cells derived from transgenic (WAP-T) mice. We established a
highly tumorigenic WAP-T cell line (G-2 cells) that displays stem-like traits.
G-2 cells, as well as their clonal derivates, are closely related to primary
tumors regarding histology and gene expression profiles, and reflect
heterogeneity regarding their differentiation states. G-2 cultures comprise cell 
populations in distinct differentiation states identified by co-expression of
cytoskeletal proteins (cytokeratins and vimentin), a combination of cell surface 
markers and a set of transcription factors. Cellular subsets sorted according to 
expression of CD24a, CD49f, CD61, Epcam, Sca1, and Thy1 cell surface proteins, or
metabolic markers (e.g. ALDH activity) are competent to reconstitute the initial 
cellular composition. Repopulation efficiency greatly varies between individual
subsets and is influenced by interactions with the respective complementary G-2
cellular subset. The balance between differentiation states is regulated in part 
by the transcription factor Sox10, as depletion of Sox10 led to up-regulation of 
Twist2 and increased the proportion of Thy1-expressing cells representing cells
in a self-renewable, reversible, quasi-mesenchymal differentiation state.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: G-2 cells constitute a self-reproducing cancer cell
system, maintained by bi- and unidirectional conversion of complementary cellular
subsets. Our work contributes to the current controversial discussion on the
existence and nature of CSC and provides a basis for the incorporation of
alternative hypotheses into the CSC model.

PMCID: PMC2920333
PMID: 20730114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 21;29(42):5741-54. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.309. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

MUC4 mucin-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition: a novel mechanism for
metastasis of human ovarian cancer cells.

Ponnusamy MP(1), Lakshmanan I, Jain M, Das S, Chakraborty S, Dey P, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5870, USA.

Erratum in
    Oncogene. 2010 Nov 11;29(45):6084.

The acquisition of invasiveness in ovarian cancer (OC) is accompanied by the
process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The MUC4 mucin is
overexpressed in ovarian tumors and has a role in the invasiveness of OC cells.
The present study was aimed at evaluating the potential involvement of MUC4 in
the metastasis of OC cells by inducing EMT. Ectopic overexpression of MUC4 in OC 
cells (SKOV3-MUC4) resulted in morphological alterations along with a decreased
expression of epithelial markers (E-cadherin and cytokeratin (CK)-18) and an
increased expression of mesenchymal markers (N-cadherin and vimentin) compared
with the control cells (SKOV3-vector). Also, pro-EMT transcription factors
TWIST1, TWIST2 and SNAIL showed an upregulation in SKOV3-MUC4 cells. We further
investigated the pathways upstream of N-cadherin, such as focal adhesion kinase
(FAK), MKK7, JNK1/2 and c-Jun, which were also activated in the SKOV3-MUC4 cells 
compared with SKOV3-vector cells. Inhibition of phospho-FAK (pFAK) and pJNK1/2
decreased N-cadherin expression in the MUC4-overexpressing cells, which further
led to a significant decrease in cellular motility. Knockdown of N-cadherin
decreased the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (ERK1/2),
AKT and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), and inhibited the motility in the
SKOV3-MUC4 cells. Upon in vivo tumorigenesis and metastasis analysis, the
SKOV3-MUC4 cells produced significantly larger tumors and demonstrated a higher
incidence of metastasis to distance organs (peritoneal wall, colon, intestine,
stomach, lymph nodes, liver and diaphragm). Taken together, our study reveals a
novel role for MUC4 in inducing EMT through the upregulation of N-cadherin and
promoting metastasis of OC cells.

PMCID: PMC3005772
PMID: 20697346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):289-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.009.

Homozygous nonsense mutations in TWIST2 cause Setleis syndrome.

Tukel T(1), oic D, Al-Gazali LI, Erazo M, Casasnovas J, Franco HL, Richardson
JA, Olson EN, Cadilla CL, Desnick RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of
New York University, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The focal facial dermal dysplasias (FFDDs) are a group of inherited developmental
disorders in which the characteristic diagnostic feature is bitemporal scar-like 
lesions that resemble forceps marks. To date, the genetic defects underlying
these ectodermal dysplasias have not been determined. To identify the gene defect
causing autosomal-recessive Setleis syndrome (type III FFDD), homozygosity
mapping was performed with genomic DNAs from five affected individuals and 26
members of the consanguineous Puerto Rican (PR) family originally described by
Setleis and colleagues. Microsatellites D2S1397 and D2S2968 were homozygous in
all affected individuals, mapping the disease locus to 2q37.3. Haplotype analyses
of additional markers in the PR family and a consanguineous Arab family further
limited the disease locus to approximately 3 Mb between D2S2949 and D2S2253. Of
the 29 candidate genes in this region, the bHLH transcription factor, TWIST2, was
initially sequenced on the basis of its known involvement in murine facial
development. Homozygous TWIST2 nonsense mutations, c.324C>T and c.486C>T, were
identified in the affected members of the Arab and PR families, respectively.
Characterization of the expressed mutant proteins, p.Q65X and p.Q119X, by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and immunoblot analyses indicated that they
were truncated and unstable. Notably, Setleis syndrome patients and Twist2
knockout mice have similar facial features, indicating the gene's conserved role 
in mammalian development. Although human TWIST2 and TWIST1 encode highly
homologous bHLH transcription factors, the finding that TWIST2 recessive
mutations cause an FFDD and dominant TWIST1 mutations cause Saethre-Chotzen
craniocynostosis suggests that they function independently in skin and bone
development.

PMCID: PMC2917720
PMID: 20691403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Bone. 2010 Nov;47(5):916-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.07.022. Epub 2010 Jul 27.

Isolation of murine bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells using Twist2 Cre
transgenic mice.

Liu Y(1), Wang L, Fatahi R, Kronenberg M, Kalajzic I, Rowe D, Li Y, Maye P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reconstructive Sciences, MC3705, L7007, School of Dental
Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, 263 Farmington Avenue,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

While human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) are of great
interest for their potential therapeutic value, their murine equivalent remains
an important basic research model that can provide critical insights into the
biology of this progenitor cell population. Here we present a novel transgenic
strategy that allowed for the selective identification and isolation of murine
BMSCs at the early stages of stromal cell culture. This strategy involved
crossing Twist2 -Cre mice with Cre reporter mice such as Z/EG or Ai9, which
express EGFP or Tomato fluorescent protein, respectively, upon Cre mediated
excision of a stop sequence. Using this approach, we identified an adherent
fluorescent protein+cell population (T2C+) that is present during the earliest
stages of colony formation and by day 5 of culture represents ~20% of the total
cell population. Cell surface profiling by flow cytometry showed that T2C+cells
are highly positive for SCA1 and CD29 and negative for CD45, CD117, TIE2, and
TER119. Isolation of T2C+cells by FACS selected for a cell population with
skeletal potential that can be directed to differentiate into osteoblasts,
adipocytes, or chondrocytes. We also demonstrated in a calvarial bone defect
model that T2C+cells retain a strong efficacy for osteogenic repair and can
support a hematopoietic environment. Collectively, these studies provide evidence
that the Twist2-Cre x Cre reporter breeding strategy can be used to positively
identify and isolate multipotent murine BMSCs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2952694
PMID: 20673822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell. 2010 Jul 23;142(2):309-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.06.002.

Insulin receptor signaling in osteoblasts regulates postnatal bone acquisition
and body composition.

Fulzele K(1), Riddle RC, DiGirolamo DJ, Cao X, Wan C, Chen D, Faugere MC, Aja S, 
Hussain MA, Brüning JC, Clemens TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Jul 23;142(2):198-200.

Global energy balance in mammals is controlled by the actions of circulating
hormones that coordinate fuel production and utilization in metabolically active 
tissues. Bone-derived osteocalcin, in its undercarboxylated, hormonal form,
regulates fat deposition and is a potent insulin secretagogue. Here, we show that
insulin receptor (IR) signaling in osteoblasts controls osteoblast development
and osteocalcin expression by suppressing the Runx2 inhibitor Twist2. Mice
lacking IR in osteoblasts have low circulating undercarboxylated osteocalcin and 
reduced bone acquisition due to decreased bone formation and deficient numbers of
osteoblasts. With age, these mice develop marked peripheral adiposity and
hyperglycemia accompanied by severe glucose intolerance and insulin resistance.
The metabolic abnormalities in these mice are improved by infusion of
undercarboxylated osteocalcin. These results indicate the existence of a
bone-pancreas endocrine loop through which insulin signaling in the osteoblast
ensures osteoblast differentiation and stimulates osteocalcin production, which
in turn regulates insulin sensitivity and pancreatic insulin secretion.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2925155
PMID: 20655471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Nov;51(11):5561-70. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-5123.
Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Twist2: role in corneal stromal keratocyte proliferation and corneal thickness.

Weaving L(1), Mihelec M, Storen R, Sosic D, Grigg JR, Tam PP, Jamieson RV.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Genetics Research Group, Embryology, Children's Medical Research
Institute, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Save Sight Institute, Sydney,
NSW, Australia.

PURPOSE: Twist2 is a member of a family of bHLH transcription factors critical
for normal mesenchymal proliferation and differentiation. In this study, the
authors analyzed the role of Twist2 in the eye and cornea through examination of 
a Twist2 loss-of-function mouse mutant.
METHODS: Twist2 expression during eye development in the mouse was investigated
using RT-PCR and mRNA slide in situ hybridization. Lineage tracing was performed 
using Cre reporter mice. Morphometric analyses were performed, and cell
proliferation and cell death were investigated by immunohistochemistry using Ki67
and cleaved caspase 3 antibodies, respectively.
RESULTS: In the mouse, Twist2 is expressed first in the periocular mesenchyme and
subsequently in the corneal stroma and endothelium of the developing eye. Loss of
Twist2 function leads to corneal thinning and a reduced population of stromal
keratocytes. The reduction in the stromal cell population can be traced back to
embryonic stages during which the proliferation of stromal progenitor cells is
impaired and to the reduced number of proliferating cells in the corneal limbus
postnatally. Adult Twist2-null mice display enophthalmia and blepharophimosis.
Corneal thinning in mutant mice is not accompanied by glaucoma, an association
reported in human patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Twist2 is required for normal corneal keratocyte proliferation and
eyelid morphogenesis in the mouse. Loss of Twist2 function leads to corneal
thinning because of the reduction in stromal keratocyte proliferation.

PMID: 20574024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cell Struct Funct. 2010;35(1):53-61. Epub 2010 Apr 24.

Potential involvement of Twist2 and Erk in the regulation of osteoblastogenesis
by HB-EGF-EGFR signaling.

Nakamura T(1), Toita H, Yoshimoto A, Nishimura D, Takagi T, Ogawa T, Takeya T,
Ishida-Kitagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Ikoma, Japan.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) family members play important roles in the skeletal
system. In this study, we examined the role of EGF receptor (EGFR) signaling in
osteoblastogenesis in vitro. The expression of HB-EGF and epiregulin (EPR) was
transiently induced within 24 h after osteogenic stimulation, but when
preosteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells were incubated with HB-EGF or EPR, osteoblast
differentiation was inhibited. These effects were Ras-dependent, and ERK
modulated Runx2 activity through the localization of Smad1 and the induction of
Twist2. PI3-kinase was also required for the induction of Twist2. However, the
inhibition of individual signaling pathways was not sufficient to overcome
HB-EGF-mediated inhibition of osteoblast differentiation. Additionally, HB-EGF
treatment promoted the proliferation of preosteoblasts, and this was associated
with the downregulation of p27 at the protein level. These results suggest that
HB-EGF-EGFR signaling inhibits the differentiation of osteoblasts by suppression 
of Runx2 transcriptional activity and enhances proliferation of preosteoblasts by
downregulation of expression of p27.

PMID: 20448405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Pathobiology. 2010;77(2):106-13. doi: 10.1159/000278293. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Negative regulation of the tight junction protein tricellulin by snail-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in gastric carcinoma cells.

Masuda R(1), Semba S, Mizuuchi E, Yanagihara K, Yokozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Pathology, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Tricellulin plays a central role in the sealing of epithelia at
tricellular contacts. We examined the effects of Snail, an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT)-related transcription factor, on the regulation of tricellulin
expression in human gastric carcinoma (GC)-derived cells.
METHOD: Six human GC-derived cell lines were used in this study. Expression and
localization of tricellulin was analyzed by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. Also, a Snail expression vector was transfected into HSC-45
cells to examine altered mRNA levels of tricellulin,E-cadherin, vimentin,
N-cadherin and several EMT transcription factors by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Abundant tricellulin expression was detected in all GC-derived cells
examined. In HSC-45 cells, transduction of Snail decreased the expression levels 
of tricellulin and E-cadherin but increased vimentin and N-cadherin, which was
accompanied by induction of EMT transcription factors such as Twist1, Twist2 and 
Slug. In normal gastric mucosa, tricellulin protein was localized at the
tricellular tight junction; however, in HSC-45 cells, tricellulin protein was
distributed in the cytoplasm. In GC tissues, tricellulin expression at the
cellular membrane was retained in a subset of EMT-negative GCs, and it
disappeared in EMT-positive GCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings in the present study suggest that repression of
tricellulin expression may be related to Snail-induced EMT in human GCs.

PMID: 20332670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Mar;15(3):691-700. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01052.x.

Promotion of hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis through matrix metalloproteinase
activation by epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulator Twist1.

Zhao XL(1), Sun T, Che N, Sun D, Zhao N, Dong XY, Gu Q, Yao Z, Sun BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.

E-cadherin loss is a key biological mechanism in tumour invasion. As a main
regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) mechanism-mediated invasion 
and metastasis, Twist1 plays an important role through its regulation of
E-cadherin expression. However, whether or not Twist2 has the same function in
tumour metastasis remains unclear. The purpose of this study is to investigate
the expressions and different roles of Twist1 and Twist2 in human hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC). The expressions of Twist1 and Twist2 in HCC tissue were
evaluated by immunohistochemical staining. The role of Twist1 and Twist2 in
invasiveness was also evaluated in vitro by using HCC cell lines. Twist1 nuclear 
overexpression is found to be correlated with HCC metastasis, and its expression 
is negatively correlated with E-cadherin expression in human tissue. Twist2, a
Twist1 homology protein, only expresses in the cytoplasm and shows no significant
correlation with HCC metastasis. By ectopic transfection of Twist1 and Twist2
into the HCC cells, HepG2 and PLC, Twist1 is able to down-regulate E-cadherin
expression and promote matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation, specifically in
MMP2 and MMP9. In functional assays, Twist1 is found to promote invasion in HepG2
and PLC cells, but the invasion ability of the groups is not affected Twist2. Our
findings indicate that Twist1 induces HCC invasion via increased activity in
MMPs, leading to poor clinical prognoses. The results of this study also
demonstrate a novel cogitation in Twist2, which has no effect on HCC invasion and
metastasis. Twist1 may contribute to HCC invasion and metastasis and may be used 
as a novel therapeutic target for the inhibition of HCC metastasis.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922390
PMID: 20219012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2010 Apr;137(7):1137-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.045534.

Beta-catenin deficiency causes DiGeorge syndrome-like phenotypes through
regulation of Tbx1.

Huh SH(1), Ornitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO, USA.

DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) is a common genetic disease characterized by pharyngeal
apparatus malformations and defects in cardiovascular, craniofacial and glandular
development. TBX1 is the most likely candidate disease-causing gene and is
located within a 22q11.2 chromosomal deletion that is associated with most cases 
of DGS. Here, we show that canonical Wnt-beta-catenin signaling negatively
regulates Tbx1 expression and that mesenchymal inactivation of beta-catenin
(Ctnnb1) in mice caused abnormalities within the DGS phenotypic spectrum,
including great vessel malformations, hypoplastic pulmonary and aortic arch
arteries, cardiac malformations, micrognathia, thymus hypoplasia and
mislocalization of the parathyroid gland. In a heterozygous Fgf8 or Tbx1 genetic 
background, ectopic activation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling caused an increased 
incidence and severity of DGS-like phenotypes. Additionally, reducing the gene
dosage of Fgf8 rescued pharyngeal arch artery defects caused by loss of Ctnnb1.
These findings identify Wnt-beta-catenin signaling as a crucial upstream
regulator of a Tbx1-Fgf8 signaling pathway and suggest that factors that affect
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling could modify the incidence and severity of DGS.

PMCID: PMC2835329
PMID: 20215350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. BMC Genomics. 2010 Feb 24;11:132. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-132.

Pediatric primary central nervous system germ cell tumors of different prognosis 
groups show characteristic miRNome traits and chromosome copy number variations.

Wang HW(1), Wu YH, Hsieh JY, Liang ML, Chao ME, Liu DJ, Hsu MT, Wong TT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Intracranial pediatric germ cell tumors (GCTs) are rare and
heterogeneous neoplasms and vary in histological differentiation, prognosis and
clinical behavior. Germinoma and mature teratoma are GCTs that have a good
prognosis, while other types of GCTs, termed nongerminomatous malignant germ cell
tumors (NGMGCTs), are tumors with an intermediate or poor prognosis. The second
group of tumors requires more extensive drug and irradiation treatment regimens. 
The mechanisms underlying the differences in incidence and prognosis of the
various GCT subgroups are unclear.
RESULTS: We identified a distinct mRNA profile correlating with GCT histological 
differentiation and prognosis, and also present in this study the first miRNA
profile of pediatric primary intracranial GCTs. Most of the differentially
expressed miRNAs were downregulated in germinomas, but miR-142-5p and miR-146a
were upregulated. Genes responsible for self-renewal (such as POU5F1 (OCT4),
NANOG and KLF4) and the immune response were abundant in germinomas, while genes 
associated with neuron differentiation, Wnt/beta-catenin pathway, invasiveness
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (including SNAI2 (SLUG) and TWIST2) were
abundant in NGMGCTs. Clear transcriptome segregation based on patient survival
was observed, with malignant NGMGCTs being closest to embryonic stem cells.
Chromosome copy number variations (CNVs) at cytobands 4q13.3-4q28.3 and
9p11.2-9q13 correlated with GCT malignancy and clinical risk. Six genes (BANK1,
CXCL9, CXCL11, DDIT4L, ELOVL6 and HERC5) within 4q13.3-4q28.3 were more abundant 
in germinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results integrate molecular profiles with clinical observations 
and provide insights into the underlying mechanisms causing GCT malignancy. The
genes, pathways and microRNAs identified have the potential to be novel
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2837036
PMID: 20178649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cells. 2009 Dec 31;28(6):553-8. doi: 10.1007/s10059-009-0150-8. Epub 2009 Nov
19.

Twist2 regulates CD7 expression and galectin-1-induced apoptosis in mature
T-cells.

Koh HS(1), Lee C, Lee KS, Park EJ, Seong RH, Hong S, Jeon SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Center for Efficacy Assessment and Development 
of Functional Foods and Drugs, Hallym University, Chuncheon 200-702, Korea.

In the periphery, a galectin-1 receptor, CD7, plays crucial roles in
galectin-1-mediated apoptosis of activated T-cells as well as progression of
T-lymphoma. Previously, we demonstrated that NF-kappaB downregulated CD7 gene
expression through the p38 MAPK pathway in developing immature thymocytes.
However, its regulatory pathway is not well understood in functional mature
T-cells. Here, we show that CD7 expression was downregulated by Twist2 in Jurkat 
cells, a human acute T-cell lymphoma cell line, and in EL4 cells, a mature murine
T-cell lymphoma cell line. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Twist2 in Jurkat
cells reduced galectin-1-induced apoptosis. While full-length Twist2 decreased
CD7 promoter activity, a C-terminal deletion form of Twist2 reversed its
inhibition, suggesting an important role of the C-terminus in CD7 regulation. In 
addition, CD7 expression was enhanced by histone deacetylase inhibitors such as
trichostatin A and sodium butyrate, which indicates that Twist2 might be one of
candidate factors involved in histone deacetylation. Based on these results, we
conclude that upregulation of Twist2 increases the resistance to
galectin-1-mediated-apoptosis, which may have significant implications for the
progression of some T-cells into tumors such as Sezary cells.

PMID: 19937140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):873-86.

Hedgehog target genes: mechanisms of carcinogenesis induced by aberrant hedgehog 
signaling activation.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is aberrantly activated in glioma, medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
breast cancer, and other tumors. Hedgehog signals activate GLI family members via
Smoothened. RTK signaling potentiates GLI activity through PI3K-AKT-mediated GSK3
inactivation or RAS-STIL1-mediated SUFU inactivation, while GPCR signaling to Gs 
represses GLI activity through adenylate cyclase-mediated PKA activation. GLI
activators bind to GACCACCCA motif to regulate transcription of GLI1, PTCH1,
PTCH2, HHIP1, MYCN, CCND1, CCND2, BCL2, CFLAR, FOXF1, FOXL1, PRDM1 (BLIMP1),
JAG2, GREM1, and Follistatin. Hedgehog signals are fine-tuned based on positive
feedback loop via GLI1 and negative feedback loop via PTCH1, PTCH2, and HHIP1.
Excessive positive feedback or collapsed negative feedback of Hedgehog signaling 
due to epigenetic or genetic alterations leads to carcinogenesis. Hedgehog
signals induce cellular proliferation through upregulation of N-Myc, Cyclin D/E, 
and FOXM1. Hedgehog signals directly upregulate JAG2, indirectly upregulate
mesenchymal BMP4 via FOXF1 or FOXL1, and also upregulate WNT2B and WNT5A.
Hedgehog signals induce stem cell markers BMI1, LGR5, CD44 and CD133 based on
cross-talk with WNT and/or other signals. Hedgehog signals upregulate BCL2 and
CFLAR to promote cellular survival, SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), ZEB1, ZEB2
(SIP1), TWIST2, and FOXC2 to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
PTHLH (PTHrP) to promote osteolytic bone metastasis. KAAD-cyclopamine,
Mu-SSKYQ-cyclopamine, IPI-269609, SANT1, SANT2, CUR61414 and HhAntag are
small-molecule inhibitors targeted to Smoothened, GANT58, GANT61 to GLI1 and
GLI2, and Robot-nikinin to SHH. Hedgehog signaling inhibitors should be used in
combination with RTK inhibitors, GPCR modulators, and/or irradiation for cancer
therapy.

PMID: 19860666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Prostate. 2010 Feb 15;70(3):276-87. doi: 10.1002/pros.21062.

Microarray analysis reveals potential target genes of NF-kappaB2/p52 in LNCaP
prostate cancer cells.

Nadiminty N(1), Dutt S, Tepper C, Gao AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, California, USA.

PURPOSE: Our previous studies showed that NF-kappaB2/p52 is involved in the
castration-resistant growth of the androgen-sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer
cells. The role of NF-kappaB2/p52 in lymphomagenesis has been studied
extensively, but its target genes in other cancers remain unknown. In order to
identify genes potentially regulated by p52 in prostate cancer cells, we
performed a genome-wide microarray analysis of genes differentially up- or
down-regulated by the overexpression of p52 by adenoviral-mediated gene delivery 
in LNCaP cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Total RNAs from vector control-infected and
Adeno-p52-infected LNCaP cells were used to prepare cDNAs, which were hybridized 
to the Whole Genome Human 44k Microarray chips (Agilent Technologies). Data
analysis was performed using GeneSpring and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. 
Validation of microarray results was performed by real-time quantitative RT-PCR
and Western blot analyses.
RESULTS: Expression of approximately 130 genes was differentially upregulated by 
>5-fold, whereas approximately 60 genes were differentially downregulated by
>2-fold in p52-expressing LNCaP cells. Pathway analysis revealed that the
upregulated genes belong to functional categories like cell growth and
proliferation, cellular movement, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, cancer,
cell cycle, etc., whereas the downregulated genes were represented by functional 
categories like cell movement, antigen presentation, and cell death. Six of the
top upregulated genes including annexin A2, PLAU, RND3, Twist2, VEGFC, and CXCL1 
were validated by real-time PCR and Western blot analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a comprehensive analysis of genes potentially
regulated by NF-kappaB2/p52 in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line and provides a
rationale for the induction of castration-resistant growth by p52 in LNCaP cells.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19827050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Kidney Int. 2009 Aug;76(4):460-1; author reply 461-2. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.164.

It takes two to Twist.

Groot AJ, van Diest PJ, Vooijs MA.

Comment on
    Kidney Int. 2009 Jun;75(12):1278-87.

PMID: 19644484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Stem Cells. 2009 Oct;27(10):2457-68. doi: 10.1002/stem.181.

TWIST family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors mediate human
mesenchymal stem cell growth and commitment.

Isenmann S(1), Arthur A, Zannettino AC, Turner JL, Shi S, Glackin CA, Gronthos S.

Author information: 
(1)Mesenchymal Stem Cell Group, Division of Haematology, Institute of Medical and
Veterinary Science/Hanson Institute/ CSCR, University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

The TWIST family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, Twist-1 and
Dermo-1 are known mediators of mesodermal tissue development and contribute to
correct patterning of the skeleton. In this study, we demonstrate that freshly
purified human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSC) express
high levels of Twist-1 and Dermo-1 which are downregulated following ex vivo
expansion. Enforced expression of Twist-1 or Dermo-1 in human MSC cultures
increased expression of the MSC marker, STRO-1, and the early osteogenic
transcription factors, Runx2 and Msx2. Conversely, overexpression of Twist-1 and 
Dermo-1 was associated with a decrease in the gene expression of
osteoblast-associated markers, bone morphogenic protein-2, bone sialoprotein,
osteopontin, alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin. High expressing Twist-1 or
Dermo-1 MSC lines exhibited an enhanced proliferative potential of approximately 
2.5-fold compared with control MSC populations that were associated with elevated
levels of Id-1 and Id-2 gene expression. Functional studies demonstrated that
high expressing Twist-1 and Dermo-1 MSC displayed a decreased capacity for
osteo/chondrogenic differentiation and an enhanced capacity to undergo
adipogenesis. These findings implicate the TWIST gene family members as potential
mediators of MSC self-renewal and lineage commitment in postnatal skeletal
tissues by exerting their effects on genes involved in the early stages of bone
development.

PMID: 19609939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jul;10(7):778-85. doi: 10.1038/ni.1741. Epub 2009 May 31.

Interleukin 17 acts in synergy with B cell-activating factor to influence B cell 
biology and the pathophysiology of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Doreau A(1), Belot A, Bastid J, Riche B, Trescol-Biemont MC, Ranchin B, Fabien N,
Cochat P, Pouteil-Noble C, Trolliet P, Durieu I, Tebib J, Kassai B, Ansieau S,
Puisieux A, Eliaou JF, Bonnefoy-Bérard N.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Institut Fédératif de Recherche 128, Lyon, France.

Retraction in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Sep;15(9):894.

Studies have suggested involvement of interleukin 17 (IL-17) in autoimmune
diseases, although its effect on B cell biology has not been clearly established.
Here we demonstrate that IL-17 alone or in combination with B cell-activating
factor controlled the survival and proliferation of human B cells and their
differentiation into immunoglobulin-secreting cells. This effect was mediated
mainly through the nuclear factor-kappaB-regulated transcription factor Twist-1. 
In support of the relevance of our observations and the potential involvement of 
IL-17 in B cell biology, we found that the serum of patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus had higher concentrations of IL-17 than did the serum of healthy
people and that IL-17 abundance correlated with the disease severity of systemic 
lupus erythematosus.

PMID: 19483719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jun;34(6):1737-42.

Integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2: Transcriptional regulation of ZEB2 based on
SMADs, ETS1, HIF1alpha, POU/OCT, and NF-kappaB.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is defined as phenotypic change of
epithelial cells into mesenchymal cells. EMT, allowing cellular dissociation from
epithelial tissues, plays a key role in invasion and metastasis during
carcinogenesis as well as in gastrulation and neurulation during embryogenesis.
SNAI1/Snail, SNAI2/Slug, ZEB1/deltaEF1/ZFHX1A, ZEB2/SIP1/ZFHX1B, TWIST1/TWIST,
and TWIST2/DERMO1 are representative EMT regulators. ZEB2 represses transcription
of CDH1, CLDN4, CCND1, TERT, SFRP1, ALPL and miR-200b-200a-429 primary miRNA, and
upregulates transcription of mesenchymal markers. ZEB2 is relatively highly
expressed in brain corpus callosum and monocytes. ZEB2 is expressed in various
types of human tumors, such as breast cancer, gastric cancer, and pancreatic
cancer. TGFbeta, TNFalpha, IL1, AKT and hypoxia signals are involved in ZEB2
upregulation and EMT induction; however precise mechanisms of ZEB2 transcription 
remained unclear. Here, refined integrative genomic analyses of ZEB2 gene were
carried out. ZEB2 was co-expressed with POU3F2 (BRN2) and POU3F3 (BRN1) in brain 
corpus callosum, spinal cord, and fetal brain, whereas ZEB2 was co-expressed with
POU2F2 (OCT2) in monocytes. Ets-Smad-binding CGGAGAC motif, bHLH-binding site,
and POU/OCT-binding site within proximal promoter region, and NF-kappaB-binding
site within intron 2 were completely conserved in human ZEB2, chimpanzee ZEB2,
cow ZEB2, mouse Zeb2, rat Zeb2, and chicken zeb2 genes. In addition,
HIF1alpha-binding site within proximal promoter region was conserved in mammalian
ZEB2 orthologs. Consensus binding site for Hedgehog effector GLI was not
identified within or adjacent to the 7-kb regions of human ZEB2 gene. TGFbeta,
TNFalpha, IL1, and hypoxia signals directly upregulate ZEB2 to induce EMT, growth
arrest, and senescence, whereas Hedgehog signals indirectly upregulate ZEB2 via
TGFbeta. Together these facts indicate that ZEB2, occupying the crossroads of
inflammation, aging and carcinogenesis, is an important target for drug
discovery.

PMID: 19424592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2009 Apr 20;12(4):294-9. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2009.04.07.

[High expression of twist is positively correlated with the differentiation of
lung cancer.].

[Article in Chinese]

Hui L(1), Liu B, Zhao L, Zhang S, Zhou B, Qiu X, Cui Z.

Author information: 
(1)CTR Laboratory Technology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

BACKGROUND: Twist has been identified as a promoting factor for
epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT), which enhances the metastatic potential
of cancer. The aim of this study is to detect the expression of Twist in lung
cancer tissues and cell lines, and analyze its relationship with
clinicopathologic characteristics and biological behavior of lung cancer.
METHODS: Twist expression was examined in 68 lung cancer specimens and 8 normal
lung specimens using immunohistochemistry (S-P method). Expression levels of
Twist1 and Twist2 mRNA were detected using transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) in HBE and 8 lung cancer cell lines. Immunofluorescence was
used to detect the Twist protein expression levels and subcellular localization
in lung cancer cells and HBE (human normal bronchi epithelium) cells.
RESULTS: Among 68 lung cancer specimens, 9 samples showed weak expression of
Twist 13.24% (9 of 68), 75.00% (51 of 68) lung cancer specimens showed moderate
to strong Twist staining whereas 8 corresponding normal lung specimens showed
weak staining extent. Twist expression level was positively correlated with
differentiation (P =0.002) and age (P =0.012). Twist1 and Twist2 mRNA expression 
levels were incompatible in different histology types. The fluorescence signal of
Twist protein was conspicuous in lung squamous cell carcinoma cells and
adencarcinoma cells, primarily in cytoplasm, but low in HBE.
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of Twist in lung cancer was associated with
differentiation. Twist could be used as a valuable biomarker to evaluate the
progression of lung cancer.

PMID: 20719114  [PubMed]


117. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(1):67-75.

Transcriptional heterogeneity in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Tanaka TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Institute for Genomic Biology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1207 West Gregory Drive, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
ttanaka@illinois.edu

The embryonic stem (ES) cell is a stem cell derived from early embryos that can
indefinitely repeat self-renewing cell division cycles as an undifferentiated
cell in vitro and give rise to all specialised cell types in the body. However,
manipulating ES cell differentiation in vitro is a challenge due to, at least in 
part, heterogeneous gene induction. Recent experimental evidence has demonstrated
that undifferentiated mouse ES cells maintained in culture exhibit heterogeneous 
expression of Dppa3, Nanog, Rex1, Pecam1 and Zscan4 as well as genes
(Brachyury/T, Rhox6/9 and Twist2) normally expressed in specialised cell types.
The Nanog-negative, Rex1-negative or T-positive ES cell subpopulation has a
unique differentiation potential. Thus, studying the mechanism that generates ES 
cell subpopulations will improve manipulation of ES cell fate and help our
understanding of the nature of embryonic development.

PMID: 19152747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec 16;6(12):e316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060316.

Twist-2 controls myeloid lineage development and function.

Sharabi AB(1), Aldrich M, Sosic D, Olson EN, Friedman AD, Lee SH, Chen SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors play critical roles in
lymphoid and erythroid development; however, little is known about their role in 
myeloid lineage development. In this study, we identify the bHLH transcription
factor Twist-2 as a key negative regulator of myeloid lineage development, as
manifested by marked increases in mature myeloid populations of macrophages,
neutrophils, and basophils in Twist-2-deficient mice. Mechanistic studies
demonstrate that Twist-2 inhibits the proliferation as well as differentiation of
granulocyte macrophage progenitors (GMP) by interacting with and inhibiting the
transcription factors Runx1 and C/EBPalpha. Moreover, Twist-2 was found to have a
contrasting effect on cytokine production: inhibiting the production of
proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-12 (IL-12) and interferon-gamma
(IFNgamma) while promoting the regulatory cytokine IL-10 by myeloid cells. The
data from further analyses suggest that Twist-2 activates the transcription
factor c-Maf, leading to IL-10 expression. In addition, Twist-2 was found to be
essential for endotoxin tolerance. Thus, this study reveals the critical role of 
Twist-2 in regulating the development of myeloid lineages, as well as the
function and inflammatory responses of mature myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC2602725
PMID: 19090621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 15;68(24):10377-86. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1444.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition induced by growth suppressor p12CDK2-AP1
promotes tumor cell local invasion but suppresses distant colony growth.

Tsuji T(1), Ibaragi S, Shima K, Hu MG, Katsurano M, Sasaki A, Hu GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Molecular Oncology
Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been considered essential for
metastasis, a multistep process including local invasion, intravasation,
extravasation, and proliferation at distant sites. However, controversy remains
as to whether EMT truly happens and how important it is to metastasis. We studied
the involvement of EMT in individual steps of metastasis and found that
p12(CDK2-AP1), a down-stream effector of transforming growth factor beta, induced
EMT of hamster cheek pouch carcinoma-1 cells by promoting the expression of
Twist2. EMT cells have an increased invasive but decreased metastatic phenotype. 
When s.c. inoculated, both EMT and non-EMT cells established primary tumors, but 
only EMT cells invaded into the adjacent tissues and blood vessels; however,
neither cells formed lung metastases. When i.v. inoculated, only non-EMT cells
established lung metastases. Moreover, s.c. inoculation of a mixture of the two
cell types resulted in intravasation of both cell types and formation of lung
metastasis from non-EMT cells. Our results allowed us to propose a novel model
for the role of EMT in cancer metastasis. We showed that EMT and non-EMT cells
cooperate to complete the spontaneous metastasis process. We thus hypothesize
that EMT cells are responsible for degrading the surrounding matrix to lead the
way of invasion and intravasation. Non-EMT cells then enter the blood stream and 
reestablish colonies in the secondary sites.

PMCID: PMC2605670
PMID: 19074907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Ann Pharm Fr. 2008 Nov-Dec;66(5-6):278-87. doi: 10.1016/j.pharma.2008.08.001.
Epub 2008 Oct 16.

[Inactivation of failsafe programs by Twist oncoproteins and tumor progression].

[Article in French]

Puisieux A(1).

Author information: 
(1)U590, Inserm, Lyon, France. puisieux@lyon.fnclcc.fr

Multicellular organisms have developed innate defense mechanisms to prevent the
expansion of abnormal cells with significant proliferative potential. The two
major safeguard mechanisms are premature senescence, which is characterized by
definitive cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis, the most common form of programmed
cell death. In normal and premalignant cells, the control of these processes is
coupled to the regulation of cell proliferation, mainly through the p16 (Ink4A)
-Rb and ARF-p53 intracellular signaling pathways. Hence, in benign tumors,
aberrant mitogenic activity is counterbalanced by the induction of these
oncosuppressive pathways, leading to either apoptosis or senescence which both
limit tumor outgrowth. Progression towards malignant and potentially metastatic
tumors requires the inhibition of these failsafe programs. Based on our work on
Twist oncoproteins, we propose a presentation of recent data on cellular
mechanisms by which cancer cells override the surveillance machinery and escape
senescence and apoptosis, and we will describe the biological impact of this
process on tumor metastasis.

PMID: 19061727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 1;105(2):487-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21844.

Intricate gene regulatory networks of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins support
regulation of bone-tissue related genes during osteoblast differentiation.

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Li ZY, Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are key regulators of neurogenesis, 
myogenesis and osteogenesis. Here the relative contributions of multiple classes 
of HLH factors to the expression of bone related genes during osteoblast
maturation were compared. We examined the expression of a panel of HLH proteins
(e.g., Twist1/2, USF1/2, c-Myc, Id1 approximately 4, E12/47, Stra13) and one Zn
finger protein (Snail which recognizes a subset of E-boxes), during osteoblast
differentiation and their functional contributions to bone phenotypic gene
regulation. While expression of Twist1, Stra13, E12/47 and Snail transcripts
remains relatively constant, expression of Twist2 as well as the inhibitory
factors Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 decreases and USF1 is up-regulated during
osteoblastic differentiation of MC3T3 cells. Forced expression of selected HLH
transcription factors shows that Myc, Snail and USF factors increase expression
of the bone markers osteocalcin (OC) and/or alkaline phosphatase (AP), while
E12/47, Twist and Id factors decrease their expression. None of these factors
affect Runx2 gene expression. Interestingly, Snail enhances expression of
osteoblast markers, while Twist1 and Twist2 factors are cross-regulated and
inhibit bone specific gene expression and other HLH proteins (e.g., Id)
indirectly. Thus, our data suggest that the integrated activities of negative and
positive E-box related regulatory factors control osteoblast differentiation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2612593
PMID: 18655182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genesis. 2008 Jul;46(7):347-56. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20404.

Development of a gene-trap vector with a highly sensitive fluorescent protein
reporter system for expression profiling.

Tanaka TS(1), Davey RE, Lan Q, Zandstra PW, Stanford WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada. ttanaka@uiuc.edu

SUMMARY: Combining high-content screening (HCS) with random gene-trap mutagenesis
could be a powerful tool to investigate transcriptional networks, cell signaling,
chemical genetics, and developmental processes. However, a critical limitation
has been poor quantification of reporter expression per cell. To overcome this
hurdle, we generated a variety of Gtx-based expression cassettes and re-evaluated
translational enhancement of arrayed Gtx segments in tandem by HCS. We then
modified the cassette into a new polyA trap vector, which consists of a variant
of yellow fluorescent protein, Venus, in combination with the Gtx segments.
Expression of Venus was detected in about 60% of trapped genes assayed in
embryonic stem cell (ESC) cultures, comparable to expression screening of
LacZ-based vectors. Furthermore, tetraploid aggregations using a clone encoding a
gene-trap insertion into Twist2 demonstrated identical spatiotemporal expression 
between Venus and Twist2. This highly sensitive reporter system is amenable to
high-throughput expression-based real-time HCS including single cell analyses.

PMID: 18615730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):79-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.06.005.

Induction of EMT by twist proteins as a collateral effect of tumor-promoting
inactivation of premature senescence.

Ansieau S(1), Bastid J, Doreau A, Morel AP, Bouchet BP, Thomas C, Fauvet F,
Puisieux I, Doglioni C, Piccinin S, Maestro R, Voeltzel T, Selmi A,
Valsesia-Wittmann S, Caron de Fromentel C, Puisieux A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U590, Lyon F-69008, France.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):5-7.

Twist1 and Twist2 are major regulators of embryogenesis. Twist1 has been shown to
favor the metastatic dissemination of cancer cells through its ability to induce 
an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Here, we show that a large fraction
of human cancers overexpress Twist1 and/or Twist2. Both proteins override
oncogene-induced premature senescence by abrogating key regulators of the p53-
and Rb-dependent pathways. Twist1 and Twist2 cooperate with Ras to transform
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Interestingly, in epithelial cells, the oncogenic
cooperation between Twist proteins and activated mitogenic oncoproteins, such as 
Ras or ErbB2, leads to complete EMT. These findings suggest an unanticipated
direct link between early escape from failsafe programs and the acquisition of
invasive features by cancer cells.

PMID: 18598946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):5-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.06.012.

Deregulating EMT and senescence: double impact by a single twist.

Smit MA(1), Peeper DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):79-89.

The acquisition of a fully malignant phenotype is limited by several barriers,
including cellular senescence and the requirement to undergo an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Deregulation of these processes is
believed to occur by largely independent events. In this issue of Cancer Cell,
Ansieau et al. (2008) challenge this view.

PMID: 18598938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 23;370(1):149-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.03.049. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

CD7 expression and galectin-1-induced apoptosis of immature thymocytes are
directly regulated by NF-kappaB upon T-cell activation.

Koh HS(1), Lee C, Lee KS, Ham CS, Seong RH, Kim SS, Jeon SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Hallym University, Hallym Daehakgil 39, Chuncheon 
200-702, Republic of Korea.

CD7, one of the galectin-1 receptors, has crucial roles in galectin-1-mediated
apoptosis of activated T-cells and T-lymphoma progression in peripheral tissues. 
In this study, we showed that CD7 promoter activity was increased by NF-kappaB
and that this activity was synergistic when Sp1 was co-expressed in the immature 
T-cell line L7. Site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the CD7 promoter indicated 
that NF-kappaB specifically bound to the NF-kappaE2 site in cooperation with Sp1.
Overexpression of E12 or Twist2 proteins negatively regulated NF-kappaB-mediated 
activity of the CD7 proximal promoter. In addition, CD7 expression was
down-regulated by treatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB20358, or the MSK1
inhibitor H-89. These signaling pathway inhibitors prevented galectin-1-mediated 
apoptosis of immature T-cells. From these results, we concluded that the
regulation of CD7 gene expression through NF-kappaB activation induced by
TCR/CD28 might have significant implications for T-cell homeostasis.

PMID: 18355446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 30;3(1):e1516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001516.

Formation and differentiation of multiple mesenchymal lineages during lung
development is regulated by beta-catenin signaling.

De Langhe SP(1), Carraro G, Tefft D, Li C, Xu X, Chai Y, Minoo P, Hajihosseini
MK, Drouin J, Kaartinen V, Bellusci S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Department of Surgery, Saban Research Institute
of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The role of ss-catenin signaling in mesodermal lineage formation and 
differentiation has been elusive.
METHODOLOGY: To define the role of ss-catenin signaling in these processes, we
used a Dermo1(Twist2)(Cre/+) line to target a floxed beta-catenin allele,
throughout the embryonic mesenchyme. Strikingly, the Dermo1(Cre/+);
beta-catenin(f/-) conditional Knock Out embryos largely phenocopy
Pitx1(-/-)/Pitx2(-/-) double knockout embryos, suggesting that ss-catenin
signaling in the mesenchyme depends mostly on the PITX family of transcription
factors. We have dissected this relationship further in the developing lungs and 
find that mesenchymal deletion of beta-catenin differentially affects two major
mesenchymal lineages. The amplification but not differentiation of
Fgf10-expressing parabronchial smooth muscle progenitor cells is drastically
reduced. In the angioblast-endothelial lineage, however, only differentiation
into mature endothelial cells is impaired.
CONCLUSION: Taken together these findings reveal a hierarchy of gene activity
involving ss-catenin and PITX, as important regulators of mesenchymal cell
proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2211394
PMID: 18231602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Feb;50(2):121-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2007.00982.x.

Molecular mechanism of transforming growth factor-beta-mediated inhibition of
growth arrest and differentiation in a myoblast cell line.

Murakami M(1), Ohkuma M, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Human Gene Sciences Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo
113-8510, Japan.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been demonstrated to inhibit
myogenesis in myoblasts. Here we report that transcriptional upregulation of
p21(WAF1/Cip1) and muscle creatinine kinase (MCK) genes in C2C12 cells, which are
associated with growth arrest at the G1 phase and representative
cell-lineage-specific expression during myogenesis, was inhibited by TGF-beta
treatment. C2C12 cells expressed TWIST2, but not TWIST1, which was downregulated 
in myogenic differentiation in response to low-serum cultures. We further found
that TGF-beta prevented differentiation-associated downregulation of TWIST2
transcription, resulting in maintaining TWIST2 mRNA expression as high as that in
growing C2C12 cells. Ectopic TWIST2 suppressed the p21 and MCK promoters
activated by the exogenous addition of E2A and MyoD and this inhibitory effect of
TWIST2 was cancelled by the introduction of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against
TWIST2. On the other hand, TWIST2 shRNA failed to recover endogenous promoter
activities from TGF-beta-mediated repression. The results clearly indicate that
TGF-beta inhibits G1 arrest and maintains TWIST2 expression in C2C12 cells. Our
data however suggest that the TGF-beta signaling pathway may not involve TWIST2
to inhibit p21 and MCK expression.

PMID: 18211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Endocrinology. 2008 Apr;149(4):1697-704. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and RUNX2-related osteogenic genes
are down-regulated throughout osteogenesis in type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Fowlkes JL(1), Bunn RC, Liu L, Wahl EC, Coleman HN, Cockrell GE, Perrien DS,
Lumpkin CK Jr, Thrailkill KM.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Hospital, 800 Marshall Street, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA.
fowlkesjohnl@uams.edu

Type 1 diabetes mellitus is associated with a number of disorders of skeletal
health, conditions that rely, in part, on dynamic bone formation. A mouse model
of distraction osteogenesis was used to study the consequences of
streptozotocin-induced diabetes and insulin treatment on bone formation and
osteoblastogenesis. In diabetic mice compared with control mice, new bone
formation was decreased, and adipogenesis was increased in and around,
respectively, the distraction gaps. Although insulin treatment restored bone
formation to levels observed in nondiabetic control mice, it failed to
significantly decrease adipogenesis. Molecular events altered during de novo bone
formation in untreated type 1 diabetes mellitus, yet restored with insulin
treatment were examined so as to clarify specific osteogenic genes that may
contribute to diabetic bone disease. RNA from distraction gaps was analyzed by
gene microarray and quantitative RT-PCR for osteogenic genes of interest.
Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), and several RUNX2 target genes,
including matrix metalloproteinase-9, Akp2, integrin binding sialoprotein, Dmp1, 
Col1a2, Phex, Vdr, osteocalcin, and osterix, were all significantly
down-regulated in the insulin-deficient, hyperglycemic diabetic animals; however,
insulin treatment of diabetic animals significantly restored their expression.
Expression of bone morphogenic protein-2, transcriptional coactivator with
PDZ-binding motif, and TWIST2, all important regulators of RUNX2, were not
impacted by the diabetic condition, suggesting that the defect in osteogenesis
resides at the level of RUNX2 expression and its activity. Together, these data
demonstrate that insulin and/or glycemic status can regulate osteogenesis in
vivo, and systemic insulin therapy can, in large part, rescue the diabetic bone
phenotype at the tissue and molecular level.

PMCID: PMC2276714
PMID: 18162513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Calcif Tissue Int. 2008 Jan;82(1):12-26. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Different gene expression patterns in the bone tissue of aging postmenopausal
osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic women.

Balla B(1), Kósa JP, Kiss J, Borsy A, Podani J, Takács I, Lazáry A, Nagy Z, Bácsi
K, Speer G, Orosz L, Lakatos P.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Korányi S. u. 2/a,
Budapest, 1083, Hungary. betti@bel1.sote.hu

PURPOSE: To identify genes that are differently expressed in osteoporotic and
non-osteoporotic human bone and to describe the relationships between these genes
using multivariate data analysis.
METHODS: Seven bone tissue samples from postmenopausal osteoporotic patients and 
10 bone tissue samples from postmenopausal non-osteoporotic women were examined
in our study. Messenger RNA was prepared from each sample and reverse transcribed
to cDNA. The expression differences of 87 selected genes were analyzed in a
Taqman probe-based quantitative real-time RT-PCR system.
RESULTS: A Mann-Whitney U-test indicated significant differences in the
expression of nine genes (p < or = 0.05). Seven of these nine genes-ALPL, COL1A1,
MMP2, MMP13, MMP9, PDGFA, NFKB1-were significantly downregulated in the bone
tissue of osteoporotic women, while CD36 and TWIST2 were significantly
upregulated in osteoporotic patients. Principal components analysis was used to
evaluate data structure and the relationship between osteoporotic and
non-osteoporotic phenotypes based on the multiple mRNA expression profiles of 78 
genes. Canonical variates analysis demonstrated further that osteoporotic and
non-osteoporotic tissues can be distinguished by expression analysis of genes
coding growth factors/non-collagen matrix molecules, and genes belonging to the
canonical TGFB pathway.
CONCLUSION: Significant differences observed in gene expression profiles of
osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic human bone tissues provide further insight into
the pathogenesis of this disease. Characterization of the differences between
osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic bones by expression profiling will contribute
to the development of diagnostic tools in the future.

PMID: 18074071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 5;282(40):29701-11. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Regulation of mesodermal differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells by
basement membranes.

Fujiwara H(1), Hayashi Y, Sanzen N, Kobayashi R, Weber CN, Emoto T, Futaki S,
Niwa H, Murray P, Edgar D, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Basement membranes (BMs) have been implicated in cell fate determination during
development. Embryoid bodies (EBs) derived from mouse embryonic stem cells
deficient in the laminin gamma1 chain are incapable of depositing a BM, resulting
in failure of primitive ectoderm epithelialization. To elucidate the mechanisms
involved in this phenomenon, we compared the gene expression profiles of EBs with
or without a BM to identify the genes showing BM-dependent expression. We found
that the expressions of marker genes for the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), including the transcription factor Snai2, were up-regulated in LAMC1(-/-) 
EBs, whereas restoration of a BM to LAMC1(-/-) EBs suppressed the up-regulation
of these genes. Overexpression of Snai2 induced the EMT in control EBs by
molecular and morphological criteria, suggesting that suppression of the EMT
regulatory genes is involved in BM-dependent epithelialization of primitive
ectoderm. Despite the failure of primitive ectoderm epithelialization in
BM-deficient EBs, mesodermal differentiation was not compromised, but rather
accelerated. Furthermore, at later stages of control EB differentiation, the BM
was disrupted at the gastrulation site where mesodermal markers were strongly
expressed only in cells that had lost contact with the BM. Taken together, these 
results indicate that the BM prevents the EMT and precocious differentiation of
primitive ectoderm toward mesoderm in EBs, implying that BMs are important for
the control of mammalian gastrulation.

PMID: 17690109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2615-26.

Four twist genes in zebrafish, four expression patterns.

Germanguz I(1), Lev D, Waisman T, Kim CH, Gitelman I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Developmental Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Twist genes code for regulatory bHLH proteins essential for embryonic development
and conserved across the metazoa. There are four genes that constitute the
zebrafish twist family: twist1a, twist1b, twist2--orthologs of the mammalian
twist1 and twist2 genes; and twist3--a gene from a new clade that does not exist 
in mammals. Presented here are their embryonic mRNA expression profiles. The
study extends the known conservation of twist developmental patterns in tetrapods
to the fish, e.g., expression in cephalic neural crest, sclerotome and lateral
plate mesoderm. Some other expression domains are unique, like hypochord and
dorsal aorta; some, like the notochord, may be ancestral patterns retained from
protochordates; and the expression in invaginating/migrating cells may have been 
retained from the jellyfish. Perhaps this is one of the more ancient functions of
twist--conserved from diploblasts to humans--to facilitate cell movement.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17685477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Biol Evol. 2007 Sep;24(9):1912-25. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Evolution of the vertebrate twist family and synfunctionalization: a mechanism
for differential gene loss through merging of expression domains.

Gitelman I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Developmental Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 84105, Israel. gitelman@bgu.ac.il

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2009 Jul;26(7):1677.

Twist genes are essential for embryonic development and are conserved from
jellyfish to human. To study the vertebrate twist family and its evolution, the
entire complement of twist genes was obtained for 9 representative species.
Phylogenetic analysis showed that a single protochordate twist gene was
duplicated at least twice before the teleost-tetrapod split to give rise to 3
ancestral genes, which were further duplicated or deleted, resulting in
fluctuating number of twist paralogs in different vertebrate lineages. To find
whether changes in gene copy number were associated with changes in gene
function, embryonic expression patterns of twist orthologs were evaluated against
the number of twist paralogs in different species. The results showed evidence
for both neo- and subfunctionalization, and, in addition, for loss of an
ancestral regulatory gene. For example, in Xenopus, twist2 was lost, but the
twist1 paralog acquired, and therefore preserved, twist2 function. A general
model is proposed to explain the data. In this process, termed
synfunctionalization, one paralog acquires the expression domain(s) of another.
The merging may lead to function shuffle. Alternatively, it may leave one paralog
redundant and thus subject to deletion--while its function is retained by the
surviving paralog(s). Synfunctionalization is a mechanism that, together with
neo- and subfunctionalization, may work to establish equilibrium in the number of
genes that regulate developmental processes; it may regulate the complexity of
regulatory regions as well as gene copy number and therefore may play a role in
evolution of gene function and the structure of genome.

PMID: 17567594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(11):3920-35. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Upregulation of Twist-1 by NF-kappaB blocks cytotoxicity induced by
chemotherapeutic drugs.

Pham CG(1), Bubici C, Zazzeroni F, Knabb JR, Papa S, Kuntzen C, Franzoso G.

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, 924 East
57th Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

NF-kappaB/Rel transcription factors are central to controlling programmed cell
death (PCD). Activation of NF-kappaB blocks PCD induced by numerous triggers,
including ligand engagement of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNF-R) family
receptors. The protective activity of NF-kappaB is also crucial for oncogenesis
and cancer chemoresistance. Downstream of TNF-Rs, this activity of NF-kappaB has 
been linked to the suppression of reactive oxygen species and the
c-Jun-N-terminal-kinase (JNK) cascade. The mechanism by which NF-kappaB inhibits 
PCD triggered by chemotherapeutic drugs, however, remains poorly understood. To
understand this mechanism, we sought to identify unrecognized protective genes
that are regulated by NF-kappaB. Using an unbiased screen, we identified the
basic-helix-loop-helix factor Twist-1 as a new mediator of the protective
function of NF-kappaB. Twist-1 is an evolutionarily conserved target of
NF-kappaB, blocks PCD induced by chemotherapeutic drugs and TNF-alpha in
NF-kappaB-deficient cells, and is essential to counter this PCD in cancer cells. 
The protective activity of Twist-1 seemingly halts PCD independently of
interference with cytotoxic JNK, p53, and p19(ARF) signaling, suggesting that it 
mediates a novel protective mechanism activated by NF-kappaB. Indeed, our data
indicate that this activity involves a control of inhibitory Bcl-2
phosphorylation. The data also suggest that Twist-1 and -2 play an important role
in NF-kappaB-dependent chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC1900008
PMID: 17403902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):351-8. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Dynamic changes in chromatin acetylation and the expression of histone
acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases regulate the SM22alpha transcription 
in response to Smad3-mediated TGFbeta1 signaling.

Qiu P(1), Ritchie RP, Gong XQ, Hamamori Y, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201,
USA.

TGFbeta1 plays critical roles in stimulating smooth muscle gene transcription
during myofibroblast and smooth muscle cell (SMC) differentiation. Increasing
evidence demonstrates that histone modification plays important roles in
regulating gene transcription. Here, we investigated the effect of changes in the
expression of histone acetyltransferases (HAT) or histone deacetylases (HDAC) on 
TGFbeta1-induced SM22 promoter activities. We found that overexpressing HAT
proteins such as p300 and CBP enhances TGFbeta1-induced SM22 promoter activities;
conversely, overexpressing HAT inhibitor such as Twist1 (but not Twist2/Dermo-1) 
and E1A suppresses this effect of TGFbeta1. We also found that TSA, a HDAC
inhibitor that stimulates histone acetylation of the SM22alpha locus, further
enhances the transactivational activity of Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4, and relieves
the inhibitory effect of Smad6, Smad7, and the dominant negative mutants of
Smads. TGFbeta1 also stimulates the association of Smad3 (a potent transactivator
for the SM22 promoter) and p300 by co-immunoprecipitation assay. In contrast,
overexpressing HDAC 1-6 inhibits TGFbeta1-induced as well as Smad3 and
myocardin-activated SM22 promoter. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays show that TGFbeta1 induces histone acetylation at the SM22alpha locus.
This study demonstrates that the balance of HAT and HDAC expression affects
TGFbeta1-induced SM22alpha transcription; TGFbeta1-induced SM22alpha
transcription is accompanied by histone hyperacetylation at the SM22alpha locus. 
This study provides the first evidence showing that histone hyperacetylation of
the SM22 promoter is a target of TGFbeta1 signaling, suggesting that modulation
of histone acetylation is involved in the molecular mechanisms of
TGFbeta1-regulated SMC gene transcription.

PMID: 16876108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Med Genet. 2006 Mar-Apr;49(2):135-9. Epub 2005 Aug 11.

Focal preauricular dermal dysplasia: distinctive congenital lesions with a
bilateral and symmetric distribution.

Prescott T(1), Devriendt K, Hamel B, Pasch MC, Peeters H, Vander Poorten V,
Tallerås O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Forskningsveien 2B, 0407 Oslo,
Norway.

We present three unrelated children with distinctive congenital facial skin
lesions. All three children had two to three well-circumscribed, round or oval
vesicular lesions, 1/2-1 cm in diameter on each cheek at birth. The lesions were 
located along an arc from the top of the ear to the corner of the mouth. Patient 
1 was born with a unilateral cleft lip and palate, and a cutaneous hemangioma in 
the right palm. She is developing normally. Patient 2 has neurological sequelae
after suffering an unexplained large left-sided intracerebral hemorrhage
perinatally. Patient 3 has a small chin, somewhat cupped ears and a nevus on the 
left foot. He is developing normally. This condition has been described in the
dermatological literature as focal facial dermal hypoplasia with preauricular
localization. No cases with associated anomalies have been published previously. 
Most cases have been sporadic but familial occurrence compatible with autosomal
dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance has been documented. If an embryonic
fusion defect of the mandibular and maxillary prominences underlies the anomaly, 
the cleft lip and palate seen in one of our patients may be non-coincidental. No 
mutations in the TWIST2 gene were found in DNA extracted from peripheral
leukocytes in the two children who were investigated.

PMID: 16530710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Jun 10;23(17):3877-85. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

TWIST2 demonstrates differential methylation in immunoglobulin variable heavy
chain mutated and unmutated chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Raval A(1), Lucas DM, Matkovic JJ, Bennett KL, Liyanarachchi S, Young DC,
Rassenti L, Kipps TJ, Grever MR, Byrd JC, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

PURPOSE: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a clinically heterogeneous disease
for which natural history can be predicted based on the presence or absence of
immunoglobulin (Ig) variable heavy chain (V(H)) gene mutations. Herein we report 
selective epigenetic silencing of the transcription factor TWIST2 (DERMO1) in Ig 
V(H) mutated CLL and describe a semiquantitative assay to study promoter
methylation of this gene in primary tumor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: TWIST2 promoter methylation was identified by restriction 
landmark genome scanning. Southern blot (SB), bisulfite sequencing, and combined 
bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA), and quantitative SB-COBRA was performed
to study methylation of the TWIST2 promoter. Reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction assays were used to study TWIST2 expression in CLL cells.
RESULTS: Following identification and confirmation of TWIST2 methylation in CLL
patients, we demonstrated that expression of this transcription factor is related
to the degree of promoter methylation. Expression of TWIST2 in a CLL cell line in
which the promoter is methylated was increased following decitabine treatment. We
next studied 53 patients by COBRA and demonstrated that 72% of patient samples
with mutated Ig V(H) show TWIST2 methylation, while only 16% of patient samples
with unmutated Ig V(H) were methylated (P < .001). In a subset of patients,
methylation of TWIST2 correlated with mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: TWIST2 is differentially methylated in CLL cells relative to Ig V(H) 
mutational status and can be quantitatively monitored by SB-COBRA. Based on the
known role of TWIST2 in silencing p53 function in other malignancies, future
studies should focus on the role of TWIST2 in CLL and related lymphoproliferative
diseases.

PMID: 15809452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann Anat. 2004 Aug;186(4):291-2.

The role of cDermo-1 and cTwist in the avian embryo.

Hornik C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie und Zellbiologie II, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,
Albertstrasse 17, D-79104 Freiburg.

PMID: 15481833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Cell. 2004 Mar;6(3):423-35.

A twist code determines the onset of osteoblast differentiation.

Bialek P(1), Kern B, Yang X, Schrock M, Sosic D, Hong N, Wu H, Yu K, Ornitz DM,
Olson EN, Justice MJ, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Bone Disease Program of Texas,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2004 Mar;6(3):317-8.

Runx2 is necessary and sufficient for osteoblast differentiation, yet its
expression precedes the appearance of osteoblasts by 4 days. Here we show that
Twist proteins transiently inhibit Runx2 function during skeletogenesis. Twist-1 
and -2 are expressed in Runx2-expressing cells throughout the skeleton early
during development, and osteoblast-specific gene expression occurs only after
their expression decreases. Double heterozygotes for Twist-1 and Runx2 deletion
have none of the skull abnormalities observed in Runx2(+/-) mice, a Twist-2 null 
background rescues the clavicle phenotype of Runx2(+/-) mice, and Twist-1 or -2
deficiency leads to premature osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, Twist-1
overexpression inhibits osteoblast differentiation without affecting Runx2
expression. Twist proteins' antiosteogenic function is mediated by a novel
domain, the Twist box, which interacts with the Runx2 DNA binding domain to
inhibit its function. In vivo mutagenesis confirms the antiosteogenic function of
the Twist box. Thus, relief of inhibition by Twist proteins is a mandatory event 
precluding osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 15030764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Dec 15;31(24):7165-74.

Twist2, a novel ADD1/SREBP1c interacting protein, represses the transcriptional
activity of ADD1/SREBP1c.

Lee YS(1), Lee HH, Park J, Yoo EJ, Glackin CA, Choi YI, Jeon SH, Seong RH, Park
SD, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Korea.

Adipocyte determination and differentiation dependent factor 1 (ADD1)/sterol
regulatory element binding protein isoform (SREBP1c) is a key transcription
factor in fatty acid metabolism and insulin- dependent gene expression. Although 
its transcriptional and post-translational regulation has been extensively
studied, its regulation by interacting proteins is not well understood. To
identify cellular proteins that associate with ADD1/SREBP1c, we employed the
yeast two-hybrid system with an adipocyte cDNA library. Using the N-terminal
domain of ADD1/SREBP1c as bait, we identified Twist2 (also known as Dermo-1), a
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein, as a novel ADD1/SREBP1c interacting
protein. Over-expression of Twist2 strongly repressed the transcriptional
activity of ADD1/SREBP1c, primarily by reducing its binding to target sequences. 
Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity with HDAC inhibitors relieved
this repression. Our data suggest that physical interaction between Twist2 and
ADD1/SREBP1c attenuates transcriptional activation by ADD1/SREBP1c by inhibiting 
its binding to DNA, and that this inhibition is at least partly dependent on
chromatin modification by HDACs.

PMCID: PMC291873
PMID: 14654692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Development. 2003 Jul;130(13):3063-74.

Conditional inactivation of FGF receptor 2 reveals an essential role for FGF
signaling in the regulation of osteoblast function and bone growth.

Yu K(1), Xu J, Liu Z, Sosic D, Shao J, Olson EN, Towler DA, Ornitz DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University
Medical School, Campus Box 8103, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA.

Human craniosynostosis syndromes, resulting from activating or neomorphic
mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2), underscore an essential
role for FGFR2 signaling in skeletal development. Embryos harboring homozygous
null mutations in FGFR2 die prior to skeletogenesis. To address the role of FGFR2
in normal bone development, a conditional gene deletion approach was adopted.
Homologous introduction of cre recombinase into the Dermo1 (Twist2) gene locus
resulted in robust expression of CRE in mesenchymal condensations giving rise to 
both osteoblast and chondrocyte lineages. Inactivation of a floxed Fgfr2 allele
with Dermo1-cre resulted in mice with skeletal dwarfism and decreased bone
density. Although differentiation of the osteoblast lineage was not disturbed,
the proliferation of osteoprogenitors and the anabolic function of mature
osteoblasts were severely affected.

PMID: 12756187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 5;277(14):12310-7. Epub 2002 Jan 23.

Dermo-1, a multifunctional basic helix-loop-helix protein, represses MyoD
transactivation via the HLH domain, MEF2 interaction, and chromatin
deacetylation.

Gong XQ(1), Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Center for Molecular Medicine and
Genetics, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201,
USA.

Dermo-1 is a multifunctional basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
that has been shown to be a potent negative regulator for gene transcription and 
apoptosis. To understand the molecular mechanisms that mediate the function of
Dermo-1, we generated a series of Dermo-1 mutants and used a MyoD-mediated
transcriptional activation model to characterize the roles of its N-terminal,
bHLH, and C-terminal structural domains in transcriptional repression. Both the
C-terminal and HLH domains of Dermo-1 were essential for its repression of
MyoD-mediated transactivation. Dermo-1 repressed, in a dose-dependent fashion,
the transactivation activity of myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2), a protein known
to cooperate with MyoD in activating E-box-dependent gene expression. Both the N-
and C-terminal domains of Dermo-1, but not the bHLH domain, were required for the
inhibition of MEF2, suggesting that Dermo-1 inhibits both MyoD- and
MEF2-dependent transactivation but through different mechanisms. Dermo-1
interacted directly with MEF2 and selectively repressed the MEF2 transactivation 
domain. An overall increase of histone acetylation induced by trichostatin A
treatment reduced Dermo-1 transcriptional repression activity, suggesting that
histone deacetylation is involved in Dermo-1-mediated transcriptional repression.
Together, these results suggest that MEF2 is an important target in
Dermo-1-mediated transcriptional repression and provide initial evidence of the
involvement of histone acetylation in Dermo-1 transcriptional repression.

PMID: 11809751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Bone. 2000 Nov;27(5):591-602.

Human Dermo-1 has attributes similar to twist in early bone development.

Lee MS(1), Lowe G, Flanagan S, Kuchler K, Glackin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute of the City of
Hope, Duarte, CA 91010-3011, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are implicated in cell
lineage determination and differentiation. Dermo-1 encodes a bHLH transcription
factor that shares extensive homology with another bHLH transcription factor,
Twist. We have cloned and characterized human Dermo-1 from two different bone
cytoplasmic DNA (cDNA) libraries. Dermo-1 mRNA and protein expression were
examined in human embryo and adult tissue sections. Dermo-1 is expressed in a
subset of mesodermally and ectodermally derived tissues. We further examined
expression of Dermo-1/Twist in human tissues and cell lines. In addition, we
observed Dermo-1 expression in response to basic fibroblast growth factor in
osteoblastic cell lines. To evaluate the functionality of the human Dermo-1
transcription factor in osteoblast metabolism, we made stable osteoblastic cell
lines that over- and underexpress human Dermo-1. These cell lines were analyzed
and compared with previously published data of similar cell lines transfected
with Twist. Our results demonstrate that Dermo-1 caused changes similar to Twist 
in the osteogenic properties of osteoblastic cells, such as morphology, bone
marker gene expression, and biochemical response to cytokines. However, Dermo-1
expression also has unique effects in regulating the mechanism of proliferation, 
on alkaline phosphatase enzyme activity, and in temporal expression patterns. We 
speculate that expression of Twist and Dermo-1 maintains cells in an
osteoprogenitor or preosteoblast-like state, respectively, and prevents premature
or ectopic osteoblast differentiation. Therefore, Twist and Dermo-1 must be
sequentially downregulated in order to initiate the cascade of events responsible
for osteogenic cell differentiation. These results indicate that, during
osteoblast development, Dermo-1 may inhibit osteoblast maturation and maintain
cells in a preosteoblast phenotype by utilizing mechanisms similar but not
identical to those utilized by Twist.

PMID: 11062344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 2000 May;127(10):2155-64.

The expression of the homeobox gene Msx1 reveals two populations of dermal
progenitor cells originating from the somites.

Houzelstein D(1), Chéraud Y, Auda-Boucher G, Fontaine-Pérus J, Robert B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire de la Morphogenèse, CNRS URA 1947,
Institut Pasteur, 75 724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Experimental manipulation in birds has shown that trunk dermis has a double
origin: dorsally, it derives from the somite dermomyotome, while ventrally, it is
formed by the somatopleure. Taking advantage of an nlacZ reporter gene integrated
into the mouse Msx1 locus (Msx1(nlacZ) allele), we detected segmental expression 
of the Msx1 gene in cells of the dorsal mesenchyme of the trunk between embryonic
days 11 and 14. Replacing somites from a chick host embryo by murine Msx1(nlacZ
)somites allowed us to demonstrate that these Msx1-(beta)-galactosidase positive 
cells are of somitic origin. We propose that these cells are dermal progenitor
cells that migrate from the somites and subsequently contribute to the dorsalmost
dermis. By analysing Msx1(nlacZ) expression in a Splotch mutant, we observed that
migration of these cells does not depend on Pax3, in contrast to other migratory 
populations such as limb muscle progenitor cells and neural crest cells. Msx1
expression was never detected in cells overlying the dermomyotome, although these
cells are also of somitic origin. Therefore, we propose that two somite-derived
populations of dermis progenitor cells can be distinguished. Cells expressing the
Msx1 gene would migrate from the somite and contribute to the dermis of the
dorsalmost trunk region. A second population of cells would disaggregate from the
somite and contribute to the dermis overlying the dermomyotome. This population
never expresses Msx1. Msx1 expression was investigated in the context of the
onset of dermis formation monitored by the Dermo1 gene expression. The gene is
downregulated prior to the onset of dermis differentiation, suggesting a role for
Msx1 in the control of this process.

PMID: 10769239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genes Dev. 1999 Sep 1;13(17):2207-17.

Twist is a potential oncogene that inhibits apoptosis.

Maestro R(1), Dei Tos AP, Hamamori Y, Krasnokutsky S, Sartorelli V, Kedes L,
Doglioni C, Beach DH, Hannon GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Oncology 1, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, 33081 Aviano,
Italy.

Oncogene activation increases susceptibility to apoptosis. Thus, tumorigenesis
must depend, in part, on compensating mutations that protect from programmed cell
death. A functional screen for cDNAs that could counteract the proapoptotic
effects of the myc oncogene identified two related bHLH family members, Twist and
Dermo1. Both of these proteins inhibited oncogene- and p53-dependent cell death. 
Twist expression bypassed p53-induced growth arrest. These effects correlated
with an ability of Twist to interfere with activation of a p53-dependent reporter
and to impair induction of p53 target genes in response to DNA damage. An
underlying explanation for this observation may be provided by the ability of
Twist to reduce expression of the ARF tumor suppressor. Thus, Twist may affect
p53 indirectly through modulation of the ARF/MDM2/p53 pathway. Consistent with a 
role as a potential oncoprotein, Twist expression promoted colony formation of
E1A/ras-transformed mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) in soft agar. Furthermore,
Twist was inappropriately expressed in 50% of rhabdomyosarcomas, a tumor that
arises from skeletal muscle precursors that fail to differentiate. Twist is known
to block myogenic differentiation. Thus, Twist may play multiple roles in the
formation of rhabdomyosarcomas, halting terminal differentiation, inhibiting
apoptosis, and interfering with the p53 tumor-suppressor pathway.

PMCID: PMC317004
PMID: 10485844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Feb 1;72(2):167-76.

Identification of DERMO-1 as a member of helix-loop-helix type transcription
factors expressed in osteoblastic cells.

Tamura M(1), Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

Several members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) type of transcription
factors have now been reported, and almost every member of this class has been
implicated in transcriptional regulation in cell type determination and
differentiation. Previously, we reported that dominant negative HLH proteins are 
involved in osteoblastic phenotype expression, such as osteocalcin, and hence
differentiation (Tamura and Noda [1994] J. Cell Biol. 126:773-782). In this work,
we used degenerate PCR cloning in order to identify cDNA clones encoding bHLH
proteins expressed in osteoblastic osteosarcoma ROS17/2.8 cells. Sequence
analyses of the 47 clones revealed that 11 clones encoded products with a
characteristic motif of the bHLH transcription factor family. Of these clones,
sequences in the amplified region of seven clones were homologous to the mouse
twist, and three clones were homologous to the mouse twist-related HLH protein,
Dermo-1. To confirm Dermo-1 mRNA expression in osteoblastic cells, we performed
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis using mRNA from
ROS17/2.8 cells and MC3T3-E1 cells by Dermo-1 specific primers and Northern blot 
analysis. These analyses demonstrated that Dermo-1 mRNA was expressed in these
osteoblast-like cell lines. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the partial rat
Dermo-1 cDNA cloned from ROS17/2.8 library revealed that it has the highest
degree of homology with the mouse Dermo-1 cDNA, and the partial amino acid
sequence deduced from the obtained rat Dermo-1 was identical with the
corresponding region of the mouse Dermo-1 amino acid sequence. To further examine
the role of Dermo-1 in the regulation of osteoblastic differentiation, we
examined mRNA levels of Dermo-1 and twist in C3H10T1/2 cells treated with
recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein (rhBMP)-2. Using the RT-PCR method, 
the mRNA levels of Dermo-1 and twist were found to be decreased by the treatment 
with rhBMP-2 in C3H10T1/2 cells. We also observed that the mRNA level of Dermo-1 
was decreased about fourfold by the treatment with rhBMP-2 in C3H10T1/2 cells by 
Northern blot analysis. Moreover, Dermo-1 mRNA was detected at lower levels in
21-day-old differentiated MC3T3-E1 cells compared with 3-day-old undifferentiated
MC3T3-E1 cells. These results suggested that Dermo-1 could be involved in the
osteoblastic differentiation in a negative manner.

PMID: 10022499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Feb 27;1360(1):1-2.

The locations of the H-twist and H-dermo-1 genes are distinct on the human
genome.

Perrin-Schmitt F(1), Bolcato-Bellemin AL, Bourgeois P, Stoetzel C, Danse JM.

Author information: 
(1)LGME du CNRS, U 184 de l'INSERM, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 9061034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nature. 1996 Nov 21;384(6606):266-70.

Muscle progenitor cells failing to respond to positional cues adopt non-myogenic 
fates in myf-5 null mice.

Tajbakhsh S(1), Rocancourt D, Buckingham M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire du Développement, CNRS URA1947, Paris,France.

Mice that have mutations in both myogenic transcription factors Myf-5 and MyoD
totally lack skeletal muscle fibres and their precursor myoblasts, whereas with
either mutation alone, muscle is present. Skeletal muscle in the vertebrate body 
is derived from epithelial somites that respond to environmental signals to form 
the dorsal epithelial dermomyotome (dermis, muscle) and ventral mesenchymal
sclerotome (axial skeleton, ribs). The first muscle, the myotome, forms centrally
in the somite, when only myf-5 is programming myogenesis. By targeting the nlacZ 
reporter gene into the myf-5 locus, we demonstrate that beta-galactosidase+
muscle progenitor cells are present in the dermomyotome of myf-5 null embryos,
and that they undergo a normal epithelial-mesenchymal transition; however, they
migrate aberrantly. Dorsally, they accumulate under the ectoderm and express a
non-muscle dermal marker, Dermo-1. Ventrally, beta-galactosidase+ cells also fail
to localize correctly, express a cartilage marker scleraxis, and are subsequently
found in ribs. Therefore Myf-5 protein is necessary for cells to respond
correctly to positional cues in the embryo and to adopt their myogenic fate. In
its absence, muscle progenitors, having activated myf-5, remain multipotent and
differentiate into other somitic derivatives according to their local
environment.

PMID: 8918877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dev Biol. 1995 Nov;172(1):280-92.

Dermo-1: a novel twist-related bHLH protein expressed in the developing dermis.

Li L(1), Cserjesi P, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Transcription factors belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family have 
been shown to control differentiation of a variety of cell types. Tissue-specific
bHLH proteins dimerize preferentially with ubiquitous bHLH proteins to form
heterodimers that bind the E-box consensus sequence (CANNTG) in the control
regions of target genes. Using the yeast two-hybrid system to screen for
tissue-specific bHLH proteins, which dimerize with the ubiquitous bHLH protein
E12, we cloned a novel bHLH protein, named Dermo-1. Within its bHLH region,
Dermo-1 shares extensive homology with members of the twist family of bHLH
proteins, which are expressed in embryonic mesoderm. During mouse embryogenesis, 
Dermo-1 showed an expression pattern similar to, but distinct from, that of mouse
twist. Dermo-1 was expressed at a low level in the sclerotome and dermatome of
the somites, and in the limb buds at Day 10.5 post coitum (p.c.), and accumulated
predominantly in the dermatome, prevertebrae, and the derivatives of the
branchial arches by Day 13.5 p.c. As differentiation of prechondrial cells
proceeded, Dermo-1 expression became restricted to the perichondrium. Expression 
of Dermo-1 increased continuously in the dermis through Day 17.5 p.c. and was
also detected in the dermis of neonates, but became downregulated in adult
tissues. The Dermo-1 protein bound the E-box consensus sequence in the presence
of E12, but transcriptional activity was not detectable. Instead, Dermo-1
repressed transcriptional activity of myogenic bHLH proteins. The expression
pattern of Dermo-1 suggests that it functions as a regulator of gene expression
in a subset of mesenchymal cell lineages including developing dermis.

PMID: 7589808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


