
1. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2016 Feb 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Association Between Human Hair Loss and the Expression Levels of Nucleolin,
Nucleophosmin, and UBTF Genes.

Tasdemir S(1), Eroz R(2), Dogan H(3), Erdem HB(1), Sahin I(1), Kara M(4), Engin
RI(5), Turkez H(6).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ataturk University ,
Erzurum, Turkey . (2)2 Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Duzce
University , Duzce, Turkey . (3)3 Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, Ataturk University , Erzurum, Turkey . (4)4 Department of Medical
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Mugla Sitki Kocaman University , Mugla, Turkey .
(5)5 Department of Dermatology, Regional Training and Research Hospital ,
Erzurum, Turkey . (6)6 Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of
Science, Erzurum Technical University , Erzurum, Turkey .

AIMS: Nucleolar organizer regions, also known as argyrophilic nucleolar organizer
regions, are associated with ribosomal genes. The main function of the nucleolus 
is the rapid production of ribosomal subunits, a process that must be highly
regulated to provide the appropriate levels for cellular proliferation and cell
growth. There are no studies in the literature addressing the expression and
function of nucleolar component proteins, including nucleophosmin, nucleolin and 
the upstream binding transcription factor (UBTF), in human follicular hair cells.
METHODS: Nineteen healthy males who had normal and sufficient hair follicles on
the back of the head, but exhibited hair loss on the frontal/vertex portions of
the head and 14 healthy males without hair loss were included in the current
study. Gene expression levels were measured by relative quantitative real time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In the individuals suffering from alopecia, the total expression levels 
of nucleolin, nucleophosmin, and UBTF were lower in normal sites than in hair
loss sites. Strong expression level correlations were detected between:
nucleophosmin and nucleolin; nucleophosmin and UBTF, and nucleolin and UBTF for
both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: There was an association between human hair loss and the expression 
levels of nucleolin, nucleophosmin, and UBTF genes.

PMID: 26866305  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Brain Pathol. 2015 Oct 29. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12335. [Epub ahead of print]

Altered machinery of protein synthesis in Alzheimer's: from the nucleolus to the 
ribosome.

Hernández-Ortega K(1,)(2), Garcia-Esparcia P(1,)(2), Gil L(3), Lucas JJ(2,)(4),
Ferrer I(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, IDIBELL-Bellvitge University Hospital, University
of Barcelona, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. (2)CIBERNED (Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas), Spain.
(3)Department of Genetics, Medical School, Alfonso X el Sabio University (UAX),
Villanueva de la Cañada; Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas (CIB), CSIC,
Madrid, Spain. (4)Center for Molecular Biology "Severo Ochoa" (CBMSO) CSIC/UAM,
Madrid, 28049, Spain.

Ribosomes and protein synthesis have been reported to be altered in the cerebral 
cortex at advanced stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Modifications in the
hippocampus with disease progression have not been assessed. 67 cases including
middle-aged (MA) and AD stages I-VI were analyzed. Nucleolar chaperones
nucleolin, nucleophosmin and nucleoplasmin 3, and upstream binding transcription 
factor RNA polymerase I gene (UBTF) mRNAs are abnormally regulated and their
protein levels reduced in AD. Histone modifications H3K9me2 and H3K12ac are
decreased in CA1. Nuclear tau declines in CA1 and DG, and practically disappears 
in neurons with neurofibrillary tangles. 28S rRNA expression is altered in CA1
and DG in AD. Several genes encoding ribosomal proteins are abnormally regulated 
and protein levels of translation initiation factors eIF2a, eIF3<U+03B7> and eIF5, and
elongation factor eEF2, are altered in the CA1 region in AD. These findings show 
alterations in the protein synthesis machinery in AD involving the nucleolus,
nucleus and ribosomes in the hippocampus in AD some of them starting at first
stages (I-II) preceding neuron loss. These changes may lie behind reduced numbers
of dendritic branches and reduced synapses of CA1 and DG neurons which cause
hippocampal atrophy. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2015 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 26512942  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Genom Data. 2015 Jan 5;3:103-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.12.005. eCollection
2015.

Genome wide mapping of UBF binding-sites in mouse and human cell lines.

Diesch J(1), Hannan RD(2), Sanij E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place,
East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia ; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Division of Cancer Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place,
East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia ; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia ;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria 3800, Australia ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia ; Division of Cancer
Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place, East Melbourne,
Victoria 3002, Australia ; School of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia. (3)Division of Cancer Research,
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, 
Australia ; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia ; Department of Pathology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

The upstream binding transcription factor (UBTF, also called UBF) is thought to
function exclusively in RNA polymerase I (Pol I)-specific transcription of the
ribosomal genes. We recently reported in Sanij et al. (2014) [1] that the two
isoforms of UBF (UBF1/2) are enriched at Pol II-transcribed genes throughout the 
mouse and human genomes. By using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with deep
sequencing (ChIP-seq) of UBF1/2, Pol I, Pol II, H3K9me3, H3K4me4, H3K9ac and H4
hyperacetylation, we reported a correlation of UBF1/2 binding with enrichments in
Pol II and markers of active chromatin. In addition, we examined a functional
role for UBF1/2 in mediating Pol II transcription by performing expression array 
analysis in control and UBF1/2 depleted NIH3T3 cells. Our data demonstrate that
UBF1/2 bind highly active Pol II-transcribed genes and mediate their expression
without recruiting Pol I. Furthermore, we reported ChIP-sequencing analysis of
UBF1/2 in immortalized human epithelial cells and their isogenically matched
transformed counterparts. Here we report the experimental design and the
description of the ChIP-sequencing and microarray expression datasets uploaded to
NCBI Sequence Research Archive (SRA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO).

PMCID: PMC4535872
PMID: 26484160  [PubMed]


4. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27519-36. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4823.

Depletion of the cisplatin targeted HMGB-box factor UBF selectively induces
p53-independent apoptotic death in transformed cells.

Hamdane N(1,)(2,)(3), Herdman C(1,)(2), Mars JC(1,)(2), Stefanovsky V(1),
Tremblay MG(1), Moss T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Growth and Development, St-Patrick Research Group in Basic
Oncology, Cancer Division of the Quebec University Hospital Research Centre,
Québec, QC, Canada. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and 
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada. (3)Present 
address: Inserm, U1110, Institute of Viral and Liver Diseases, Strasbourg,
France.

Cisplatin-DNA adducts act as strong decoys for the Upstream Binding Factor UBF
(UBTF) and have been shown to inhibit transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes by
RNA polymerase I. However, it is unclear if this plays a significant role in the 
chemotherapeutic activity of cis- or carboplatin. We find that cisplatin in fact 
induces a very rapid displacement of UBF from the ribosomal RNA genes and strong 
inhibition of ribosomal RNA synthesis, consistent with this being an important
factor in its cytotoxicity. Using conditional gene deletion, we recently showed
that UBF is an essential factor for transcription of the ribosomal RNA genes and 
for ribosome biogenesis. We now show that loss of UBF arrests cell proliferation 
and induces fully penetrant, rapid and synchronous apoptosis, as well as nuclear 
disruption and cell death, specifically in cells subjected to oncogenic stress.
Apoptosis is not affected by homozygous deletion of the p53 gene and occurs
equally in cells transformed by SV40 T antigens, by Myc or by a combination of
Ras & Myc oncogenes. The data strongly argue that inhibition of UBF function is a
major factor in the cytotoxicity of cisplatin. Hence, drug targeting of UBF may
be a preferable approach to the use of the highly toxic platins in cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4695006
PMID: 26317157  [PubMed - in process]


5. Genome Res. 2015 Feb;25(2):201-12. doi: 10.1101/gr.176115.114. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

A novel role for the Pol I transcription factor UBTF in maintaining genome
stability through the regulation of highly transcribed Pol II genes.

Sanij E(1), Diesch J(2), Lesmana A(2), Poortinga G(3), Hein N(2), Lidgerwood
G(4), Cameron DP(2), Ellul J(2), Goodall GJ(5), Wong LH(6), Dhillon AS(7),
Hamdane N(8), Rothblum LI(9), Pearson RB(10), Haviv I(11), Moss T(8), Hannan
RD(12).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria
3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Pathology,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
elaine.sanij@petermac.org ross.hannan@petermac.org. (2)Research Division, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; Sir Peter
MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria
3010, Australia; (3)Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East
Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of
Medicine, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia;
(4)Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria
3002, Australia; (5)Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and University of
South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia; Discipline of
Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia; 
School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
South Australia 5005, Australia; (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; (7)Research
Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002,
Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Pathology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; (8)Department of Molecular
Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval
University, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada; St-Patrick Research Group in Basic
Oncology, Québec University Hospital Research Centre, Québec, QC, G1R 3S3,
Canada; (9)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma College of
Medicine, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA; (10)Research Division, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; Sir Peter
MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria
3010, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; 
(11)Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia; Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Zfat, 13100, Israel;
(12)Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria
3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Division of Cancer Medicine, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia; School of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, Queensland, Australia
elaine.sanij@petermac.org ross.hannan@petermac.org.

Mechanisms to coordinate programs of highly transcribed genes required for
cellular homeostasis and growth are unclear. Upstream binding transcription
factor (UBTF, also called UBF) is thought to function exclusively in RNA
polymerase I (Pol I)-specific transcription of the ribosomal genes. Here, we
report that the two isoforms of UBTF (UBTF1/2) are also enriched at highly
expressed Pol II-transcribed genes throughout the mouse genome. Further analysis 
of UBTF1/2 DNA binding in immortalized human epithelial cells and their
isogenically matched transformed counterparts reveals an additional repertoire of
UBTF1/2-bound genes involved in the regulation of cell cycle checkpoints and DNA 
damage response. As proof of a functional role for UBTF1/2 in regulating Pol II
transcription, we demonstrate that UBTF1/2 is required for recruiting Pol II to
the highly transcribed histone gene clusters and for their optimal expression.
Intriguingly, lack of UBTF1/2 does not affect chromatin marks or nucleosome
density at histone genes. Instead, it results in increased accessibility of the
histone promoters and transcribed regions to micrococcal nuclease, implicating
UBTF1/2 in mediating DNA accessibility. Unexpectedly, UBTF2, which does not
function in Pol I transcription, is sufficient to regulate histone gene
expression in the absence of UBTF1. Moreover, depletion of UBTF1/2 and subsequent
reduction in histone gene expression is associated with DNA damage and genomic
instability independent of Pol I transcription. Thus, we have uncovered a novel
role for UBTF1 and UBTF2 in maintaining genome stability through coordinating the
expression of highly transcribed Pol I (UBTF1 activity) and Pol II genes (UBTF2
activity).

© 2015 Sanij et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4315294
PMID: 25452314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):720-6.

Novel 5' fusion partners of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer.

Barros-Silva JD(1), Paulo P, Bakken AC, Cerveira N, Løvf M, Henrique R, Jerónimo 
C, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Gene fusions involving the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 are a common feature of
prostate carcinomas (PCas). The most common upstream fusion partner described is 
the androgen-regulated prostate-specific gene TMPRSS2, most frequently with ERG, 
but additional 5' fusion partners have been described. We performed 5' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends in 18 PCas with ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 outlier expression
to identify the 5' fusion partners. We also evaluated the exon-level expression
profile of these ETS genes in 14 cases. We identified and confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction the two novel chimeric genes OR51E2-ETV1 and UBTF-ETV4 in two
PCas. OR51E2 encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor that is overexpressed in PCas, 
whereas UBTF is a ubiquitously expressed gene encoding an HMG-box DNA-binding
protein involved in ribosome biogenesis. We additionally describe two novel gene 
fusion combinations of previously described genes, namely, SLC45A3-ETV4 and
HERVK17-ETV4. Finally, we found one PCa with TMPRSS2-ETV1, one with
C15orf21-ETV1, one with EST14-ETV1, and two with 14q133-q21.1-ETV1. In nine PCas 
(eight ETV1 and one ETV5), exhibiting ETS outlier expression and genomic
rearrangement detected by FISH, no 5' fusion partner was found. Our findings
contribute significantly to characterize the heterogeneous group of ETS gene
fusions and indicate that all genes described as 5' fusion partners with one ETS 
gene can most likely be rearranged with any of the other ETS genes involved in
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689235
PMID: 23814484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jun 1;125(Pt 11):2732-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.100909. Epub 2012 Mar 
5.

A RUNX2-HDAC1 co-repressor complex regulates rRNA gene expression by modulating
UBF acetylation.

Ali SA(1), Dobson JR, Lian JB, Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ, Zaidi SK, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The osteogenic and oncogenic transcription factor RUNX2 downregulates the RNA
polymerase I (RNA Pol I)-mediated transcription of rRNAs and changes histone
modifications associated with the rDNA repeat. However, the mechanisms by which
RUNX2 suppresses rRNA transcription are not well understood. RUNX2 cofactors such
as histone deacetylases (HDACs) play a key role in chromatin remodeling and
regulation of gene transcription. Here, we show that RUNX2 recruits HDAC1 to the 
rDNA repeats in osseous cells. This recruitment alters the histone modifications 
associated with active rRNA-encoding genes and causes deacetylation of the
protein upstream binding factor (UBF, also known as UBTF). Downregulation of
RUNX2 expression reduces the localization of HDAC1 to the nucleolar periphery and
also decreases the association between HDAC1 and UBF. Functionally, depletion of 
HDAC1 relieves the RUNX2-mediated repression of rRNA-encoding genes and
concomitantly increases cell proliferation and global protein synthesis in
osseous cells. Our findings collectively identify a RUNX2-HDAC1-dependent
mechanism for the regulation of rRNA-encoding genes and suggest that there is
plasticity to RUNX2-mediated epigenetic control, which is mediated through
selective mitotic exclusion of co-regulatory factors.

PMCID: PMC3403236
PMID: 22393235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Jan;138(1):38-43. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2011.216.

Radial forearm free flap donor site morbidity: ulnar-based transposition flap vs 
split-thickness skin graft.

Jaquet Y(1), Enepekides DJ, Torgerson C, Higgins KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto,
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, ON, Canada. yves.jaquet@chuv.ch

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate morbidity associated with the radial forearm free flap
donor site and to compare functional and aesthetic outcomes of ulnar-based
transposition flap (UBTF) vs split-thickness skin graft (STSG) closure of the
donor site.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Tertiary care institution.
PATIENTS: The inclusion criteria were flap size not exceeding 30 cm(2), patient
availability for a single follow-up visit, and performance of surgery at least 6 
months previously. Forty-four patients were included in the study and were
reviewed. Twenty-two patients had UBTF closure, and 22 had STSG closure.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Variables analyzed included wrist mobility, Michigan Hand 
Outcomes Questionnaire scores, pinch and grip strength (using a dynamometer), and
hand sensitivity (using monofilament testing over the radial nerve distribution).
In analyses of operated arms vs nonoperated arms, variables obtained only for the
operated arms included Vancouver Scar Scale scores and visual analog scale scores
for Aesthetics and Overall Arm Function.
RESULTS: The mean (SD) wrist extension was significantly better in the UBTF group
(56.0° [10.4°] for nonoperated arms and 62.0° [9.7°] for operated arms) than in
the STSG group (59.0° [7.1°] for nonoperated arms and 58.4° [12.1°] for operated 
arms) (P = .02). The improvement in wrist range of motion for the UBTF group
approached statistical significance (P = .07). All other variables (Michigan Hand
Outcomes Questionnaire scores, pinch and grip strength, hand sensitivity, and
visual analog scale scores) were significantly better for nonoperated arms vs
operated arms, but no significant differences were observed between the UBTF and 
STSG groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The radial forearm free flap donor site carries significant
morbidity. Donor site UBTF closure was associated with improved wrist extension
and represents an alternative method of closure for small donor site defects.

PMID: 22249627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genomics. 1997 Apr 1;41(1):135-8.

Molecular cloning of the RNA polymerase I transcription factor hUBF/NOR-90 (UBTF)
gene and localization to 17q21.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid mapping.

Matera AG(1), Wu W, Imai H, O'Keefe CL, Chan EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

The 90-kDa nucleolus organizer region autoantigen (NOR-90) was previously shown
to be identical to human upstream binding factor (hUBF), which has two molecular 
mass forms of 89 and 93 kDa, respectively. hUBF/NOR-90 is a member of the HMG-box
DNA-binding protein family and is known to bind to enhancer regions upstream of
the ribosomal RNA genes, which are clustered at NORs. The smaller version of UBF 
lacks an internal 111-bp region corresponding to 37 amino acids in the second
HMG-box of the larger form. We isolated human genomic clones from a phage library
and localized one of them by fluorescence in situ hybridization to chromosome
17q21.3. DNA sequence analysis showed that the 111-bp region represented a single
exon, consistent with the previous notion that the two isoforms were products of 
alternative pre-mRNA splicing of a single gene in human. Radiation hybrid mapping
placed this STS with very high probability (LOD > 19) to chromosome 17,
approximately 3.77 cR distal to MIT framework marker UTR-9641. The order of the
markers (a partial list) from this region was UTR-9641, SGC30031, WI-17308,
D17S930, NOR53/33, WI-16100, D17S920, WI-16913, and WI-6808.

PMID: 9126496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genomics. 1995 Dec 10;30(3):602-4.

Localization of the human RNA polymerase I transcription factor gene (UBTF) to
the D17S183 locus on chromosome 17q21 and construction of a long-range
restriction map of the region.

Jones KA(1), Black DM, Griffiths BL, Solomon E.

Author information: 
(1)Somatic Cell Genetics Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London,
United Kingdom.

Human upstream binding factor (hUBF) is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein
that is essential for the activation of human 18s and 28s rRNA gene
transcription. We have isolated and localized the gene (UBTF) encoding hUBF to
the D17S183 locus on chromosome 17q21 by analyzing a cosmid from the region and
carrying out Southern analysis on a previously constructed chromosome 17 somatic 
cell hybrid mapping panel using a probe from the hUBF cDNA. Confirmation of its
location at this region was obtained from the results of pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis analysis of genomic DNA using the hUBF cDNA and other probes from
the region. These data also enabled the construction of a long-range restriction 
map of the region.

PMID: 8825649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


