
1. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 27. doi: 10.1111/bph.13472. [Epub ahead of print]

The pregnane X receptor down-regulates organic cation transporter 1 (SLC22A1) in 
human hepatocytes by squelching SRC-1 coactivator.

Hyrsova L(1), Smutny T(1), Carazo A(1), Moravcik S(1), Mandikova J(1), Trejtnar
F(1), Gerbal-Chaloin S(2,)(3), Pavek P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec
Kralove, Charles University in Prague, Heyrovskeho 1203, Hradec Kralove, CZ-500
05, Czech Republic. (2)INSERM, U1183, Institute for Regenerative Medicine and
Biotherapy, Montpellier, F-34295, France. (3)Université de Montpellier, UMR 1183,
Montpellier, F-34295, France.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1)
transports organic cationic drugs into hepatocytes. The high hepatic expression
of OCT1 is controlled by the HNF4a and USF transcription factors. The pregnane X 
receptor (PXR), a ligand-dependent nuclear receptor, mediates the induction of
principal xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters in the liver. No 
xenobiotic handling gene, however, has as of yet been systematically described to
be down-regulated through PXR activation.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The study examines the regulation of OCT1 transporter
expression by activation of PXR in hepatocyte cells.
KEY RESULTS: The significant down-regulation of OCT1 mRNA in human hepatocytes
along with reduced [(3) H]MPP(+) accumulation in differentiated HepaRG cells
after treatment with rifampicin was found. PXR ligands rifampicin and hyperforin 
as well as the constitutively active PXR mutant T248D significantly suppressed
the activity of the 1.8<U+2009>kb OCT1 promoter construct in gene reporter assays. The
silencing of both PXR and HNF4a in HepaRG cells abrogated the PXR ligand-mediated
down-regulation of OCT1 expression. The mutation of HNF4a and USF1 (E-box)
responsive elements reversed the PXR-mediated inhibition in gene reporter assays.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicate that PXR activation sequestrates
the SRC-1 coactivator from the HNF4a response element and E-box of the OCT1
promoter. Consistently, the exogenous overexpression of the SCR-1, but not the
PGC1a, coactivator relieved the PXR-mediated repressive effect on OCT1
transactivation.

© 2016 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMID: 26920453  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Sci Transl Med. 2016 Jan 27;8(323):323ra13. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad0015.

USF1 deficiency activates brown adipose tissue and improves cardiometabolic
health.

Laurila PP(1), Soronen J(2), Kooijman S(3), Forsström S(4), Boon MR(3), Surakka
I(5), Kaiharju E(6), Coomans CP(7), Van Den Berg SA(8), Autio A(9), Sarin AP(5), 
Kettunen J(10), Tikkanen E(11), Manninen T(12), Metso J(6), Silvennoinen R(13),
Merikanto K(6), Ruuth M(13), Perttilä J(14), Mäkelä A(15), Isomi A(16), Tuomainen
AM(17), Tikka A(6), Ramadan UA(18), Seppälä I(19), Lehtimäki T(19), Eriksson
J(20), Havulinna A(21), Jula A(21), Karhunen PJ(19), Salomaa V(21), Perola M(6), 
Ehnholm C(6), Lee-Rueckert M(13), Van Eck M(22), Roivainen A(23), Taskinen
MR(24), Peltonen L, Mervaala E(25), Jalanko A(6), Hohtola E(26), Olkkonen VM(14),
Ripatti S(27), Kovanen PT(13), Rensen PC(3), Suomalainen A(28), Jauhiainen M(29).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Department of Medical Genetics, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland,
FIMM, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. pirkka-pekka.laurila@thl.fi
matti.jauhiainen@thl.fi. (2)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for 
Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine 
Finland, FIMM, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Minerva Foundation Institute for
Medical Research, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland. (3)Department of Endocrinology and 
Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA,
Netherlands. Einthoven Laboratory for Experimental Vascular Medicine, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, Netherlands. (4)Molecular Neurology,
Research Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland.
(5)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare,
Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, FIMM,
Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. (6)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. (7)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden
2333 ZA, Netherlands. Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, Netherlands. (8)Department of Human Genetics,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, Netherlands. (9)Turku PET
Centre, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku FI-20520,
Finland. (10)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland,
FIMM, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Computational Medicine, Institute of Health
Sciences, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu FI-90014,
Finland. (11)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland,
FIMM, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (12)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute 
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Molecular Neurology, Research
Programs Unit, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (13)Wihuri
Research Institute, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland. (14)Minerva Foundation Institute 
for Medical Research, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland. (15)Faculty of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu FI-90014, Finland. (16)Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima 730-0053, Japan. (17)Institute of Dentistry, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (18)Experimental MRI Laboratory, Department
of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland.
(19)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, and Tampere University
School of Medicine, Tampere FI-33014, Finland. (20)Department of Health, National
Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00271, Finland. Folkhälsan Research
Centre, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Unit of General Practice, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland. Department of General Practice and 
Primary Health Care, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland.
(21)Department of Health, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki
FI-00271, Finland. (22)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 ZA, Netherlands. (23)Turku PET Centre,
University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, Turku FI-20520, Finland. Turku
Center for Disease Modeling, University of Turku, Turku FI-20520, Finland.
(24)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
FI-00014, Finland. (25)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki
FI-00014, Finland. (26)Department of Genetics and Physiology, University of Oulu,
Oulu FI-90014, Finland. (27)Genomics and Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for 
Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Institute for Molecular Medicine 
Finland, FIMM, Helsinki FI-00251, Finland. Hjelt Institute, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (28)Molecular Neurology, Research Programs Unit,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. Department of Neurology,
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki FI-00290, Finland. Neuroscience
Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FI-00014, Finland. (29)Genomics and
Biomarkers Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki FI-00251,
Finland. pirkka-pekka.laurila@thl.fi matti.jauhiainen@thl.fi.

USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1) is a transcription factor associated with
familial combined hyperlipidemia and coronary artery disease in humans. However, 
whether USF1 is beneficial or detrimental to cardiometabolic health has not been 
addressed. By inactivating USF1 in mice, we demonstrate protection against
diet-induced dyslipidemia, obesity, insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, and
atherosclerosis. The favorable plasma lipid profile, including increased
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and decreased triglycerides, was coupled
with increased energy expenditure due to activation of brown adipose tissue
(BAT). Usf1 inactivation directs triglycerides from the circulation to BAT for
combustion via a lipoprotein lipase-dependent mechanism, thus enhancing plasma
triglyceride clearance. Mice lacking Usf1 displayed increased BAT-facilitated,
diet-induced thermogenesis with up-regulation of mitochondrial respiratory chain 
complexes, as well as increased BAT activity even at thermoneutrality and after
BAT sympathectomy. A direct effect of USF1 on BAT activation was demonstrated by 
an amplified adrenergic response in brown adipocytes after Usf1 silencing, and by
augmented norepinephrine-induced thermogenesis in mice lacking Usf1. In humans,
individuals carrying SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism) alleles that reduced
USF1 mRNA expression also displayed a beneficial cardiometabolic profile,
featuring improved insulin sensitivity, a favorable lipid profile, and reduced
atherosclerosis. Our findings identify a new molecular link between lipid
metabolism and energy expenditure, and point to the potential of USF1 as a
therapeutic target for cardiometabolic disease.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26819196  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 29;470(1):54-60. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.108. Epub 2016 Jan 7.

Basal transcription of APOBEC3G is regulated by USF1 gene in hepatocyte.

Zeng Y(1), Li H(2), Zhang X(3), Shang J(1), Kang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital
(Henan Provincial People's Hospital), Zhengzhou, 450003, China. (2)The Central
Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College Huazhong University of Science
Technology, Wuhan, 430000, China. (3)Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Zhengzhou University People's Hospital (Henan Provincial People's Hospital),
Zhengzhou, 450003, China. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Zhengzhou
University People's Hospital (Henan Provincial People's Hospital), Zhengzhou,
450003, China. Electronic address: kykangyi@163.com.

Apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3G (APOBEC3G,
A3G) exert antiviral defense as an important factor of innate immunity. A variety
of cytokines such as IFN-<U+03B3><U+3001>IL2<U+3001>IL15<U+3001>IL7 could induce the transcription of A3G.
However, the regulation of other nuclear factor on the transcription of A3G have 
not been reported at the present. To gain new insights into the transcriptional
regulation of this restriction factor, we cloned and characterized the promoter
region of A3G and investigate the modulation of USF1 gene on the transcription of
A3G. We identified a 232 bp region that was sufficient to regulate the activity
of full promoter. Transcriptional start sites (TSS) were identified by the
luciferase reporter assays of plasmids containing full or shorter fragments of
the A3G promoter. The results demonstrated that the core promoter of A3G is
located within the region -159/-84 relative to the TSS. Transcriptional activity 
of A3G core promoter regulated by USF1 was dependent on an E-box (located at
position -91/-86 relative to the major TSS) and was abolished after mutation of
this DNA element. USF1 gene can take part in basal transcription regulation of
the human A3G gene in hepatocyte, and the identified E-box represented a binding 
site for the USF1.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26772882  [PubMed - in process]


4. FEBS J. 2016 Mar;283(6):1077-87. doi: 10.1111/febs.13650. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Genome-wide analyses in neuronal cells reveal that upstream transcription factors
regulate lysosomal gene expression.

Yamanaka T(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Tosaki A(2), Kurosawa M(2,)(3), Shimogori T(4),
Hattori N(5), Nukina N(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Neuropathology, Doshisha University Graduate School
of Brain Science, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Structural Neuropathology,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (3)Department of Neuroscience for 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Mechanisms of Thalamus Development,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (5)Department of Neurology,
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The upstream transcription factors (USFs) USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitously
expressed transcription factors that are characterized by a conserved basic
helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper DNA-binding domain. They form homo- or
heterodimers, and recognize E-box motifs to modulate gene expression. They are
known to regulate diverse cellular functions, including the cell cycle, immune
responses and glucose/lipid metabolism, but their roles in neuronal cells remain 
to be clarified. Here, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation of USF1 from
mouse brain cortex. Subsequent promoter array analysis (ChIP-chip) indicated that
USF1 exclusively bound to the CACGTG E-box motifs in the proximal promoter
regions. Importantly, functional annotation of the USF1-binding targets revealed 
an enrichment of genes related to lysosomal functions. Gene expression array
analysis using a neuronal cell line subsequently revealed that knockdown of USFs 
de-regulated lysosomal gene expression. Altered expression was validated by
quantitative RT-PCR, supporting the conclusion that USFs regulate lysosomal gene 
expression. Furthermore, USF knockdown slightly increased LysoTracker Red
staining, implying a role for USFs in modulating lysosomal homeostasis. Together,
our comprehensive genome-scale analyses identified lysosomal genes as targets of 
USFs in neuronal cells, suggesting a potential additional pathway of lysosomal
regulation.DATABASE: The data for the gene expression array and ChIP-chip have
been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession numbers
GSE76615 and GSE76616, respectively.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

PMID: 26756308  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):e0143377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143377.
eCollection 2015.

Bioinformatics Analysis of the Effects of Tobacco Smoke on Gene Expression.

Cao C(1), Chen J(2), Lyu C(1), Yu J(1), Zhao W(1), Wang Y(1), Zou D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, 200233, China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Psychotic Disorders, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200030, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0150778.

This study was designed to explore the effects of tobacco smoke on gene
expression through bioinformatics analyses. Gene expression profile GSE17913 was 
downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. The differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in buccal mucosa tissues between 39 active smokers and 40 
never smokers were identified. Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses
of DEGs were performed, followed by protein-protein interaction (PPI) network,
transcriptional regulatory network as well as miRNA-target regulatory network
construction. In total, 88 up-regulated DEGs and 106 down-regulated DEGs were
identified. Among these DEGs, cytochrome P450, family 1, subfamily A, polypeptide
1 (CYP1A1) and CYP1B1 were enriched in the Metabolism of xenobiotics by
cytochrome P450 pathway. In the PPI network, tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 
5-monooxygenase activation protein, zeta (YWHAZ), and CYP1A1 were hub genes. In
the transcriptional regulatory network, transcription factors of MYC associated
factor X (MAX) and upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) regulated many
overlapped DEGs. In addition, protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, D
(PTPRD) was regulated by multiple miRNAs in the miRNA-DEG regulatory network.
CYP1A1, CYP1B1, YWHAZ and PTPRD, and TF of MAX and USF1 may have the potential to
be used as biomarkers and therapeutic targets in tobacco smoke-related
pathological changes.

PMCID: PMC4667894
PMID: 26629988  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Signal. 2016 Feb;28(2):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.11.007. Epub 2015 
Nov 11.

The nuclear fraction of protein kinase CK2 binds to the upstream stimulatory
factors (USFs) in the absence of DNA.

Spohrer S(1), Dimova EY(2), Kietzmann T(2), Montenarh M(1), Götz C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg,
Germany. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Saarland University, Homburg, Germany. Electronic address: claudia.goetz@uks.eu.

The functions of the upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 are, like those
of other transcription factors, regulated by reversible phosphorylation. Besides 
many other kinases also protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates USF1 but not USF2. In a
yeast-two-hybrid screen, however, the non-catalytic CK2ß subunit of CK2 was
identified as a binding partner of USF2. This surprising observation prompted us 
to investigate the CK2/USF interaction in more detail in the present study. By
using immunofluorescence analyses as well as co-immunoprecipitations we found
that USF1 and USF2 bound to CK2a and CK2ß exclusively in the nucleus, though CK2ß
and to a minor amount CK2a were also present in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, we
found that unlike other substrates the phosphorylation of USF1 required the
presence of the regulatory CK2ß subunit; the catalytic a-subunit of CK2 alone was
not able to phosphorylate USF1. Thus, the correct phosphorylation of USF1 is only
guaranteed and strictly controlled in particular by nuclear CK2ß. Although the
data indicated that a nuclear subfraction of CK2 subunits associated with USF
proteins, DNA pull down experiments revealed that the CK2 subunits did not
co-localize with DNA bound USF proteins indicating that the USF/CK2 interaction
has a pre- or post DNA binding function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26577526  [PubMed - in process]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 4;10(11):e0141988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141988.
eCollection 2015.

(E)-4-(3,4-Dimethoxyphenyl)but-3-en-1-ol Enhances Melanogenesis through
Increasing Upstream Stimulating Factor-1-Mediated Tyrosinase Expression.

Park J(1), Chung H(1), Bang SH(2), Han AR(3), Seo EK(3), Chang SE(2), Kang DH(4),
Oh ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, the Research Center for Cellular Homeostasis,
Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (3)The Global Top5 
Research Program, College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Medical Research
Center, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated the potential melanogenic effect of compounds from Zingiber
cassumunar Roxb. Our data revealed that chloroform-soluble extract of Z.
cassumunar enhanced melanin synthesis in B16F10 melanoma cells. Among the
components of the chloroform extract, (E)-4-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)but-3-en-1-ol
(DMPB) increased melanogenesis in both B16F10 cells and human primary
melanocytes. In B16F10 cells, DMPB enhanced the activation of ERK and p38, and
the level of tyrosinase. Although the level of microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor was unchanged in DMPB-treated B16F10 cells, DMPB increased
levels and nuclear localization of upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1).
Consistently, DMPB-mediated melanin synthesis was diminished in USF1-knockdown
cells. Furthermore, DMPB induced hyperpigmentation in brown guinea pigs in vivo. 
Together, these data suggest that DMPB may promote melanin synthesis via USF1
dependent fashion and could be used as a clinical therapeutic agent against
hypopigmentation-associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC4633108
PMID: 26535571  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Biol Rhythms. 2016 Feb;31(1):68-81. doi: 10.1177/0748730415611761. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

Dissecting Daily and Circadian Expression Rhythms of Clock-Controlled Genes in
Human Blood.

Lech K(1), Ackermann K(2), Revell VL(3), Lao O(4), Skene DJ(3), Kayser M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Identification, Erasmus MC University Medical Center
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Genetic Identification,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
EaStCHEM School of Chemistry, Biomedical Sciences Research Complex and Centre of 
Magnetic Resonance, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom.
(3)Chronobiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey,
Guildford, Surrey, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Genetic Identification,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
CNAG-CRG, Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico, Parc Científic de Barcelona-Torre
I, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Department of Genetic Identification, Erasmus MC
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
m.kayser@erasmusmc.nl.

The identification and investigation of novel clock-controlled genes (CCGs) has
been conducted thus far mainly in model organisms such as nocturnal rodents, with
limited information in humans. Here, we aimed to characterize daily and circadian
expression rhythms of CCGs in human peripheral blood during a sleep/sleep
deprivation (S/SD) study and a constant routine (CR) study. Blood expression
levels of 9 candidate CCGs (SREBF1, TRIB1, USF1, THRA1, SIRT1, STAT3, CAPRIN1,
MKNK2, and ROCK2), were measured across 48 h in 12 participants in the S/SD study
and across 33 h in 12 participants in the CR study. Statistically significant
rhythms in expression were observed for STAT3, SREBF1, TRIB1, and THRA1 in
samples from both the S/SD and the CR studies, indicating that their rhythmicity 
is driven by the endogenous clock. The MKNK2 gene was significantly rhythmic in
the S/SD but not the CR study, which implies its exogenously driven rhythmic
expression. In addition, we confirmed the circadian expression of PER1, PER3, and
REV-ERBa in the CR study samples, while BMAL1 and HSPA1B were not significantly
rhythmic in the CR samples; all 5 genes previously showed significant expression 
in the S/SD study samples. Overall, our results demonstrate that rhythmic
expression patterns of clock and selected clock-controlled genes in human blood
cells are in part determined by exogenous factors (sleep and fasting state) and
in part by the endogenous circadian timing system. Knowledge of the exogenous and
endogenous regulation of gene expression rhythms is needed prior to the selection
of potential candidate marker genes for future applications in medical and
forensic settings.

© 2015 The Author(s).

PMID: 26527095  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Gen Virol. 2015 Sep;96(9):2855-66. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000230. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Transcriptional activation of Epstein-Barr virus BRLF1 by USF1 and Rta.

Hung CC(1), Kuo CW(1), Wang WH(1), Chang TH(1), Chang PJ(2), Chang LK(3), Liu
ST(4).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B> Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Chang-Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan, ROC. (2)2<U+200B> Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang-Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan
33302, Taiwan, ROC. (3)3<U+200B> Department of Biochemical Science and Technology,
College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)1<U+200B> Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Chang-Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan, ROC 4<U+200B> Department of
Medical Research, Chang-Gung Memorial Hospital Chiayi Branch, Chiayi 61363,
Taiwan, ROC.

During its lytic cycle, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) expresses Rta, a factor encoded 
by BRLF1 that activates the transcription of viral lytic genes. We found that
upstream stimulating factor (USF) binds to E1, one of the five E boxes located at
-<U+2009>79 in the BRLF1 promoter (Rp), to activate BRLF1 transcription. Furthermore,
Rta was shown to interact with USF1 in coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione
S-transferase (GST)-pulldown assays, and confocal laser-scanning microscopy
further confirmed that these two proteins colocalize in the nucleus. Rta was also
found to bind with the E1 sequence in a biotin-labelled E1 probe, but only in the
presence of USF1, suggesting that these two proteins likely form a complex on E1.
We subsequently constructed p188mSZ, a reporter plasmid that contained the
sequence from -<U+2009>188 to +5 in Rp, within which the Sp1 site and Zta response
element were mutated. In EBV-negative Akata cells cotransfected with p188mSZ and 
plasmids expressing USF1 and Rta, synergistic activation of Rp transcription was 
observed. However, after mutating the E1 sequence in p188mSZ, USF1 and Rta were
no longer able to transactivate Rp, indicating that Rta autoregulates BRLF1
transcription via its interaction with USF1 on E1. This study showed that pUSF1
transfection after EBV lytic induction in P3HR1 cells increases Rta expression,
indicating that USF1 activates Rta expression after the virus enters the lytic
cycle. Together, these results reveal a novel mechanism by which USF interacts
with Rta to promote viral lytic development, and provide additional insight into 
the viral-host interactions of EBV.

PMID: 26297580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e1-2. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467353.66660.d4.

1A.03: TRANSCRIPTIONAL NETWORK ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONTRACTILE PHENOTYPE OF
SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS IN HUMAN CAROTID ATHEROSCLEROSIS.

Cerutti C(1), Paultre CZ, Gustin MP, Lohez O, Feugier P, Li JY, Bricca G.

Author information: 
(1)EA4173 Functional Genomics of Arterial Hypertension, Claude Bernard University
Lyon 1 and Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, FRANCE.

OBJECTIVE: During atherogenesis, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) undergo a
phenotypic modulation leading to migration and loss of contractility. Here we
propose a gene regulatory network specific of the contractile phenotype of the
carotid VSMCs from transcriptomic data.
DESIGN AND METHOD: Human carotid atheroma plaque (ATH, Stary>4) and nearby
macroscopically intact tissue (MIT, Stary<3) of 32 patients were analysed by
microarrays (Affymetrix HuGene-1.0ST). Histological analysis ensured the large
predominance of VSMCs in MIT. Vascular smooth muscle contraction (VSMcontr)
involved 119 genes (KEGG database). Transcriptional regulators (TRs) were
obtained from Genomatix© and KEGG. Co-expression of TRs and VSMcontr genes was
assessed by significant pairwise correlations (p<U+200A><<U+200A>10-3) between expression
levels across the 32 patients. For each TR, its connecting index (CI) with
VSMcontr was obtained from its connectivity, number of its significant
(p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001) correlations with the VSMcontr genes, weighted by its expression
centile rank.
RESULTS: Forty VSMcontr genes were under-expressed (localFDR< 5%) in ATH vs MIT: 
11 genes encoding contractile proteins and their kinases/phosphatases, 11 genes
encoding receptors and Ca2+/K+ channels, and 18 genes involved in Ca2+ or
G-protein signalling. They were taken as the core-VSMcontr gene set. TRs showing 
the highest CI with core-VSMcontr in MIT that strongly decreased in ATH were
taken as representative of the contractile phenotype of VSMCs. Conversely, TRs
whose CI with core-VSMContr strongly increased reaching the highest levels in ATH
were taken as representative of the synthetic phenotype of VSMCs in ATH.
Ninety-one TRs had high positive (CI+) or negative (CI-) connecting index with
core-VSMcontr specifically in MIT or ATH: 49 TRs with high CI+ (including NRF1,
SRF and THRA) and 16 with high CI- (including HIF1A and STAT1) were MIT-specific,
whereas 17 (including ERCC6, PRRX1 and ARID5B) and 9 (including RNF4 and USF1)
other TRs had respectively high CI+ and high CI- and were ATH-specific.
CONCLUSIONS: The regulatory network around core-VSMcontr genes showed clear
changes in ATH compared to MIT by reducing the involvement of TRs related to cell
contractility and energy metabolism, and increasing that of TRs related to cell
dedifferentiation, proliferation and migration or with yet unknown function.

PMID: 26102644  [PubMed]


11. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jun 10;16(6):13203-16. doi: 10.3390/ijms160613203.

The rs2516839 Polymorphism of the USF1 Gene May Modulate Serum Triglyceride
Levels in Response to Cigarette Smoking.

Niemiec P(1), Nowak T(2), Iwanicki T(3), Gorczynska-Kosiorz S(4), Balcerzyk A(5),
Krauze J(6), Grzeszczak W(7), Wiecha M(8), Zak I(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia,
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Medykow Str 18, 40-752 Katowice,
Poland. info.pawelniemiec@gmail.com. (2)School of Health Sciences in Katowice,
Medical University of Silesia, Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics,
Medykow Str 18, 40-752 Katowice, Poland. tn1984@o2.pl. (3)School of Health
Sciences in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Department of Biochemistry
and Medical Genetics, Medykow Str 18, 40-752 Katowice, Poland. t_iwanicki@wp.pl. 
(4)School of Medicine with the Division of Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical
University of Silesia, Department of Internal Medicine, Diabetes and Nephrology, 
3 Maja Str 13-18, 41-800 Zabrze, Poland. skosiorz@sum.edu.pl. (5)School of
Medicine with the Division of Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia,
Department of Internal Medicine, Diabetes and Nephrology, 3 Maja Str 13-18,
41-800 Zabrze, Poland. abalcerzyk@sum.edu.pl. (6)School of Medicine in Katowice, 
Medical University of Silesia, 1st Department of Cardiac Surgery in Upper
Silesian Center of Cardiology in Katowice, Ziolowa Str 47, 40-635 Katowice,
Poland. jolakra@poczta.fm. (7)School of Medicine with the Division of Dentistry
in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Department of Internal Medicine,
Diabetes and Nephrology, 3 Maja Str 13-18, 41-800 Zabrze, Poland.
wgrzeszczak@sum.edu.pl. (8)Regional Centre of Blood Donation and Blood Treatment 
in Raciborz, Sienkiewicza Str 3, 47-400 Raciborz, Poland. sekretariat@rckik.pl.
(9)School of Health Sciences in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia,
Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Medykow Str 18, 40-752 Katowice,
Poland. izak@sum.edu.pl.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the USF1 gene (upstream stimulatory
factor 1) influence plasma lipid levels. This study aims to determine whether
USF1 SNPs interact with traditional risk factors of atherosclerosis to increase
coronary artery disease (CAD) risk. In the present study serum lipid levels and
USF1 gene polymorphisms (rs2516839 and rs3737787) were determined in 470
subjects: 235 patients with premature CAD and 235 controls. A trend of increasing
triglycerides (TG) levels in relation to the C allele dose of rs2516839 SNP was
observed. The synergistic effect of cigarette smoking and C allele carrier state 
on CAD risk was also found (SIM = 2.69, p = 0.015). TG levels differentiated
significantly particular genotypes in smokers (1.53 mmol/L for TT, 1.80 mmol/L
for CT and 2.27 mmol/L for CC subjects). In contrast, these differences were not 
observed in the non-smokers subgroup (1.57 mmol/L for TT, 1.46 mmol/L for CT and 
1.49 mmol/L for CC subjects). In conclusion, the rs2516839 polymorphism may
modulate serum triglyceride levels in response to cigarette smoking. Carriers of 
the C allele seem to be particularly at risk of CAD, when exposed to cigarette
smoking.

PMCID: PMC4490492
PMID: 26068452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2016 Apr;84(4):564-70. doi: 10.1111/cen.12832. Epub 2015
Aug 14.

Association between single nucleotide polymorphisms of upstream transcription
factor 1 (USF1) and susceptibility to papillary thyroid cancer.

Yuan Q(1), Bu Q(1), Li G(1), Zhang J(1), Cui T(1), Zhu R(1), Mu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Breast Thyroid Surgery, Shengli Oilfield Central
Hospital, Dongying, China.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer, predominantly by papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), is a
malignant tumour of endocrine system with increasing incidence rate worldwide.
Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) regulates a variety of biological
processes by transactivation of functional genes. In this study, we investigated 
the association between USF1 polymorphisms and PTC risk.
MATERIAL & METHODS: A total of 334 patients with PTC, 186 patients with benign
nodules (BN) and 668 healthy controls were enrolled in our study. Tag-SNPs were
identified in Chinese Han in Beijing (CHB) from International HapMap Project
Databases. Genomic DNAs were extracted by TaqMan Blood DNA kits. SNPs of USF1
were genotyped by TaqMan SNPs genotyping assay. Odds ratios (OR) and
corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) were used to assess the association
between USF1 genetic variants and PTC risk. The statistical analyses were carried
out with spss 13.0 software.
RESULTS: Five tag-SNPs were retrieved to capture all the genetic variants of
USF1. Among the five tag-SNPs, genetic variants in rs2516838, rs3737787 and
rs2516839 have significant association with PTC risk. The rs2516838 polymorphisms
dominant model (CG+GG vs CC: OR = 0·71; 95% CI: 0·52-0·97; P = 0·033) and allelic
model (C vs G: OR = 0·031; 95% CI: 0·56-0·97; P = 0·031) indicated it may act as 
a protective factor against PTC. On the contrary, the results of rs3737787
polymorphisms: dominant model (CT+TT vs CC: OR = 1·55; 95%CI: 1·09-2·02;
P = 0·001) and allelic model (C vs T: OR = 1·35; 95%CI: 1·10-1·64; P = 0·003), as
well as the results of rs2516839 polymorphisms: dominant model (GA+AA vs GG:
OR = 1·77; 95%CI: 1·31-2·38; P < 0·001) and allelic model (G vs A: OR = 1·36;
95%CI: 1·13-1·63; P = 0·014), revealed that they may act as risk factors for PTC.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we found the SNPs of rs2516838 (mutant G alleles vs
wild C alleles), rs3737787 (mutant T alleles vs wild C alleles) and rs2516839
(mutant A alleles vs wild G alleles) were significantly associated with PTC risk.
Further large-scale studies with different ethnicities are still needed to
validate our findings and explore the underlying mechanism of USF1 in PTC
development.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26052935  [PubMed - in process]


13. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 3;117(2):142-56. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.306712. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

Vascular smooth muscle LRP6 limits arteriosclerotic calcification in diabetic
LDLR-/- mice by restraining noncanonical Wnt signals.

Cheng SL(1), Ramachandran B(1), Behrmann A(1), Shao JS(1), Mead M(1), Smith C(1),
Krchma K(1), Bello Arredondo Y(1), Kovacs A(1), Kapoor K(1), Brill LM(1), Perera 
R(1), Williams BO(1), Towler DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, Cardiovascular Pathobiology, Orlando, FL (S.-L.C., B.R.,
A.B., M.M., C.S., Y.B.A., K.K., L.M.B., R.P., D.A.T.); MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Cancer Biology, Houston, TX (J.-S.S.); Washington University, Department of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO (K.K., A.K.); and Van Andel Research Institute,
Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, Grand Rapids, MI (B.O.W.). (2)From the
Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
Cardiovascular Pathobiology, Orlando, FL (S.-L.C., B.R., A.B., M.M., C.S.,
Y.B.A., K.K., L.M.B., R.P., D.A.T.); MD Anderson Cancer Center, Cancer Biology,
Houston, TX (J.-S.S.); Washington University, Department of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO (K.K., A.K.); and Van Andel Research Institute, Department of Cancer and Cell 
Biology, Grand Rapids, MI (B.O.W.). dwight.towler@utsouthwestern.edu.

RATIONALE: Wnt signaling regulates key aspects of diabetic vascular disease.
OBJECTIVE: We generated SM22-Cre;LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) mice to determine
contributions of Wnt coreceptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 
6 (LRP6) in the vascular smooth muscle lineage of male low-density lipoprotein
receptor-null mice, a background susceptible to diet (high-fat diet)-induced
diabetic arteriosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: As compared with LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) controls,
SM22-Cre;LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) (LRP6-VKO) siblings exhibited increased aortic
calcification on high-fat diet without changes in fasting glucose, lipids, or
body composition. Pulse wave velocity (index of arterial stiffness) was also
increased. Vascular calcification paralleled enhanced aortic osteochondrogenic
programs and circulating osteopontin (OPN), a matricellular regulator of
arteriosclerosis. Survey of ligands and Frizzled (Fzd) receptor profiles in
LRP6-VKO revealed upregulation of canonical and noncanonical Wnts alongside
Fzd10. Fzd10 stimulated noncanonical signaling and OPN promoter activity via an
upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-activated cognate inhibited by LRP6. RNA
interference revealed that USF1 but not USF2 supports OPN expression in LRP6-VKO 
vascular smooth muscle lineage, and immunoprecipitation confirmed increased USF1 
association with OPN chromatin. ML141, an antagonist of cdc42/Rac1 noncanonical
signaling, inhibited USF1 activation, osteochondrogenic programs, alkaline
phosphatase, and vascular smooth muscle lineage calcification. Mass spectrometry 
identified LRP6 binding to protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT)-1, and
nuclear asymmetrical dimethylarginine modification was increased with LRP6-VKO.
RNA interference demonstrated that PRMT1 inhibits OPN and TNAP, whereas PRMT4
supports expression. USF1 complexes containing the histone H3 asymmetrically
dimethylated on Arg-17 signature of PRMT4 are increased with LRP6-VKO. Jmjd6, a
demethylase downregulated with LRP6 deficiency, inhibits OPN and TNAP expression,
USF1: histone H3 asymmetrically dimethylated on Arg-17 complex formation, and
transactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: LRP6 restrains vascular smooth muscle lineage noncanonical signals
that promote osteochondrogenic differentiation, mediated in part via USF1- and
arginine methylation-dependent relays.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4490945 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 26034040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Feb 15;8(2):2545-53. eCollection 2015.

USF-1 genetic polymorphisms confer a high risk of nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease in Chinese population.

Wang Y(1), Wang BF(1), Tong J(1), Chang B(1), Wang BY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University Shenyang 110001, P. R. China.

Genetic polymorphisms in upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) were investigated
for their links to increased risk of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in 
Chinese population. Between January 2013 and April 2014, 174 patients with NAFLD 
in the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University were selected for
this study. A group of 100 healthy subjects were identified as the control group.
The MALDI-TOF-MS, a mass spectrometry based technique, was used to detect USF-1
genetic polymorphisms using PCR amplified DNA products. Furthermore, Automatic
Chemistry Analyzer (ACA) was used to determine the clinical indicators.
Genotypes, allele frequencies and clinical indicators were measured to assess
NAFLD risk in relation to the SNPs. USF-1 rs6427573 genetic polymorphisms were
associated with an increased risk of NAFLD (AA vs. GG: OR = 3.16, 95% CI =
1.56-6.43, P = 0.001; GA + AA vs. GG: OR = 1.87, 95% CI = 1.13-3.09, P = 0.015;
GG + AA vs. AA: OR = 2.96, 95% CI = 1.49-5.88, P = 0.001; G vs. A: OR = 2.10, 95%
CI = 1.43-3.09, P < 0.001). Similarly, rs2516839 polymorphisms also conferred a
risk for NAFLD (AA vs. GG: OR = 2.49, 95% CI = 1.43-4.34, P = 0.001; GA + AA vs. 
GG: OR = 1.69, 95% CI = 1.02-2.78, P = 0.041). On the other hand, rs3737787 and
rs2774279 showed no statistical significances in the NAFLD group and control
group (P > 0.05). Two USF-1 genetic polymorphisms, rs6427573 and rs2516839, may
present an increased risk of NAFLD.

PMCID: PMC4402847
PMID: 25932200  [PubMed]


15. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Feb 18;6:3. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00003. eCollection
2015.

Protein kinases as switches for the function of upstream stimulatory factors:
implications for tissue injury and cancer.

Horbach T(1), Götz C(2), Kietzmann T(3), Dimova EY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu, University of 
Oulu , Oulu, Finland ; Department of Chemistry, University of Kaiserslautern ,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland 
University , Homburg, Germany. (3)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu , Oulu, Finland.

The upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) are regulators of important cellular
processes. Both USF1 and USF2 are supposed to have major roles in metabolism,
tissue protection and tumor development. However, the knowledge about the
mechanisms that control the function of USFs, in particular in tissue protection 
and cancer, is limited. Phosphorylation is a versatile tool to regulate protein
functions. Thereby, phosphorylation can positively or negatively affect different
aspects of transcription factor function including protein stability,
protein-protein interaction, cellular localization, or DNA binding. The present
review aims to summarize the current knowledge about the regulation of USFs by
direct phosphorylation and the consequences for USF functions in tissue
protection and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4332324
PMID: 25741280  [PubMed]


16. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Feb 15;308(4):R276-82. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00429.2014. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Fetal iron deficiency induces chromatin remodeling at the Bdnf locus in adult rat
hippocampus.

Tran PV(1), Kennedy BC(2), Lien YC(3), Simmons RA(3), Georgieff MK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Center for Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota; tranx271@umn.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; and. (3)Children's Hospital Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Center for
Neurobehavioral Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Graduate Program in Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota; and.

Fetal and subsequent early postnatal iron deficiency causes persistent
impairments in cognitive and affective behaviors despite prompt postnatal iron
repletion. The long-term cognitive impacts are accompanied by persistent
downregulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a factor critical for
hippocampal plasticity across the life span. This study determined whether
early-life iron deficiency epigenetically modifies the Bdnf locus and whether
dietary choline supplementation during late gestation reverses these
modifications. DNA methylation and histone modifications were assessed at the
Bdnf-IV promoter in the hippocampus of rats [at postnatal day (PND) 65] that were
iron-deficient (ID) during the fetal-neonatal period. Iron deficiency was induced
in rat pups by providing pregnant and nursing dams an ID diet (4 mg/kg Fe) from
gestational day (G) 2 through PND7, after which iron deficiency was treated with 
an iron-sufficient (IS) diet (200 mg/kg Fe). This paradigm resulted in about 60% 
hippocampal iron loss on PND15 with complete recovery by PND65. For choline
supplementation, pregnant rat dams were given dietary choline (5 g/kg) from G11
through G18. DNA methylation was determined by quantitative sequencing of
bisulfite-treated DNA, revealing a small alteration at the Bdnf-IV promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed increased HDAC1 binding accompanied
by reduced binding of RNA polymerase II and USF1 at the Bdnf-IV promoter in
formerly ID rats. These changes were correlated with altered histone
methylations. Prenatal choline supplementation reverses these epigenetic
modifications. Collectively, the findings identify epigenetic modifications as a 
potential mechanism to explicate the long-term repression of Bdnf following fetal
and early postnatal iron deficiency.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4329464
PMID: 25519736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):2551-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2871-3. Epub 2014 Dec
6.

Significant association between upstream transcription factor 1 rs2516839
polymorphism and hepatocellular carcinoma risk: a case-control study.

Zhao X(1), Wang T, Liu B, Wu Z, Yu S, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Surgery, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, 215 Peace West Road, Shijiazhuang, 050000, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide with
high mortality rate. Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) is a ubiquitously
expressed transcription factor that regulates the expression of genes involving
in different biological processes, including cancer. The aim of this study is to 
examine the correlation between USF1 polymorphisms and HCC susceptibility.
Ninety-four HCC patients and 100 healthy volunteers are recruited in our study.
Tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (Tag-SNPs) were retrieved in the
International HapMap Project Databases. Extraction of genomic DNAs was conducted 
with TaqMan Blood DNA kits. Genotyping of USF1 polymorphisms were carried out
with TaqMan SNPs genotyping assay. Odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were calculated to evaluate the association between USF1
polymorphisms and HCC risk. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS
20.0 software. Five tag-SNPs were identified to represent the genetic variants of
USF1. Our results suggested that rs2516839 in the 5'UTR of USF1 was significantly
associated with increased HCC risk (AA vs GG: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.15; 95% CI 1.44-6.87;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003; GA + AA vs AA: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.85; 95% CI 1.04-3.30; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034; AA vs GG + GA: 
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.96; 95% CI 1.40-6.26; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004; A vs G: OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.09; 9% CI 1.35-3.23;
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Although rs2073655 in the intron region of USF1 was also shown to be 
correlated with decreased HCC susceptibility in recessive model (TT vs CC + CT:
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.40; 95% CI 0.54-0.75; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004), this association was not conclusive. Our
results indicated that the SNP of rs2516839 have close association with increased
risk of HCC. Further studies may be needed to validate our results and gain
insights into the pathological mechanism of USF1 gene in the HCC tumorigenesis.

PMID: 25480412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Kidney Int Suppl (2011). 2014 Nov;4(1):113-117.

Obesity, oxidative stress, and fibrosis in chronic kidney disease.

Sharma K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Renal Translational Medicine, Institute for Metabolomic Medicine,
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego/Veterans Affairs San
Diego Healthcare System , La Jolla, California, USA.

Obesity in combination with diabetes and hypertension likely is contributing to
the increasing incidence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in the 21st century
worldwide and requires novel insights and strategies for treatment. There is an
increasing recognition that the kidney has an important role in the complex
inter-organ communication that occurs with the development of inflammation and
fibrosis with obesity. Inhibition of the adiponectin-AMPK pathway has now become 
established as a critical pathway regulating both inflammation and pro-fibrotic
pathways for both obesity-related kidney disease and diabetic kidney disease.
AMPK regulates NF<U+03BA>B activation and is a potent regulator of NADPH oxidases. Nox4 
in particular has emerged as a key contribtor to the early inflammation of
diabetic kidney disease. AMPK also regulates several transcription factors that
contribute to stimulation of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) system. 
Another key aspect of AMPK regulation is its control of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) and mitochondrial biogenesis. Inhibition of PGC-1a, the
transcriptional co-activator of mitochondrial biogenesis is being recognized as a
key pathway that is inhibited in diabetic kidney disease and may be linked to
inhibition of mitochondrial function. Translation of this concept is emerging via
the field of urine metabolomics, as several metabolites linked to mitochondria
are consistently downregulated in human diabetic kidney disease. Further studies 
to explore the role of AMPK and related energy-sensing pathways will likely lead 
to a more comprehensive understanding of why the kidney is affected early on and 
in a progressive manner with obesity and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4220515
PMID: 25401040  [PubMed]


19. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jan;35(1):92-102. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.2001. Epub 2014 Nov 
12.

Integrative genomic analyses of a novel cytokine, interleukin-34 and its
potential role in cancer prediction.

Wang B(1), Xu W(2), Tan M(1), Xiao Y(1), Yang H(3), Xia TS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Eastern Hospital of The First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510700, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The Eastern Hospital of The First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510700, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China. (4)Department of Breast Surgery,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210029, P.R. China.

Interleukin-34 (IL-34) is a novel cytokine, which is composed of 222 amino acids 
and forms homodimers. It binds to the macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF) receptor and plays an important role in innate immunity and inflammatory 
processes. In the present study, we identified the completed IL-34 gene in 25
various mammalian genomes and found that IL-34 existed in all types of
vertebrates, including fish, amphibians, birds and mammals. These species have a 
similar 7 exon/6 intron gene organization. The phylogenetic tree indicated that
the IL-34 gene from the primate lineage, rodent lineage and teleost lineage form 
a species-specific cluster. It was found mammalian that IL-34 was under positive 
selection pressure with the identified positively selected site, 196Val.
Fifty-five functionally relevant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
including 32 SNPs causing missense mutations, 3 exonic splicing enhancer SNPs and
20 SNPs causing nonsense mutations were identified from 2,141 available SNPs in
the human IL-34 gene. IL-34 was expressed in various types of cancer, including
blood, brain, breast, colorectal, eye, head and neck, lung, ovarian and skin
cancer. A total of 5 out of 40 tests (1 blood cancer, 1 brain cancer, 1
colorectal cancer and 2 lung cancer) revealed an association between IL-34 gene
expression and cancer prognosis. It was found that the association between the
expression of IL-34 and cancer prognosis varied in different types of cancer,
even in the same types of cancer from different databases. This suggests that the
function of IL-34 in these tumors may be multidimensional. The upstream
transcription factor 1 (USF1), regulatory factor X-1 (RFX1), the Sp1
transcription factor 1 , POU class 3 homeobox 2 (POU3F2) and forkhead box L1
(FOXL1) regulatory transcription factor binding sites were identified in the
IL-34 gene upstream (promoter) region, which may be involved in the effects of
IL-34 in tumors.

PMCID: PMC4249750
PMID: 25395235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Reproduction. 2015 Feb;149(2):203-12. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0445. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Requirement of the transcription factor USF1 in bovine oocyte and early embryonic
development.

Datta TK(1), Rajput SK(2), Wee G(2), Lee K(1), Folger JK(2), Smith GW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (2)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea smithge7@msu.edu.

Upstream stimulating factor 1 (USF1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that specifically binds to E-box DNA motifs, known cis-elements of key
oocyte expressed genes essential for oocyte and early embryonic development.
However, the functional and regulatory role of USF1 in bovine oocyte and embryo
development is not understood. In this study, we demonstrated that USF1 mRNA is
maternal in origin and expressed in a stage specific manner during the course of 
oocyte maturation and preimplantation embryonic development. Immunocytochemical
analysis showed detectable USF1 protein during oocyte maturation and early
embryonic development with increased abundance at 8-16-cell stage of embryo
development, suggesting a potential role in embryonic genome activation.
Knockdown of USF1 in germinal vesicle stage oocytes did not affect meiotic
maturation or cumulus expansion, but caused significant changes in mRNA abundance
for genes associated with oocyte developmental competence. Furthermore,
siRNA-mediated depletion of USF1 in presumptive zygote stage embryos demonstrated
that USF1 is required for early embryonic development to the blastocyst stage. A 
similar (USF2) yet unique (TWIST2) expression pattern during oocyte and early
embryonic development for related E-box binding transcription factors known to
cooperatively bind USF1 implies a potential link to USF1 action. This study
demonstrates that USF1 is a maternally derived transcription factor required for 
bovine early embryonic development, which also functions in regulation of JY1,
GDF9, and FST genes associated with oocyte competence.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMCID: PMC4286489
PMID: 25385722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2015 Jan;32(1):95-101. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0369-y.
Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the USF1, GTF2A1L and OR2W3
genes with non-obstructive azoospermia in the Chinese population.

Zhang Y(1), He XJ, Song B, Ye L, Xie XS, Ruan J, Zhou FS, Zuo XB, Cao YX, Du WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, 230032, China.

PURPOSE: To research the association between the single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of three spermatogenesis-related genes (USF1, GTF2A1L and OR2W3) and
non-obstruction azoospermia (NOA).
METHODS: We investigated 361 NOA cases and 368 controls from the Chinese Han
population, and we used Sequenom iplex technology to analyze the candidate 9 SNPs
from the USF1, GTF2A1L and OR2W3 genes.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that the variant rs2516838 of USF1 was
associated with NOA susceptibility (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.436), and the haplotype TCG
of the variants rs1556259, rs2516838, and rs2774276 of USF1 conferred an
increased risk of NOA (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.436). Furthermore, we found that the
rs11204546 genotype of OR2W3 and the rs11677854 genotype of GTF2A1L were
correlated with the FSH level in the patients (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided a new insight into susceptibility of USF1
variant with male infertility. Clinically, the SNPs (rs11204546 of OR2W3 and
rs11677854 of GTF2A1L ) might be additional valuable molecular predictive markers
for assessing the treatment of NOA patients.

PMCID: PMC4294865
PMID: 25374392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Med Oncol. 2014 Dec;31(12):301. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0301-4. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Two polymorphisms of USF1 gene (-202G>A and -844C>T) may be associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma susceptibility based on a case-control study in Chinese 
Han population.

Zhou X(1), Zhu HQ, Ma CQ, Li HG, Liu FF, Chang H, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University (East District), No. 9677 Jingshi Road, Jinan, 250014,
Shandong Province, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a prototype of liver cancer, which is closely
related to manifested metabolism of lip and glucose. Upstream transcription
factor 1 (USF1) is an important transcription factor in human genome, and it
regulates the expression of multiple genes associated with lipid and glucose
metabolism. This study aims at investigating the correlation between seven common
USF1 polymorphisms (i.e., -1994 G>A, -202 G>A, 7998 A>G, -844 C>T, 9042 C>G, 9441
T>C, and -2083 G>A) and the risk of HCC. Elucidation of the interaction might be 
of vital importance to the diagnosis and prognosis of HCC. One hundred and
fifty-five HCC patients and 160 healthy controls from a Chinese Han population
were involved in this study. Tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
identified with reference to CBI-dbSNP and HapMap databases. DNA was extracted
from blood samples, and matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) was conducted to determine the
polymorphisms of USF1. Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval were applied
to evaluate the difference of genotype distribution. Seven SNPs were selected to 
be representatives. No significant difference was observed concerning -1994 G>A, 
7998 A>G, 9042 C>G, 9441 T>C, and -2083 G>A polymorphisms (all P > 0.05). A
significantly elevated genotype frequency regarding -202 G>A polymorphism was
observed in HCC patients [AA vs. GG: OR 2.13 (1.13-4.01), P = 0.019; AA vs.
GG+GA: OR 2.22 (1.32-3.75), P = 0.003; A allele vs. G allele: OR 1.46
(1.07-2.01), P = 0.018]. Subjects carrying mutant -844 C>T genotypes also had a
higher risk of HCC [CT vs. CC: OR 1.88 (1.17-3.04), P = 0.009; CT+TT vs. CC: OR
1.83 (1.17-2.86), P = 0.008; T allele vs. C allele: OR 1.49 (1.06-2.09), P =
0.020]. Further studies are recommended to validate our findings in different
ethnicity and to clarify the functional relationship between USF1 polymorphisms
and the susceptibility of HCC.

PMID: 25367853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Probes. 2015 Feb;29(1):19-24. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2014.10.002. Epub 2014 
Oct 13.

Association of USF1 and APOA5 polymorphisms with familial combined hyperlipidemia
in an Italian population.

Di Taranto MD(1), Staiano A(2), D'Agostino MN(3), D'Angelo A(3), Bloise E(4),
Morgante A(4), Marotta G(5), Gentile M(5), Rubba P(5), Fortunato G(6).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS SDN, Via Emanuele Gianturco 113, 80143 Napoli, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di
Scienze e Tecnologie, Università di Napoli Parthenope, Isola C4, Centro
Direzionale, 80143 Napoli, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via Sergio
Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy; CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C. a r.l., Via
Gaetano Salvatore 486, 80145 Napoli, Italy. (4)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C.
a r.l., Via Gaetano Salvatore 486, 80145 Napoli, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di
Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via
Sergio Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (6)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e
Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Via Sergio
Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy; CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate S.C. a r.l., Via
Gaetano Salvatore 486, 80145 Napoli, Italy. Electronic address:
fortunat@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCH) is a polygenic and
multifactorial disease characterized by a variable phenotype showing increased
levels of triglycerides and/or cholesterol. The aim of this study was to identify
single nucleotides (SNPs) in lipid-related genes associated with FCH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twenty SNPs in lipid-related genes were studied in 142
control subjects and 165 FCH patients after excluding patients with mutations in 
the LDLR gene and patients with the E2/E2 genotype of APOE. In particular, we
studied the 9996G > A (rs2073658) and 11235C > T (rs3737787) variants in the
Upstream Stimulatory Factor 1 gene (USF1), and the -1131T > C (rs662799) and S19W
(rs3135506) variants in the Apolipoprotein A-V gene (APOA5). We found that the
frequencies of these variants differed between patients and controls and that are
associated with different lipid profiles. At multivariate logistic regression SNP
S19W in APOA5 remained significantly associated with FCH independently of age,
sex, BMI, cholesterol and triglycerides.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the USF1 and APOA5 polymorphisms are
associated with FCH and that the S19W SNP in the APOA5 gene is associated to the 
disease independently of total cholesterol, triglycerides and BMI. However, more 
extensive studies including other SNPs such as rs2516839 in USF1, are required.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25308402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7610-24.

Silencing of miRNA-148a by hypermethylation activates the integrin-mediated
signaling pathway in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Li HP(1), Huang HY(2), Lai YR(2), Huang JX(2), Chang KP(3), Hsueh C(4), Chang
YS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China (ROC). Contributed equally to this work. (2)Graduate Institute 
of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China
(ROC). (3)Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at
Lin-Kou, Taoyuan, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). Pathology Core, Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). Department of Pathology,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou, Taoyuan, Taiwan, ROC. (5)Graduate
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China (ROC). Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, School of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan,
Republic of China (ROC).

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a pivotal role in carcinogenesis by suppressing oncogenes
or tumor suppressor genes. Various studies have identified numerous miRNAs and
their diverse targets; however, the consequences of dysregulated miRNAs in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) remain unclear. For this study, we found that
miR-148a is downregulated through hypermethylation in NPC biopsies and NPC cell
lines compared with adjacent normal and NP cells respectively. Promoter assays
demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) is a crucial transcription
factor that activates miR-148a promoter activity. EMSA assays confirmed that
purified USF1 binds better toward the unmethylated than the methylated
CG-containing USF1 consensus probe. The ectopic expression of miR-148a inhibits
cell migration in NPC cells through the suppression of integrin-mediated
signaling by targeting VAV2, WASL and ROCK1. Biochemical and functional assays
provided supporting evidence that these 3 genes are the downstream targets of
miR-148a in NPC cells. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining and Western
blotting analysis revealed that the 3 oncogenic targets of miR-148a were
overexpressed in NPC biopsies, suggesting that the inactivation of miR-148a
caused by DNA methylation promotes NPC progression. Overall, our findings
revealed that miR-148a can act as tumor suppressor miRNA and serve as a biomarker
as well as a therapeutic target for NPC.

PMCID: PMC4202148
PMID: 25277193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2809-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.028. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

The upstream stimulatory factor USF1 is regulated by protein kinase CK2
phosphorylation.

Lupp S(1), Götz C(2), Khadouma S(1), Horbach T(3), Dimova EY(3), Bohrer AM(1),
Kietzmann T(3), Montenarh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg,
Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University,
Homburg, Germany. Electronic address: claudia.goetz@uks.eu. (3)Faculty of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland.

The upstream stimulatory factors 1 (USF1) and 2 (USF2) are transcription factors 
which bind to E-box motifs of various promoters regulating a variety of different
cellular processes. Only little is known about the regulation of USFs. Here, we
identified protein kinase CK2 as an enzyme that phosphorylates USF1 but not USF2.
Using deletion mutants and point mutants we were able to identify threonine 100
as the major phosphorylation site for CK2. It is well known that USF1 and USF2
form hetero-dimers. Binding studies revealed that the inhibition of CK2 kinase
activity by a specific inhibitor enhanced binding of USF1 to USF2. Furthermore,
transactivation studies showed that the inhibition of CK2 phosphorylation of USF1
stimulated transcription from the glucokinase promoter as well as the fatty acid 
synthetase promoter but not from the heme oxygenase-1 promoter. Thus, we have
shown for the first time that CK2 phosphorylation of USF1 modulates two
functionally important properties of USF1, namely hetero-dimerization and
transactivation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25194820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10385-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku721. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Dual roles of c-Myc in the regulation of hTERT gene.

Zhao Y(1), Cheng D(2), Wang S(2), Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of C & M Physiology, Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Department of C & M Physiology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University College of
Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington, USA. (3)Department of C & M Physiology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University College of
Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington, USA jiyue.zhu@wsu.edu.

Human telomerase gene hTERT is important for cancer and aging. hTERT promoter is 
regulated by multiple transcription factors (TFs) and its activity is dependent
on the chromatin environment. However, it remains unsolved how the interplay
between TFs and chromatin environment controls hTERT transcription. In this
study, we employed the recombinase-mediated BAC targeting and BAC recombineering 
techniques to dissect the functions of two proximal E-box sites at -165 and +44
nt in regulating the hTERT promoter in the native genomic contexts. Our data
showed that mutations of these sites abolished promoter binding by c-Myc/Max,
USF1 and USF2, decreased hTERT promoter activity, and prevented its activation by
overexpressed c-Myc. Upon inhibition of histone deacetylases, mutant and wildtype
promoters were induced to the same level, indicating that the E-boxes functioned 
to de-repress the hTERT promoter and allowed its transcription in a repressive
chromatin environment. Unexpectedly, knockdown of endogenous c-Myc/Max proteins
activated hTERT promoter. This activation did not require the proximal E-boxes
but was accompanied by increased promoter accessibility, as indicated by
augmented active histone marks and binding of multiple TFs at the promoter. Our
studies demonstrated that c-Myc/Max functioned in maintaining chromatin-dependent
repression of the hTERT gene in addition to activating its promoter.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176324
PMID: 25170084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Eur J Med Res. 2014 Aug 23;19:45. doi: 10.1186/s40001-014-0045-9.

Expressions of heparanase and upstream stimulatory factor in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Chen B, Chen XP(1), Wu MS, Cui W, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Yijishan Hospital of Wannan Medical 
College, Wuhu 241001, Anhui Province, China. drcxp@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The expression of heparanase (HPSE) was associated with postoperative
metastatic recurrence in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The six
E-box binding sites in the core promoter of the HPSE gene suggested that
transcription factors of E-box such as upstream stimulatory factor (USF) might
regulate the transcription of the HPSE gene. The aim of our study is to measure
the levels of HPSE and USF expression and investigate the relationship between
USF expression and clinicopathological parameters in patients with HCC.
METHODS: HPSE, USF1 and USF2 expressions in human HCC cell lines (BEL-7402, HepG2
and HCCLM3) and 15 fresh human HCC tissue samples were measured by real-time
reverse transcriptase-PCR and Western blot analysis. The normal liver cell line
QSG7701 or fresh normal liver tissue samples obtained from 15 additional surgical
patients with hepatic rupture was used as a control. The protein expressions were
determined by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded human HCC tissues and
corresponding non-neoplastic tumor surrounding tissues (NTST) of 57 patients.
RESULTS: HPSE, USF1 and USF2 mRNA expressions were increased in HCC cell lines
and HCC tissues compared with normal liver cell line and normal liver tissue. The
protein expressions of HPSE, USF1 and USF2 in HCC cell lines and HCC tissues were
also increased. Both USF1 and USF2 expressions were positively correlated with
HPSE. USF1 and USF2 expressions were increased in patients with liver cirrhosis, 
worse tissue differentiation, advanced HCC stages and metastatic recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased USF in HCC is associated with HPSE expression. USF might
be an important factor in regulating HPSE expression and act as a novel marker of
metastatic recurrence of HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4237794
PMID: 25149140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 Jun 6;4:542-53. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.05.006. eCollection
2014.

Systematic analysis of transcription-level effects of neurodegenerative diseases 
on human brain metabolism by a newly reconstructed brain-specific metabolic
network.

Sertbas M(1), Ulgen K(2), Cakir T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Gebze Institute of Technology, Gebze, Kocaeli,
Turkey ; Department of Chemical Engineering, Bogaziçi University, 34342 Bebek,
Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Bogaziçi University,
34342 Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of Bioengineering, Gebze Institute
of Technology, Gebze, Kocaeli, Turkey.

Network-oriented analysis is essential to identify those parts of a cell affected
by a given perturbation. The effect of neurodegenerative perturbations in the
form of diseases of brain metabolism was investigated by using a newly
reconstructed brain-specific metabolic network. The developed stoichiometric
model correctly represents healthy brain metabolism, and includes 630 metabolic
reactions in and between astrocytes and neurons, which are controlled by 570
genes. The integration of transcriptome data of six neurodegenerative diseases
(Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia) with the model was
performed to identify reporter features specific and common for these diseases,
which revealed metabolites and pathways around which the most significant changes
occur. The identified metabolites are potential biomarkers for the pathology of
the related diseases. Our model indicated perturbations in oxidative stress,
energy metabolism including TCA cycle and lipid metabolism as well as several
amino acid related pathways, in agreement with the role of these pathways in the 
studied diseases. The computational prediction of transcription factors that
commonly regulate the reporter metabolites was achieved through binding-site
analysis. Literature support for the identified transcription factors such as
USF1, SP1 and those from FOX families are known from the literature to have
regulatory roles in the identified reporter metabolic pathways as well as in the 
neurodegenerative diseases. In essence, the reconstructed brain model enables the
elucidation of effects of a perturbation on brain metabolism and the illumination
of possible machineries in which a specific metabolite or pathway acts as a
regulatory spot for cellular reorganization.

PMCID: PMC4104795
PMID: 25061554  [PubMed]


29. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 23;9(7):e102730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102730.
eCollection 2014.

Multiple E-boxes in the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase gene
function as a glucose-responsive element.

Wutthisathapornchai A(1), Vongpipatana T(1), Muangsawat S(1), Boonsaen T(1),
MacDonald MJ(2), Jitrapakdee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. (2)UW Childrens Diabetes Center, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States of America.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is an anaplerotic enzyme that regulates glucose-induced
insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. Dysregulation of its expression is
associated with type 2 diabetes. Herein we describe the molecular mechanism
underlying the glucose-mediated transcriptional regulation of the PC gene.
Incubation of the rat insulin cell line INS-1 832/13 with glucose resulted in a
2-fold increase in PC mRNA expression. Transient transfections of the rat PC
promoter-luciferase reporter construct in the above cell line combined with
mutational analysis indicated that the rat PC gene promoter contains the
glucose-responsive element (GRE), comprising three canonical E-boxes (E1, E3 and 
E4) and one E-box-like element (E2) clustering between nucleotides -546 and -399,
upstream of the transcription start site. Mutation of any of these E-boxes
resulted in a marked reduction of glucose-mediated transcriptional induction of
the reporter gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that the
upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2) bind to E1, the Specificity 
Protein-1 (Sp1) binds to E2, USF2 and the carbohydrate responsive element binding
protein (ChREBP) binds to E4, while unknown factors binds to E3. High glucose
promotes the recruitment of Sp1 to E2 and, USF2 and ChREBP to E4. Silencing the
expression of Sp1, USF2 and ChREBP by their respective siRNAs in INS-1 832/13
cells blunted glucose-induced expression of endogenous PC. We conclude that the
glucose-mediated transcriptional activation of the rat PC gene is regulated by at
least these three transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4108332
PMID: 25054881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochem J. 2014 Oct 15;463(2):287-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140643.

Pdx1 and USF transcription factors co-ordinately regulate Alx3 gene expression in
pancreatic ß-cells.

Fernández-Pérez A, Vallejo M.

Alterations in transcription factors expressed in insulin-producing islet ß-cells
generate pancreatic dysfunction leading to diabetes. The homeodomain
transcription factor Alx3 (aristaless-like homeobox 3) expressed in pancreatic
islets participates in the regulated expression of several islet genes, and its
deficiency in mice leads to islet cell apoptosis and glucose intolerance. In the 
present study, we investigated the mechanisms that regulate expression of Alx3 in
pancreatic islets at the transcriptional level. We found that the Alx3 promoter
contains at least eight putative regulatory elements with an E-box consensus
sequence, three of which were determined to be functional and required for Alx3
promoter activity by mutational analysis in transfected MIN6 ß-cells. We
determined that these E-box elements are recognized by the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1) and USF2. We also
identified a highly conserved A-box in the Alx3 promoter that is recognized by
the islet-specific transcription factor Pdx1 (pancreatic and duodenal homeobox
1). Pdx1-mediated transactivation of the Alx3 promoter requires the integrity of 
the three functional E-boxes and the co-operation with USF transcription factors 
bound to them. The results from the present study indicate that Pdx1 contributes 
to the transcriptional transactivation of Alx3 in pancreatic ß-cells by acting in
co-ordination with USF1 and USF2.

PMID: 25040025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;115(10):1840-7. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24861.

The basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper transcription factor USF2 integrates
serum-induced PAI-1 expression and keratinocyte growth.

Qi L(1), Higgins CE, Higgins SP, Law BK, Simone TM, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology & Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, New
York, 12208.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1), a major regulator of the
plasmin-dependent pericellular proteolytic cascade, is prominently expressed
during the tissue response to injury although the factors that impact PAI-1
induction and their role in the repair process are unclear. Kinetic modeling
using established biomarkers of cell cycle transit (c-MYC; cyclin D1; cyclin A)
in synchronized human (HaCaT) keratinocytes, and previous cytometric assessments,
indicated that PAI-1 transcription occurred early after serum-stimulation of
quiescent (G0) cells and prior to G1 entry. It was established previously that
differential residence of USF family members (USF1<U+2192>USF2 switch) at the PE2 region
E box (CACGTG) characterized the G0 <U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>G1 transition period and the
transcriptional status of the PAI-1 gene. A consensus PE2 E box motif
(5'-CACGTG-3') at nucleotides -566 to -561 was required for USF/E box
interactions and serum-dependent PAI-1 transcription. Site-directed CG<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>AT
substitution at the two central nucleotides inhibited formation of USF/probe
complexes and PAI-1 promoter-driven reporter expression. A dominant-negative USF 
(A-USF) construct or double-stranded PE2 "decoy" attenuated serum- and
TGF-ß1-stimulated PAI-1 synthesis. Tet-Off induction of an A-USF insert reduced
both PAI-1 and PAI-2 transcripts while increasing the fraction of Ki-67(+) cells.
Conversely, overexpression of USF2 or adenoviral-delivery of a PAI-1 vector
inhibited HaCaT colony expansion indicating that the USF1<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>USF2 transition and
subsequent PAI-1 transcription are critical events in the epithelial go-or-grow
response. Collectively, these data suggest that USF2, and its target gene PAI-1, 
regulate serum-stimulated keratinocyte growth, and likely the cadence of cell
cycle progression in replicatively competent cells as part of the injury repair
program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4134751
PMID: 24905330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 May 23;9(5):e97311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097311. eCollection
2014.

CDC2 mediates progestin initiated endometrial stromal cell proliferation: a PR
signaling to gene expression independently of its binding to chromatin.

Vallejo G(1), La Greca AD(1), Tarifa-Reischle IC(1), Mestre-Citrinovitz AC(1),
Ballaré C(2), Beato M(3), Saragüeta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, IByME-Conicet, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (2)Centre de Regulació Genòmica, (CRG), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Centre de
Regulació Genòmica, (CRG), Barcelona, Spain; University Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona, Spain.

Although non-genomic steroid receptor pathways have been studied over the past
decade, little is known about the direct gene expression changes that take place 
as a consequence of their activation. Progesterone controls proliferation of rat 
endometrial stromal cells during the peri-implantation phase of pregnancy. We
showed that picomolar concentration of progestin R5020 mimics this control in
UIII endometrial stromal cells via ERK1-2 and AKT activation mediated by
interaction of Progesterone Receptor (PR) with Estrogen Receptor beta (ERb) and
without transcriptional activity of endogenous PR and ER. Here we identify early 
downstream targets of cytoplasmic PR signaling and their possible role in
endometrial stromal cell proliferation. Microarray analysis of global gene
expression changes in UIII cells treated for 45 min with progestin identified 97 
up- and 341 down-regulated genes. The most over-represented molecular functions
were transcription factors and regulatory factors associated with cell
proliferation and cell cycle, a large fraction of which were repressors
down-regulated by hormone. Further analysis verified that progestins regulate
Ccnd1, JunD, Usf1, Gfi1, Cyr61, and Cdkn1b through PR-mediated activation of
ligand-free ER, ERK1-2 or AKT, in the absence of genomic PR binding. ChIP
experiments show that progestin promoted the interaction of USF1 with the
proximal promoter of the Cdc2 gene. Usf1 knockdown abolished Cdc2
progestin-dependent transcriptional regulation and cell proliferation, which also
blocked Cdc2 knockdown. We conclude that progestin-induced proliferation of
endometrial stromal cells is mediated by ERK1-2 and AKT dependent early
regulation of USF1, which directly induces Cdc2. To our knowledge, this is the
first description of early target genes of progestin-activated classical PR via
crosstalk with protein kinases and independently of hormone receptor binding to
the genomic targets.

PMCID: PMC4032247
PMID: 24859236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS Genet. 2014 May 15;10(5):e1004309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004309.
eCollection 2014.

p53 requires the stress sensor USF1 to direct appropriate cell fate decision.

Bouafia A(1), Corre S(1), Gilot D(1), Mouchet N(1), Prince S(2), Galibert MD(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR6290 Genetic and Development Institute of Rennes, GEO Team, Rennes,
France; Université de Rennes 1, UEB, SFR Biosit, Rennes, France. (2)University of
Cape Town, Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Cape Town,
South Africa. (3)CNRS-UMR6290 Genetic and Development Institute of Rennes, GEO
Team, Rennes, France; Université de Rennes 1, UEB, SFR Biosit, Rennes, France;
CHU Rennes, Service de génétique moléculaire et génomique, Rennes, France.

Genomic instability is a major hallmark of cancer. To maintain genomic integrity,
cells are equipped with dedicated sensors to monitor DNA repair or to force
damaged cells into death programs. The tumor suppressor p53 is central in this
process. Here, we report that the ubiquitous transcription factor Upstream
Stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) coordinates p53 function in making proper cell fate
decisions. USF1 stabilizes the p53 protein and promotes a transient cell cycle
arrest, in the presence of DNA damage. Thus, cell proliferation is maintained
inappropriately in Usf1 KO mice and in USF1-deficient melanoma cells challenged
by genotoxic stress. We further demonstrate that the loss of USF1 compromises p53
stability by enhancing p53-MDM2 complex formation and MDM2-mediated degradation
of p53. In USF1-deficient cells, the level of p53 can be restored by the
re-expression of full-length USF1 protein similarly to what is observed using
Nutlin-3, a specific inhibitor that prevents p53-MDM2 interaction. Consistent
with a new function for USF1, a USF1 truncated protein lacking its DNA-binding
and transactivation domains can also restore the induction and activity of p53.
These findings establish that p53 function requires the ubiquitous stress sensor 
USF1 for appropriate cell fate decisions in response to DNA-damage. They
underscore the new role of USF1 and give new clues of how p53 loss of function
can occur in any cell type. Finally, these findings are of clinical relevance
because they provide new therapeutic prospects in stabilizing and reactivating
the p53 pathway.

PMCID: PMC4022457
PMID: 24831529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Sci Rep. 2014 Apr 11;4:4650. doi: 10.1038/srep04650.

Upstream Transcription Factor 1 (USF1) allelic variants regulate lipoprotein
metabolism in women and USF1 expression in atherosclerotic plaque.

Fan YM(1), Hernesniemi J(1), Oksala N(2), Levula M(1), Raitoharju E(1), Collings 
A(1), Hutri-Kähönen N(3), Juonala M(4), Marniemi J(5), Lyytikäinen LP(1), Seppälä
I(1), Mennander A(6), Tarkka M(6), Kangas AJ(7), Soininen P(7), Salenius JP(8),
Klopp N(9), Illig T(9), Laitinen T(10), Ala-Korpela M(11), Laaksonen R(1),
Viikari J(12), Kähönen M(13), Raitakari OT(14), Lehtimäki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere University
Hospital and School of Medicine at the University of Tampere, Tampere. (2)1]
Department of Clinical Chemistry, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere University
Hospital and School of Medicine at the University of Tampere, Tampere [2] Divison
of Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tampere University Hospital and
University of Tampere, Finland. (3)Department of Pediatrics, University of
Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere. (4)Research Centre of Applied
and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Turku, Turku. (5)Department
of Health and Functional Capacity, Population Research Laboratory, National
Public Health Institute. (6)Heart Center, Department of Cardiac Surgery, Tampere 
University Hospital, Finland. (7)1] Computational Medicine, Institute of Health
Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland [2] NMR Metabolomics Laboratory,
School of Pharmacy, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (8)Divison of
Vascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tampere University Hospital and
University of Tampere, Finland. (9)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Center
Munich, Munich, 85764, Germany. (10)Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear
Medicine, Kuopio University Hospital and University of Eastern Finland, Finland. 
(11)1] Computational Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland [2] NMR Metabolomics Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland [3] Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland [4] 
Computational Medicine, School of Social and Community Medicine & Medical
Research Council Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol,
United Kingdom. (12)Department of Medicine, University of Turku and Division of
Medicine, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland. (13)Department of Clinical
Physiology, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere.
(14)Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University
of Turku and Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Turku and Turku
University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) allelic variants significantly influence
future risk of cardiovascular disease and overall mortality in females. We
investigated sex-specific effects of USF1 gene allelic variants on serum indices 
of lipoprotein metabolism, early markers of asymptomatic atherosclerosis and
their changes during six years of follow-up. In addition, we investigated the
cis-regulatory role of these USF1 variants in artery wall tissues in Caucasians. 
In the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study, 1,608 participants (56% women,
aged 31.9 ± 4.9) with lipids and cIMT data were included. For functional study,
whole genome mRNA expression profiling was performed in 91 histologically
classified atherosclerotic samples. In females, serum total, LDL cholesterol and 
apoB levels increased gradually according to USF1 rs2516839 genotypes TT < CT <
CC and rs1556259 AA < AG < GG as well as according to USF1 H3 (GCCCGG) copy
number 0 < 1 < 2. Furthermore, the carriers of minor alleles of rs2516839 (C) and
rs1556259 (G) of USF1 gene had decreased USF1 expression in atherosclerotic
plaques (P = 0.028 and 0.08, respectively) as compared to non-carriers. The
genetic variation in USF1 influence USF1 transcript expression in advanced
atherosclerosis and regulates levels and metabolism of circulating apoB and
apoB-containing lipoprotein particles in sex-dependent manner, but is not a major
determinant of early markers of atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3983598
PMID: 24722012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 May;1839(5):415-23. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.03.010.
Epub 2014 Mar 28.

An integrated approach for the identification of USF1-centered transcriptional
regulatory networks during liver regeneration.

Chen H(1), Lu S(1), Zhou J(1), Bai Z(1), Fu H(2), Xu X(3), Yang S(1), Jiao B(4), 
Sun Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Second Military Medical
University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China. (3)School of Pharm. Sichuan University, 3-17 Ren-min-nan Road,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, 
China. Electronic address: jiaobh@live.cn. (5)Medical Systems Biology Research
Center, Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China; National
Engineering Research Center for Beijing Biochip Technology, 18 Life Science
Parkway, Beijing 102206, China. Electronic address: ymsun@capitalbio.com.

Liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PH) is a synchronized process that 
is precisely controlled by system-wide transcriptional regulatory networks. To
clarify the transcriptional changes and regulatory networks that involve
transcription factors (TFs) and their target genes during the priming phase, an
advanced mouse oligonucleotide array-based transcription factor assay (MOUSE
OATFA), mRNA microarray analysis, bioinformatic analysis and ChIP-on-chip
experiments were used. A total of 774 genes were upregulated or downregulated in 
PH liver samples compared with the sham operation (SH) group. Seventeen TFs
showed significant changes in activity in the regenerating livers, some of which 
have not been extensively studied in previous reports, including upstream
stimulatory transcription factor 1 (USF1). The TF signatures from MOUSE OATFA
were combined with mRNA expression profiles and ChIP-on-chip analyses to
construct experimental transcriptional regulatory networks in regenerating
livers. USF1-centered regulatory networks were further confirmed by ChIP assays, 
revealing some of its target genes and novel coregulatory networks. The
combination of MOUSE OATFA with transcriptome profiling and bioinformatic
analysis represents a novel paradigm for the comprehensive prediction of
transcriptional coregulatory networks during the early phase of liver
regeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24686121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Apr 18;446(4):1053-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.03.064. Epub 2014 Mar 21.

USF-1 inhibition protects against oxygen-and-glucose-deprivation-induced
apoptosis via the downregulation of miR-132 in HepG2 cells.

Wang R(1), Liang H(2), Li H(3), Dou H(1), Zhang M(1), Baobuhe(1), Du Z(1), Gao
M(1), Wang R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Pingjin Hospital, Logistics College of
Armed Police Forces, Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Pingjin
Hospital, Logistics College of Armed Police Forces, Tianjin, China. (3)Department
of Thoracic Surgery, Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong,
China. (4)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Pingjin Hospital, Logistics College 
of Armed Police Forces, Tianjin, China. Electronic address: wrm20142233@sohu.com.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) is an important transcription factor that
participates in glucose metabolism and tumorigenesis. The aim of the current
study was to explore the regulatory mechanism of USF-1 in HepG2 cells exposed to 
oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD). After the establishment of the OGD model in
HepG2 cells, we determined that the cells treated with OGD exhibited a high
apoptotic rate and that the introduction of siRNA against USF-1 protected the
cells from OGD-induced apoptosis. The miRNA microarray results demonstrated that 
a set of miRNAs were deregulated in the cells transfected with USF-1 siRNA, and
the set of downregulated miRNAs included a novel miRNA, miR-132. Further analyses
indicated that miR-132 overexpression inhibits the protective roles of USF-1
siRNA in OGD-induced apoptosis. We also identified several binding sites for
USF-1 in the miR-132 promoter. The silencing of USF-1 resulted in a reduction in 
miR-132 expression, and USF-1 overexpression increased the expression of this
miRNA. Our study indicated that the silencing of USF-1 plays protective roles in 
OGD-induced apoptosis through the downregulation of miR-132, which indicates that
the silencing of USF-1 may be a therapeutic strategy for the promotion of cancer 
cell survival under OGD conditions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24661879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem J. 2014 May 1;459(3):489-503. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131476.

Suppression of adipogenesis by valproic acid through repression of USF1-activated
fatty acid synthesis in adipocytes.

Yuyama M(1), Fujimori K(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Biodefense and Regulation, Osaka University of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 4-20-1 Nasahara, Takatsuki, Osaka 569-1094, Japan.

VPA (valproic acid), a short-chain fatty acid that is a HDAC (histone
deacetylase) inhibitor, is known to suppress adipogenesis. In the present study, 
we identified the molecular mechanism of VPA-mediated suppression of adipogenesis
in adipocytes. VPA suppressed the accumulation of intracellular triacylglycerol. 
The expression levels of PPAR<U+03B3> (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>) and
C/EBPa (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a), which are key regulators of
adipogenesis, as well as the expression of SCD (stearoyl-CoA desaturase), were
decreased by the treatment with VPA. Moreover, glycerol release was decreased in 
the VPA-treated cells, even though the transcription levels of ATGL (adipose
triacylglycerol lipase), HSL (hormone-sensitive lipase) and MGL (monoacylglycerol
lipase), all of which are involved in lipolysis, were elevated by the treatment
with VPA. It is noteworthy that the expression level of FAS (fatty acid synthase)
was significantly suppressed when the cells were cultured in medium containing
VPA. Furthermore, VPA-mediated suppression of the accumulation of the
intracellular triacylglycerols was prevented by the treatment with palmitic acid,
a major product of FAS. The results of promoter-luciferase and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that USF1(upstream stimulating factor 1) 
bound to the E-box of the promoter region of the FAS gene. In addition, the
expression of USF1 was decreased by the treatment with VPA. siRNA-mediated
knockdown of the expression of the USF1 gene repressed adipogenesis along with
the decreased expression of the FAS gene. The overexpression of USF1 enhanced
both adipogenesis and the expression of FAS in VPA-treated cells. These results
indicate that VPA suppressed adipogenesis through the down-regulation of
USF1-activated fatty acid synthesis in adipocytes.

PMID: 24511897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Immunol. 2014 Mar;15(3):239-47. doi: 10.1038/ni.2823. Epub 2014 Feb 2.

The transcription factor DREAM represses the deubiquitinase A20 and mediates
inflammation.

Tiruppathi C(1), Soni D(1), Wang DM(1), Xue J(1), Singh V(1), Thippegowda PB(1), 
Cheppudira BP(1), Mishra RK(1), Debroy A(1), Qian Z(2), Bachmaier K(1), Zhao
YY(1), Christman JW(1), Vogel SM(1), Ma A(3), Malik AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and the Center for Lung and Vascular Biology,
University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (2)Department of
Hematology/Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Here we found that the transcription repressor DREAM bound to the promoter of the
gene encoding A20 to repress expression of this deubiquitinase that suppresses
inflammatory NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. DREAM-deficient mice displayed persistent and
unchecked A20 expression in response to endotoxin. DREAM functioned by
transcriptionally repressing A20 through binding to downstream regulatory
elements (DREs). In contrast, binding of the transcription factor USF1 to the
DRE-associated E-box domain in the gene encoding A20 activated its expression in 
response to inflammatory stimuli. Our studies define the critical opposing
functions of DREAM and USF1 in inhibiting and inducing A20 expression,
respectively, and thereby the strength of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Targeting of DREAM to 
induce USF1-mediated A20 expression is therefore a potential anti-inflammatory
strategy for the treatment of diseases associated with unconstrained NF-<U+03BA>B
activity, such as acute lung injury.

PMCID: PMC4005385
PMID: 24487321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;48:66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.01.004.
Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Leishmania donovani activates uncoupling protein 2 transcription to suppress
mitochondrial oxidative burst through differential modulation of SREBP2, Sp1 and 
USF1 transcription factors.

Ball WB(1), Mukherjee M(1), Srivastav S(1), Das PK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases and Immunology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical
Biology, Kolkata 700032, India. (2)Infectious Diseases and Immunology Division,
CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata 700032, India. Electronic
address: pijushdas@iicb.res.in.

In order to reside and multiply successfully within the host macrophages,
Leishmania parasites impair the generation of cellular as well as mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (ROS), which is a major host defense mechanism against
any invading pathogen. Mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) is strongly
induced in Leishmania infection, both at mRNA and protein levels, to suppress the
mitochondrial ROS generation. In the present study we have demonstrated that
Leishmania donovani infection is associated with strong up-regulation of UCP2 at 
mRNA level which is the determining factor for its protein level upregulation.
The transcriptional activation of UCP2 was mediated by increased nuclear
translocation and DNA binding of sterol regulatory element binding protein 2
(SREBP2) and specificity protein 1 (Sp1) transcription factors with concomitant
decrease of both the nuclear content and the promoter occupancy of upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF1). siRNA-mediated silencing of SREBP2 or Sp1 was
associated with decreased UCP2 expression in infected macrophages. In contrast,
downregulation of USF1 resulted in activated transcription of UCP2. L. donovani
infection resulted in degradation of USF1 thereby facilitating SREBP2 binding
which in turn assisted in the association of Sp1 with the promoter ultimately
culminating in elevated transcription of UCP2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24417972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Mar;1843(3):565-79.

The 58-kda microspherule protein (MSP58) represses human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) gene expression and cell proliferation by interacting with 
telomerase transcriptional element-interacting factor (TEIF).

Hsu CC, Chen CH, Hsu TI, Hung JJ, Ko JL, Zhang B, Lee YC, Chen HK, Chang WC, Lin 
DY.

58-kDa microspherule protein (MSP58) plays an important role in a variety of
cellular processes including transcriptional regulation, cell proliferation and
oncogenic transformation. Currently, the mechanisms underlying the oncogenic
effect of MSP58 are not fully understood. The human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) gene, which encodes an essential component for telomerase
activity that is involved in cellular immortalization and transformation, is
strictly regulated at the gene transcription level. Our previous study revealed a
novel function of MSP58 in cellular senescence. Here we identify telomerase
transcriptional element-interacting factor (TEIF) as a novel MSP58-interacting
protein and determine the effect of MSP58 on hTERT transcription. This study thus
provides evidence showing MSP58 to be a negative regulator of hTERT expression
and telomerase activity. Luciferase reporter assays indicated that MSP58 could
suppress the transcription ofhTERTpromoter. Additionally, stable overexpression
of MSP58 protein in HT1080 and 293T cells decreased both endogenous hTERT
expression and telomerase activity. Conversely, their upregulation was induced by
MSP58 silencing. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that MSP58 binds to 
the hTERT proximal promoter. Furthermore, overexpression of MSP58 inhibited
TEIF-mediated hTERT transactivation, telomerase activation, and cell
proliferation promotion. The inhibitory effect of MSP58 occurred through
inhibition of TEIF binding to DNA. Ultimately, the HT1080-implanted xenograft
mouse model confirmed these cellular effects. Together, our findings provide new 
insights into both the biological function of MSP58 and the regulation of
telomerase/hTERT expression.

PMID: 24361335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):19848-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310427110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Reintroducing domesticated wild mice to sociality induces adaptive
transgenerational effects on MUP expression.

Nelson AC(1), Cauceglia JW, Merkley SD, Youngson NA, Oler AJ, Nelson RJ, Cairns
BR, Whitelaw E, Potts WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.

When brought into captivity, wild animals can adapt to domestication within 10
generations. Such adaptations may decrease fitness in natural conditions. Many
selective pressures are disrupted in captivity, including social behavioral
networks. Although lack of sociality in captivity appears to mediate
domestication, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. Additionally,
determining the contribution of genetic inheritance vs. transgenerational effects
during relaxed selection may provide insight into the flexibility of adaptation. 
When wild-derived mice kept under laboratory conditions for eight generations
were reintroduced to sociality and promiscuity (free mate choice), they adapted
within two generations. Fitness assessments between this promiscuous lineage and 
a monogamous laboratory lineage revealed male-specific effects. Promiscuous-line 
males had deficits in viability, but a striking advantage in attracting mates,
and their scent marks were also more attractive to females. Here, we investigate 
mechanistic details underlying this olfactory signal and identify a role of major
urinary protein (MUP) pheromones. Promiscuous-line males inherit higher MUP
expression than monogamous-line males through transgenerational inheritance.
Sociality-driven maternal and paternal effects reveal intriguing conflicts among 
parents and offspring over pheromone expression. MUP up-regulation is not driven 
by hormone-driven transduction pathways, but rather is associated with reduction 
in DNA methylation of a CpG dinucleotide in the promoter. This reduction in
methylation could enhance transcription by promoting the binding of transcription
factor USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1). Finally, we experimentally
demonstrate that increased MUP expression is a female attractant. These results
identify molecular mechanisms guiding domestication and adaptive responses to
fluctuating sociality.

PMCID: PMC3856842
PMID: 24248373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):202-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2848. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Upregulation of DNMT1 mediated by HBx suppresses RASSF1A expression independent
of DNA methylation.

Qiu X(1), Zhang L, Lu S, Song Y, Lao Y, Hu J, Fan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Developmental Biology, Medical School of
Southeast University and the Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human
Diseases, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P.R.
China.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (HBx) plays a key role in the molecular
pathogenesis of HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, its critical
gene targets remain largely unknown. RASSF1A gene (Ras-association domain family 
1A, RASSF1A), a tumor-suppressor gene, is frequently found to be hypermethylated 
and downregulated in HCC. In the present study, we investigated whether HBx is
involved in the hypermethylation and downregulation of RASSF1A and we examined
the potential regulation mechanisms. RT-PCR analysis was used to determine
RASSF1A and HBx expression in 9 liver cell lines and the results showed that
RASSF1A expression was relatively low in HBx-positive cells. Notably, RASSF1A was
downregulated in HepG2.2.15 cells, as compared to HepG2 cells. Further analysis
revealed that HBx transfection suppressed RASSF1A expression and HBx knockdown
induced its expression. Enforced HBx suppressed RASSF1A and meanwhile induced
DNMT1 and DNMT3B expression. In addition, RASSF1A is negatively regulated by
DNMT1. ChIP analysis using an antibody against DNMT1 revealed that HBx enhanced
the binding of DNMT1 to the RASSF1A promoter but the inhibition of RASSF1A by HBx
is DNA methylation-independent as detected by methylation-specific PCR (MSP).
Further studies using MSP and bisulfite genomic sequencing (BGS) revealed that no
significant methylation changes were observed for regional methylation levels of 
RASSF1A in DNMT1 knockdown cells, although methylation levels of specific CpG
sites at the predicted binding sites for the Sp1 and USF transcription factors
were reduced. Additionally, RASSF1A was downregulated in HBV-associated HCC
(HBV-HCC) as detected by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry suggesting RASSF1A
expression may be related to HBx in HCC and the clinical relevance of our
observations. Collectively, our data showed that HBx suppressed RASSF1A
expression via DNMT1 and offered a new mechanism of RASSF1A inactive in HCC in
addition to the widely known DNA methylation, enriching the epigenetic mechanism 
by which HBx contributes to the pathogenesis of HBV-HCC.

PMID: 24247422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Nov 8;6:50. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-50.

ChIP-seq in steatohepatitis and normal liver tissue identifies candidate disease 
mechanisms related to progression to cancer.

Bysani M, Wallerman O, Bornelöv S, Zatloukal K, Komorowski J, Wadelius C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
BMC, Uppsala University, PO BOX 815, Uppsala, SE 751 08, Sweden.
Claes.Wadelius@igp.uu.se.

BACKGROUND: Steatohepatitis occurs in alcoholic liver disease and may progress to
liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Its molecular pathogenesis is to a 
large degree unknown. Histone modifications play a key role in transcriptional
regulations as marks for silencing and activation of gene expression and as marks
for functional elements. Many transcription factors (TFs) are crucial for the
control of the genes involved in metabolism, and abnormality in their function
may lead to disease.
METHODS: We performed ChIP-seq of the histone modifications H3K4me1, H3K4me3 and 
H3K27ac and a candidate transcription factor (USF1) in liver tissue from patients
with steatohepatitis and normal livers and correlated results to mRNA-expression 
and genotypes.
RESULTS: We found several regions that are differentially enriched for histone
modifications between disease and normal tissue, and qRT-PCR results indicated
that the expression of the tested genes strongly correlated with differential
enrichment of histone modifications but is independent of USF1 enrichment. By
gene ontology analysis of differentially modified genes we found many disease
associated genes, some of which had previously been implicated in the etiology of
steatohepatitis. Importantly, the genes associated to the strongest histone peaks
in the patient were over-represented in cancer specific pathways suggesting that 
the tissue was on a path to develop to cancer, a common complication to the
disease. We also found several novel SNPs and GWAS catalogue SNPs that are
candidates to be functional and therefore needs further study.
CONCLUSION: In summary we find that analysis of chromatin features in tissue
samples provides insight into disease mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3831757
PMID: 24206787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(9):5281-6.

Identifying differentially expressed genes and small molecule drugs for prostate 
cancer by a bioinformatics strategy.

Li J(1), Xu YH, Lu Y, Ma XP, Chen P, Luo SW, Jia ZG, Liu Y, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, the 452nd Hospital of PLA, Chengdu, China E-mail :
xuyahong452@hotmail.com.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer caused by the abnormal disorderly growth of prostatic
acinar cells is the most prevalent cancer of men in western countries. We aimed
to screen out differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and explore small molecule
drugs for prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The GSE3824 gene expression profile of prostate cancer was
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database which including 21 normal
samples and 18 prostate cancer cells. The DEGs were identified by Limma package
in R language and gene ontology and pathway enrichment analyses were performed.
In addition, potential regulatory microRNAs and the target sites of the
transcription factors were screened out based on the molecular signature
database. In addition, the DEGs were mapped to the connectivity map database to
identify potential small molecule drugs.
RESULTS: A total of 6,588 genes were filtered as DEGs between normal and prostate
cancer samples. Examples such as ITGB6, ITGB3, ITGAV and ITGA2 may induce
prostate cancer through actions on the focal adhesion pathway. Furthermore, the
transcription factor, SP1, and its target genes ARHGAP26 and USF1 were
identified. The most significant microRNA, MIR-506, was screened and found to
regulate genes including ITGB1 and ITGB3. Additionally, small molecules MS-275,
8-azaguanine and pyrvinium were discovered to have the potential to repair the
disordered metabolic pathways, abd furthermore to remedy prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our analysis bear on the mechanism of prostate cancer
and allow screening for small molecular drugs for this cancer. The findings have 
the potential for future use in the clinic for treatment of prostate cancer.

PMID: 24175814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):197-201. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2818. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Regulation of major vault protein expression by upstream stimulating factor 1 in 
SW620 human colon cancer cells.

Ikeda R(1), Nishizawa Y, Tajitsu Y, Minami K, Mataki H, Masuda S, Furukawa T,
Akiyama S, Yamada K, Takeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.

Major vault protein (MVP) is the main constituent of the vault ribonucleoprotein 
particle and is identical to lung resistance-related protein (LRP). Although MVP 
is also expressed in several types of normal tissues, little is known about its
physiological role. In the present study, we identified the crucial MVP promoter 
elements that regulate MVP expression. An examination of tissue expression
profiles revealed that MVP was expressed in the heart, placenta, lung, liver,
kidney and pancreas. Elements of the MVP promoter contain binding sites for
transcription factors, STAT, p53, Sp1, E-box, GATA, MyoD and Y-box. By deletion
analysis, a conserved proximal E-box binding site was demonstrated to be
important for human MVP promoter transactivation. Introduction of siRNA against
upstream stimulating factor (USF) 1, which is known to bind the E-box binding
site, decreased the expression of MVP in SW620 and ACHN cells. Using a chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, USF1 bound the MVP promoter in SW620 cells.
These findings suggest that USF1 binding to an E-box element may be critical for 
basal MVP promoter activation. The results of the present study are useful in
understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating MVP gene expression, and may
aid in elucidating the physiological functions of MVP.

PMID: 24173679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):132-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.099. Epub 2013 Sep
13.

Genetic risk assessment for cardiovascular disease in Azoreans (Portugal): a
general population-based study.

Correia M(1), Branco CC, Bruffaerts N, Balagué A, Mota-Vieira L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo of
Ponta Delgada, EPE, São Miguel Island, Azores, Portugal.

The identification of clinically validated genetic variants contributing to
complex disorders raise the possibility to investigate individuals' risk. In this
line of research, the present work aimed to assess the genetic risk for
cardiovascular disease (CVD) in Azoreans. Genotyping of 19 SNPs - 9 on 9p21, 5 on
LDLR and 5 on USF1 - was performed by TaqMan assays on 170 healthy Azorean
individuals. Results demonstrate that the most frequent haplotype in 9p21, with a
frequency of 41.4%, is TGGGCGCGC, which harbors all risk alleles. Considering
haplotype homozygosity data show that females present higher value of
homozygosity for both LDLR (13.5%) and USF1 (15.3%), whereas males present higher
value for the 9p21 region (8.2%). Interestingly, genetic profile analysis
revealed differences in terms of geographic and gender distribution. The Azorean 
Central group presented a higher risk for atherosclerosis, 2.7 times higher when 
compared to the Eastern group, while the Eastern group shows 1.5 times higher
risk for dyslipidemias. Moreover, Azorean females demonstrated a 4 times higher
risk for dyslipidemias when compared to males, whereas males have an increased
risk for atherosclerosis. Although allele frequencies in Azoreans were similar to
those reported for the HapMap CEU population, the differences in terms of
haplotype and genetic profile distribution must be taken in consideration when
assessing genetic risk. Taken together, the data here presented evidence for the 
need to perform biomedical research and epidemiologic analysis in Azoreans with
the aim of developing strategies to CVD prevention, health promotion and
population education.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24042129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003524. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

USF1 and hSET1A mediated epigenetic modifications regulate lineage
differentiation and HoxB4 transcription.

Deng C(1), Li Y, Liang S, Cui K, Salz T, Yang H, Tang Z, Gallagher PG, Qiu Y,
Roeder R, Zhao K, Bungert J, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA.

The interplay between polycomb and trithorax complexes has been implicated in
embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and differentiation. It has been shown
recently that WRD5 and Dpy-30, specific components of the SET1/MLL protein
complexes, play important roles during ESC self-renewal and differentiation of
neural lineages. However, not much is known about how and where specific
trithorax complexes are targeted to genes involved in self-renewal or
lineage-specification. Here, we report that the recruitment of the hSET1A histone
H3K4 methyltransferase (HMT) complex by transcription factor USF1 is required for
mesoderm specification and lineage differentiation. In undifferentiated ESCs,
USF1 maintains hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HS/PC) associated bivalent
chromatin domains and differentiation potential. Furthermore, USF1 directed
recruitment of the hSET1A complex to the HoxB4 promoter governs the
transcriptional activation of HoxB4 gene and regulates the formation of early
hematopoietic cell populations. Disruption of USF or hSET1A function by
overexpression of a dominant-negative AUSF1 mutant or by
RNA-interference-mediated knockdown, respectively, led to reduced expression of
mesoderm markers and inhibition of lineage differentiation. We show that USF1 and
hSET1A together regulate H3K4me3 modifications and transcription preinitiation
complex assembly at the hematopoietic-associated HoxB4 gene during
differentiation. Finally, ectopic expression of USF1 in ESCs promotes mesoderm
differentiation and enforces the endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition by
inducing hematopoietic-associated transcription factors, HoxB4 and TAL1. Taken
together, our findings reveal that the guided-recruitment of the hSET1A histone
methyltransferase complex and its H3K4 methyltransferase activity by
transcription regulator USF1 safeguards hematopoietic transcription programs and 
enhances mesoderm/hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3675019
PMID: 23754954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Proteomics. 2013 Aug;13(16):2377-85. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200521. Epub 2013 Jul
22.

Construction of a novel oligonucleotide array-based transcription factor
interaction assay platform and its uses for profiling STAT1 cofactors in mouse
fibroblast cells.

Zeng L(1), Sun Y, Xie L, Wei L, Ren Y, Zhao J, Qin W, Mitchelson K, Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Medical Systems Biology Research Center,
Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing, China.

Here, we describe a novel oligonucleotide array-based transcription factor (TF)
interaction assay platform that can directly identify cointeracting TF complexes 
following binding to their regulatory DNA elements. This platform that combines
immuno-coprecipitation technology with our previously reported oligonucleotide
array-based TF assay (OATFA), is named targeted immuno-coprecipitation OATFA
(TIC-OATFA). We illustrate use of the system to identify interaction partners of 
STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins 1) in mouse
fibroblasts. Several previously known partners of STAT1, as well as new partners,
were identified by TIC-OATFA, including the upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 
(USF1, USF2), nuclear factor of activated T cells, TATA box-binding protein,
nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2, nuclear factor-kappa B, and nuclear factor 1.
Both USF1 and nuclear factor-kappa B are well known to interact with STAT1, but
the other five TFs are previously unreported STAT1 interaction partners. We
examined interactions between one new TF, USF2, and STAT1 in detail. USF2 belongs
to the group of bHLH-zip transcription factors, which in a number of diseases
including cancers, has enhanced activity. In summary, a novel oligonucleotide
array-based assay platform was developed and used to study interactions between
STAT1 and functional TF binding partners, revealing that USF2 and potentially
four other new TFs are partners of STAT1 in an IFN-<U+03B3> stimulated mouse fibroblast 
cell line.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23749757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2013 Jul;170(6):1310-9. doi: 10.1007/s12010-013-0280-5. 
Epub 2013 May 11.

Molecular characterization, expression patterns, and association analysis with
carcass traits of porcine USF1 gene.

Wu H(1), Qiao M, Peng X, Wu J, Liu G, Sun H, Li L, Mei S.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo and Molecular Breeding, Institute of
Animal Husbandry and Veterinary, Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan
430064, China.

The upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) is a transcription factor controlling
expression of several genes involved in lipid and glucose homeostasis. In this
study, two isoforms of the porcine USF1 gene were detected by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), termed USF1 wild-type (wt) and 
USF1/CD, both of them contain a helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (HLH-LZ)
conserved domain. Tissue distribution analysis showed that the two transcripts of
porcine USF1 gene were ubiquitously expressed in all tested tissues, except for
heart. Moreover, we found that a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, C/T) in
intron 10 was significantly associated with ratio of lean to fat (P < 0.05),
dress percentage (P < 0.05), average backfat thickness (P < 0.05), loin eye width
(P < 0.05), lean meat percentage (P < 0.01), loin eye height (P < 0.01), and loin
eye area (P < 0.01). This result suggests that porcine USF1 gene may be a
candidate gene of meat production trait.

PMID: 23666615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):359-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.04.003.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Shaping synaptic plasticity: the role of activity-mediated epigenetic regulation 
on gene transcription.

Cortés-Mendoza J(1), Díaz de León-Guerrero S, Pedraza-Alva G, Pérez-Martínez L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
UNAM, Cuernavaca, Morelos 62271, Mexico.

Learning and memory are basic functions of the brain that allowed human
evolution. It is well accepted that during learning and memory formation the
dynamic establishment of new active synaptic connections is crucial. Persistent
synaptic activation leads to molecular events that include increased release of
neurotransmitters, increased expression of receptors on the postsynaptic neuron, 
thus creating a positive feedback that results in the activation of distinct
signaling pathways that temporally and permanently alter specific patterns of
gene expression. However, the epigenetic changes that allow the establishment of 
long term genetic programs that control learning and memory are not completely
understood. Even less is known regarding the signaling events triggered by
synaptic activity that regulate these epigenetic marks. Here we review the
current understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling activity-dependent 
gene transcription leading synaptic plasticity and memory formation. We describe 
how Ca(2+) entry through N-methyl-d-aspartate-type glutamate neurotransmitter
receptors result in the activation of specific signaling pathways leading to
changes in gene expression, giving special emphasis to the recent data pointing
out different epigenetic mechanisms (histone acetylation, methylation and
phosphorylation as well as DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation) underlying
learning and memory.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):987-99. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 May 9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a regulates the expression of the murine pyruvate
carboxylase gene through the HNF4-specific binding motif in its proximal
promoter.

Chavalit T(1), Rojvirat P, Muangsawat S, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is the first regulatory enzyme of gluconeogenesis. Here
we report that the proximal promoter of the murine PC gene contains three binding
sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a). These sites include the classical
direct repeat 1 (DR1) (-386/-374), non-perfect DR1 (-118/-106) and HNF4a-specific
binding motif (H4-SBM) (-26/-14). Under basal conditions, mutation of the
non-perfect DR1 decreased promoter activity by 50%, whereas mutation of neither
the DR1 nor the H4-SBM had any effect. In marked contrast, only mutation of the
H4-SBM decreased HNF4a-transactivation of the promoter activity by 65%. EMSA
revealed that HNF4a binds to the DR1site and H4-SBM with similar affinity while
it binds poorly to the non-perfect DR1. Interestingly, this non-perfect DR1 also 
coincides with two E-boxes. Mutation of the non-perfect DR1 together with the
nearby E-box reduced USF1- but not USF2-transactivation of promoter activity,
suggesting that USF1 partly contributes to the basal activity of the promoter.
Substitution of the H4-SBM with the DR1 marginally reduced the basal promoter
activity but did not eliminate HNF4a-transactivation, suggesting that HNF4a can
exert its effect via DR1 within this promoter context. ChIP-assay confirmed that 
HNF4a is associated with the H4-SBM. Suppression of HNF4a expression in AML12
cells down-regulated PC mRNA and PC protein by 60% and 50%, respectively,
confirming that PC is a target of HNF4a. We also propose a model for differential
regulation of P1 promoter of PC gene in adipose tissue and liver.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):19238-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.451054. Epub
2013 May 7.

Upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 mediate the transcription of angiotensin II 
binding and inhibitory protein.

Matsuda M(1), Tamura K, Wakui H, Maeda A, Ohsawa M, Kanaoka T, Azushima K, Uneda 
K, Haku S, Tsurumi-Ikeya Y, Toya Y, Maeshima Y, Yamashita A, Umemura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Cardiorenal Medicine, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, USA.

The angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R)-associated protein (ATRAP/Agtrap)
promotes constitutive internalization of the AT1R so as to specifically inhibit
the pathological activation of its downstream signaling yet preserve the
base-line physiological signaling activity of the AT1R. Thus, tissue-specific
regulation of Agtrap expression is relevant to the pathophysiology of
cardiovascular and renal disease. However, the regulatory mechanism of Agtrap
gene expression has not yet been fully elucidated. In this study, we show that
the proximal promoter region from -150 to +72 of the mouse Agtrap promoter, which
contains the X-box, E-box, and GC-box consensus motifs, is able to elicit
substantial transcription of the Agtrap gene. Among these binding motifs, we
showed that the E-box specifically binds upstream stimulatory factor (Usf) 1 and 
Usf2, which are known E-box-binding transcription factors. It is indicated that
the E-box-Usf1/Usf2 binding regulates Agtrap expression because of the following:
1) mutation of the E-box to prevent Usf1/Usf2 binding reduces Agtrap promoter
activity; 2) knockdown of Usf1 or Usf2 affects both endogenous Agtrap mRNA and
Agtrap protein expression, and 3) the decrease in Agtrap mRNA expression in the
afflicted kidney by unilateral ureteral obstruction is accompanied by changes in 
Usf1 and Usf2 mRNA. Furthermore, the results of siRNA transfection in mouse
distal convoluted tubule cells and those of unilateral ureteral obstruction in
the afflicted mouse kidney suggest that Usf1 decreases but Usf2 increases the
Agtrap gene expression by binding to the E-box. The results also demonstrate a
functional E-box-USF1/USF2 interaction in the human AGTRAP promoter, thereby
suggesting that a strategy of modulating the E-box-USF1/USF2 binding has novel
therapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC3696694
PMID: 23653383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Elife. 2013 Apr 9;2:e00659. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00659.

Shedding new light on circadian clocks.

Demarque M(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)is at the Department of Molecular Biology , University of Geneva , Geneva ,
Switzerland maud.demarque@unige.ch.

Comment on
    Elife. 2013;2:e00426.

Using a clever combination of genetic and biochemical tools researchers have
shown that a transcription factor called USF1 has a central role in determining
how mutations of the Clock gene manifest themselves in the behaviour of different
mouse strains.

PMCID: PMC3622228
PMID: 23580350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Elife. 2013 Apr 9;2:e00426. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00426.

Usf1, a suppressor of the circadian Clock mutant, reveals the nature of the
DNA-binding of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex in mice.

Shimomura K(1), Kumar V, Koike N, Kim TK, Chong J, Buhr ED, Whiteley AR, Low SS, 
Omura C, Fenner D, Owens JR, Richards M, Yoo SH, Hong HK, Vitaterna MH, Bass J,
Pletcher MT, Wiltshire T, Hogenesch J, Lowrey PL, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Genomics, Department of Neurobiology, Center for Sleep
and Circadian Biology , Northwestern University , Evanston , United States.

Comment in
    Elife. 2013;2:e00659.

Genetic and molecular approaches have been critical for elucidating the mechanism
of the mammalian circadian clock. Here, we demonstrate that the Clock<U+0394>19 mutant
behavioral phenotype is significantly modified by mouse strain genetic
background. We map a suppressor of the Clock<U+0394>19 mutation to a ~900 kb interval on
mouse chromosome 1 and identify the transcription factor, Usf1, as the
responsible gene. A SNP in the promoter of Usf1 causes elevation of its
transcript and protein in strains that suppress the Clock mutant phenotype. USF1 
competes with the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex for binding to E-box sites in target genes.
Saturation binding experiments demonstrate reduced affinity of the CLOCK<U+0394>19:BMAL1
complex for E-box sites, thereby permitting increased USF1 occupancy on a
genome-wide basis. We propose that USF1 is an important modulator of molecular
and behavioral circadian rhythms in mammals.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00426.001.

PMCID: PMC3622178
PMID: 23580255  [PubMed - in process]


55. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 3;434(2):334-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.072. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Identification and functional characterization of novel MATE1 genetic variations 
in Koreans.

Kim TH(1), Kim KH, Park HJ, Kim S, Choi JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tissue Injury Defense Research Center, School of
Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 (MATE1, SLC47A1), an organic cation transporter, 
plays an important role in the renal and biliary elimination of various clinical 
drugs, including the anti-diabetic drug metformin. The goal of this study was to 
identify and characterize novel genetic variants of MATE1. Five variants in the
promoter region and two nonsynonymous variants, p.D64G and p.L125F, were
identified in 48 DNA samples from healthy Koreans. MATE1 promoter haplotype 3
containing g.-1975C>A showed a significant increase in reporter activity. Three
transcription factors, Nkx-2.5, SREBP-1, and USF-1 were predicted to bind to the 
promoter in the region of g.-1975C>A. Results from electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that the g.-1975A allele exhibits greater binding affinity to all
of these transcription factors than the g.-1975C allele. In particular, we found 
that Nkx-2.5 and USF-1 induce MATE1 transcription. Our study suggests that the
common promoter haplotype of MATE1 changes MATE1 transcriptional activity
regulated by Nkx-2.5, SREBP-1, and USF-1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23558289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 5;288(14):10061-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421156. Epub 2013
Feb 15.

Regulated transcription of human matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) and
interleukin-1ß (IL1B) genes in chondrocytes depends on methylation of specific
proximal promoter CpG sites.

Hashimoto K(1), Otero M, Imagawa K, de Andrés MC, Coico JM, Roach HI, Oreffo RO, 
Marcu KB, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Hospital for Special Surgery and Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The role of DNA methylation in the regulation of catabolic genes such as MMP13
and IL1B, which have sparse CpG islands, is poorly understood in the context of
musculoskeletal diseases. We report that demethylation of specific CpG sites at
-110 bp and -299 bp of the proximal MMP13 and IL1B promoters, respectively,
detected by in situ methylation analysis of chondrocytes obtained directly from
human cartilage, strongly correlated with higher levels of gene expression. The
methylation status of these sites had a significant impact on promoter activities
in chondrocytes, as revealed in transfection experiments with site-directed CpG
mutants in a CpG-free luciferase reporter. Methylation of the -110 and -299 CpG
sites, which reside within a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) consensus motif in
the respective MMP13 and IL1B promoters, produced the most marked suppression of 
their transcriptional activities. Methylation of the -110 bp CpG site in the
MMP13 promoter inhibited its HIF-2a-driven transactivation and decreased HIF-2a
binding to the MMP13 proximal promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
In contrast to HIF-2a, MMP13 transcriptional regulation by other positive (RUNX2,
AP-1, ELF3) and negative (Sp1, GATA1, and USF1) factors was not affected by
methylation status. However, unlike the MMP13 promoter, IL1B was not susceptible 
to HIF-2a transactivation, indicating that the -299 CpG site in the IL1B promoter
must interact with other transcription factors to modulate IL1B transcriptional
activity. Taken together, our data reveal that the methylation of different CpG
sites in the proximal promoters of the human MMP13 and IL1B genes modulates their
transcription by distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3617244
PMID: 23417678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2013 Oct;36(3):317-23. doi: 10.1007/s11239-012-0861-0.

Association analysis of USF1 gene polymorphisms and total unstable carotid plaque
area in atherosclerotic stroke patients.

Wang RM(1), Liu ZZ, Gong YH, Chen LJ, Jia Q, Wang YJ, Fang F, Lv H, Zhang GJ,
Kang XX.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Laboratory Diagnosis, Beijing Tian Tan Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, 100050, China.

Polymorphisms of the upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) have been associated
with carotid artery intima-media thickness and coronary atherosclerotic lesions. 
Unstable carotid plaque is an atherosclerotic change of vascular morphology that 
has been correlated with cerebrovascular ischemic symptoms. Associations of three
single nucleotide polymorphisms of the USF1 gene with total unstable carotid
plaque area (CPA) were investigated in Chinese atherosclerotic stroke patients.
We recruited 668 atherosclerotic stroke patients and 602 controls. Total unstable
CPA values were measured by ultrasound. Genotypes were analyzed using polymerase 
chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) or
mismatched PCR-RFLP. A significant difference in total unstable CPA was found for
rs2516838 and rs2516839 genotypes (P = 0.039 and 0.046, respectively) in
atherosclerotic stroke patients with unstable carotid plaque. Furthermore, in
multiple logistic regression analysis adjusted by age, sex, BMI, hypertension,
smoking status, glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, high-density
lipoprotein-cholesterols, low-density lipoprotein-cholesterols and
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, significant associations were seen between
the total unstable CPA values and genotypes of the rs2516838 or the rs2516839 in 
these patients. The rare allele C of rs2516838 or rare allele A of rs2516839
could predict relative low total unstable CPA values. The rs2516838 and rs2516839
polymorphisms of USF1 influence total unstable CPA in atherosclerotic stroke
patients, which might be new markers to predict the risk of recurrence for this
disease.

PMID: 23271305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell. 2013 Jan 24;49(2):283-97. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.028. Epub 2012 
Dec 6.

Phosphorylation and recruitment of BAF60c in chromatin remodeling for lipogenesis
in response to insulin.

Wang Y(1), Wong RH, Tang T, Hudak CS, Yang D, Duncan RE, Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis is induced in response to feeding and
insulin. This lipogenic induction involves coordinate transcriptional activation 
of lipogenic enzymes, including fatty acid synthase and glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase. We recently reported the importance of USF-1 phosphorylation and
subsequent acetylation in insulin-induced lipogenic gene activation. Here, we
show that Brg1/Brm-associated factor (BAF) 60c is a specific chromatin remodeling
component for lipogenic gene transcription in liver. In response to insulin,
BAF60c is phosphorylated at S247 by atypical PKC<U+03B6>/<U+03BB>, which causes translocation
of BAF60c to the nucleus and allows a direct interaction of BAF60c with USF-1
that is phosphorylated by DNA-PK and acetylated by P/CAF. Thus, BAF60c is
recruited to form the lipoBAF complex to remodel chromatin structure and to
activate lipogenic genes. Consequently, BAF60c promotes lipogenesis in vivo and
increases triglyceride levels, demonstrating its role in metabolic adaption to
activate the lipogenic program in response to feeding and insulin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3786575
PMID: 23219531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 15;450(1):199-208. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120962.

Differential configurations involving binding of USF transcription factors and
Twist1 regulate Alx3 promoter activity in mesenchymal and pancreatic cells.

García-Sanz P(1), Fernández-Pérez A, Vallejo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC (Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Científicas)/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, and CIBERDEM
(Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas 
Asociadas), Madrid, Spain.

During embryonic development, the aristaless-type homeodomain protein Alx3 is
expressed in the forehead mesenchyme and contributes to the regulation of
craniofacial development. In the adult, Alx3 is expressed in pancreatic islets
where it participates in the control of glucose homoeostasis. In the present
study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of Alx3 gene expression in 
these two cell types. We found that the Alx3 promoter contains two E-box
regulatory elements, named EB1 and EB2, that provide binding sites for the basic 
helix-loop-helix transcription factors Twist1, E47, USF (upstream stimulatory
factor) 1 and USF2. In primary mouse embryonic mesenchymal cells isolated from
the forehead, EB2 is bound by Twist1, whereas EB1 is bound by USF1 and USF2.
Integrity of both EB1 and EB2 is required for Twist1-mediated transactivation of 
the Alx3 promoter, even though Twist1 does not bind to EB1, indicating that
binding of USF1 and USF2 to this element is required for Twist1-dependent Alx3
promoter activity. In contrast, in pancreatic islet insulin-producing cells, the 
integrity of EB2 is not required for proximal promoter activity. The results of
the present study indicate that USF1 and USF2 are important regulatory factors
for Alx3 gene expression in different cell types, whereas Twist1 contributes to
transcriptional transactivation in mesenchymal, but not in pancreatic, cells.

PMID: 23181698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):375-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.021. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

The liver X receptor promotes macrophage differentiation and suppresses
osteoclast formation in mouse RAW264.7 promyelocytic leukemia cells exposed to
bacterial lipopolysaccharide.

Robertson Remen KM(1), Gustafsson JÅ, Andersson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, 14157
Huddinge, Sweden. kirsten.remen@ki.se

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the principal component of Gram-negative bacterial cell
walls, is a stimulator of osteoclastogenesis and thus a key factor in
inflammatory bone loss. We have recently reported that the important cholesterol 
and inflammatory regulator, liver X receptor (LXRa/ß), can potently inhibit
osteoclast formation from bone marrow-derived osteoclast precursors in a
bacterial/LPS environment. In this manuscript, we further studied the effect of
the LXR agonist GW3965 on osteoclast differentiation in RAW264.7 promyelocytic
leukemia cells exposed to LPS. We found that not only did activation of the LXR
potently inhibit the formation of TRAP-positive osteoclast-like cells, but
promoted a population of TRAP-negative mononuclear cells with high phagocytic
activity. We observed reduced expression of the osteoclast markers TRAP/Acp5,
Ctsk, Calcr and Oscar after 3-4days of GW3965 treatment, coinciding with an
increase in the expression of the anti-osteoclastogenic factor Irf8. Expression
of the macrophage/phagocytic marker Cd68 was increased, however the "classical"
macrophage markers F4/80 and Cd14 and the "alternatively" activated macrophage
markers Tgfß and Il10 were not altered. Further, activation of LXR increased the 
expression of the macrophage survival gene AIM/SPa, a known LXR target gene, and 
osteoclast/macrophage-related markers (Mitf, Pu.1, Usf1/2, Ostm1 and Mfr).
Although Akt phosphorylation was reduced, GW3965 seemed to act independently of
MAPKs (p38, ERK, JNK) and NF<U+03BA>B, and had no inhibitory effect on cytokine
expression (Tnfa, Il6, or Il1ß). Our results indicate that activation of the LXR 
not only inhibits the differentiation of osteoclast-like cells from RAW264.7
cells in a bacterial/LPS environment, but is also involved in the fate
determination of myeloid progenitor cells into macrophages with high phagocytic
capacity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Angiogenesis. 2013 Jan;16(1):223-33. doi: 10.1007/s10456-012-9314-9. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

PPARa agonist Wy14643 suppresses cathepsin B in human endothelial cells via
transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms.

Reichenbach G(1), Starzinski-Powitz A, Sloane BF, Doll M, Kippenberger S, Bernd
A, Kaufmann R, Meissner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Cathepsin B has been shown to be important in angiogenesis; therefore,
understanding its regulation in endothelial cells should provide fundamental
information that will aid in the development of new treatment options. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) have been shown to have
anti-inflammatory, anti-angiogenic and anti-tumorigenic properties. We explored
the influence of a PPARa agonist on cathepsin B expression in human endothelial
cells. The PPARa agonist, Wy14643, was found to inhibit cathepsin B protein
expression. Further studies demonstrated the Wy14643-dependent but
PPARa-independent suppression of cathepsin B. This has been previously described 
for other PPAR agonists. Wy14643 suppressed the accumulation of cathepsin B mRNA,
which was accompanied by the selective suppression of a 5'-alternative splice
variant. Consistent with these results, luciferase promoter assays and
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis demonstrated that the suppression was
facilitated by reduced binding of the transcription factors USF1/2 to an E-box
within the cathepsin B promoter. Additionally, Wy14643 treatment resulted in a
reduction in cathepsin B half-life, suggesting a posttranslational regulatory
mechanism. Overall, our results suggest that the PPARa-dependent anti-angiogenic 
action of Wy14643 seems to be mediated, in part, by Wy14643-dependent but
PPARa-independent regulation of cathepsin B expression.

PMID: 23096928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Oct 11;3:e400. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.138.

p53 is a major component of the transcriptional and apoptotic program regulated
by PI 3-kinase/Akt/GSK3 signaling.

Nayak G(1), Cooper GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway has a prominent role
in cell survival and proliferation, in part, by regulating gene expression at the
transcriptional level. Previous work using global expression profiling identified
FOXOs and the E-box-binding transcription factors MITF and USF1 as key targets of
PI 3-kinase signaling that lead to the induction of proapoptotic and cell cycle
arrest genes in response to inhibition of PI 3-kinase. In this study, we
investigated the role of p53 downstream of PI 3-kinase signaling by analyzing the
effects of inhibition of PI 3-kinase in Rat-1 cells, which have wild-type p53,
compared with Rat-1 cells expressing a dominant-negative p53 mutant. Expression
of dominant-negative p53 conferred partial resistance to apoptosis induced by
inhibition of PI 3-kinase. Global gene expression profiling combined with
computational and experimental analysis of transcription factor binding sites
demonstrated that p53, along with FOXO, MITF and USF1, contributed to gene
induction in response to PI 3-kinase inhibition. Activation of p53 was mediated
by phosphorylation of the histone acetyltransferase Tip60 by glycogen synthase
kinase (GSK) 3, leading to activation of p53 by acetylation. Many of the genes
targeted by p53 were also targeted by FOXO and E-box-binding transcription
factors, indicating that p53 functions coordinately with these factors to
regulate gene expression downstream of PI 3-kinase/Akt/GSK3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3481126
PMID: 23059819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Oct;10(10):1332-42. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0351. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

SINE retrotransposons cause epigenetic reprogramming of adjacent gene promoters.

Estécio MR(1), Gallegos J, Dekmezian M, Lu Y, Liang S, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. mestecio@mdanderson.org

Almost half of the human genome and as much as 40% of the mouse genome is
composed of repetitive DNA sequences. The majority of these repeats are
retrotransposons of the SINE and LINE families, and such repeats are generally
repressed by epigenetic mechanisms. It has been proposed that these elements can 
act as methylation centers from which DNA methylation spreads into gene promoters
in cancer. Contradictory to a methylation center function, we have found that
retrotransposons are enriched near promoter CpG islands that stay
methylation-free in cancer. Clearly, it is important to determine which
influence, if any, these repetitive elements have on nearby gene promoters. Using
an in vitro system, we confirm here that SINE B1 elements can influence the
activity of downstream gene promoters, with acquisition of DNA methylation and
loss of activating histone marks, thus resulting in a repressed state. SINE
sequences themselves did not immediately acquire DNA methylation but were marked 
by H3K9me2 and H3K27me3. Moreover, our bisulfite sequencing data did not support 
that gain of DNA methylation in gene promoters occurred by methylation spreading 
from SINE B1 repeats. Genome-wide analysis of SINE repeats distribution showed
that their enrichment is directly correlated with the presence of USF1, USF2, and
CTCF binding, proteins with insulator function. In summary, our work supports the
concept that SINE repeats interfere negatively with gene expression and that
their presence near gene promoters is counter-selected, except when the promoter 
is protected by an insulator element.

PMCID: PMC3475755
PMID: 22952045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(8):e1002638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002638. Epub
2012 Aug 9.

High resolution genome wide binding event finding and motif discovery reveals
transcription factor spatial binding constraints.

Guo Y(1), Mahony S, Gifford DK.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

An essential component of genome function is the syntax of genomic regulatory
elements that determine how diverse transcription factors interact to orchestrate
a program of regulatory control. A precise characterization of in vivo spacing
constraints between key transcription factors would reveal key aspects of this
genomic regulatory language. To discover novel transcription factor spatial
binding constraints in vivo, we developed a new integrative computational method,
genome wide event finding and motif discovery (GEM). GEM resolves ChIP data into 
explanatory motifs and binding events at high spatial resolution by linking
binding event discovery and motif discovery with positional priors in the context
of a generative probabilistic model of ChIP data and genome sequence. GEM
analysis of 63 transcription factors in 214 ENCODE human ChIP-Seq experiments
recovers more known factor motifs than other contemporary methods, and discovers 
six new motifs for factors with unknown binding specificity. GEM's adaptive
learning of binding-event read distributions allows it to further improve upon
previous methods for processing ChIP-Seq and ChIP-exo data to yield unsurpassed
spatial resolution and discovery of closely spaced binding events of the same
factor. In a systematic analysis of in vivo sequence-specific transcription
factor binding using GEM, we have found hundreds of spatial binding constraints
between factors. GEM found 37 examples of factor binding constraints in mouse ES 
cells, including strong distance-specific constraints between Klf4 and other key 
regulatory factors. In human ENCODE data, GEM found 390 examples of spatially
constrained pair-wise binding, including such novel pairs as c-Fos:c-Jun/USF1,
CTCF/Egr1, and HNF4A/FOXA1. The discovery of new factor-factor spatial
constraints in ChIP data is significant because it proposes testable models for
regulatory factor interactions that will help elucidate genome function and the
implementation of combinatorial control.

PMCID: PMC3415389
PMID: 22912568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):3034-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200519. Epub 2012
Aug 13.

Upstream stimulating factors regulate the expression of ROR<U+03B3>T in human
lymphocytes.

Ratajewski M(1), Walczak-Drzewiecka A, Salkowska A, Dastych J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Medical Biology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, 93-232 Lodz, Poland.

Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>T (ROR<U+03B3>T) is the orphan nuclear receptor
that regulates the development of Th17 cells and the expression of IL-17. The
differentiation of Th17 cells is associated with the upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>T mRNA, 
and the mechanisms regulating that process in human cells are not well
understood. We investigated the transcriptional regulation of ROR<U+03B3>T in a human
lymphocytic cell line and Th17 differentiated from naive CD4+ cells from human
peripheral blood. A series of experiments, including 5' deletion and in situ
mutagenesis analysis of the human ROR<U+03B3>T promoter, chromatin immunoprecipitation, 
and overexpression of selected transcription factors, revealed that the
transcription factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) and USF-2 are
indispensable for the transcription of ROR<U+03B3>T in human lymphocytes. There was also
upregulation of USF-1 and USF-2 during the differentiation of Th17 cells from
naive CD4+ cells. In this article, we report the first analysis, to our
knowledge, of the human ROR<U+03B3>T promoter and demonstrate the role of the USF-1 and 
USF-2 transcription factors in regulating the expression of ROR<U+03B3>T in human
lymphocytes. Thus, USFs are important for the molecular mechanisms of Th17
differentiation, and possible changes in the expression of USFs might be of
interest for inflammatory conditions with a Th17 component. Furthermore, these
observations suggest a possible link between metabolic disorders in which the
role of glucose-induced USF expression has already been established and
autoimmune diseases in which the upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>T is frequently detected.

PMID: 22891280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040730. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Yersinia enterocolitica YopT and Clostridium difficile toxin B induce expression 
of GILZ in epithelial cells.

Köberle M(1), Göppel D, Grandl T, Gaentzsch P, Manncke B, Berchtold S, Müller S, 
Lüscher B, Asselin-Labat ML, Pallardy M, Sorg I, Langer S, Barth H, Zumbihl R,
Autenrieth IB, Bohn E.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, Eberhard Karls 
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Glucocorticoid induced-leucine zipper (GILZ) has been shown to be induced in
cells by different stimuli such as glucocorticoids, IL-10 or deprivation of IL-2.
GILZ has anti-inflammatory properties and may be involved in signalling
modulating apoptosis. Herein we demonstrate that wildtype Yersinia enterocolitica
which carry the pYV plasmid upregulated GILZ mRNA levels and protein expression
in epithelial cells. Infection of HeLa cells with different Yersinia mutant
strains revealed that the protease activity of YopT, which cleaves the
membrane-bound form of Rho GTPases was sufficient to induce GILZ expression.
Similarly, Clostridium difficile toxin B, another bacterial inhibitor of Rho
GTPases induced GILZ expression. YopT and toxin B both increased transcriptional 
activity of the GILZ promoter in HeLa cells. GILZ expression could not be linked 
to the inactivation of an individual Rho GTPase by these toxins. However, forced 
expression of RhoA and RhoB decreased basal GILZ promoter activity. Furthermore, 
MAPK activation proved necessary for profound GILZ induction by toxin B. Promoter
studies and gel shift analyses defined binding of upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) 1 and 2 to a canonical c-Myc binding site (E-box) in the GILZ promoter as a
crucial step of its trans-activation. In addition we could show that USF-1 and
USF-2 are essential for basal as well as toxin B induced GILZ expression. These
findings define a novel way of GILZ promoter trans-activation mediated by
bacterial toxins and differentiate it from those mediated by dexamethasone or
deprivation of IL-2.

PMCID: PMC3392236
PMID: 22792400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Hypertension. 2012 Sep;60(3):697-704. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.198242.
Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Chronic hypoxia during gestation causes epigenetic repression of the estrogen
receptor-a gene in ovine uterine arteries via heightened promoter methylation.

Dasgupta C(1), Chen M, Zhang H, Yang S, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, Division of Pharmacology, Department of Basic
Sciences, Loma Linda University, School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) plays a key role in the adaptation of increased uterine
blood flow in pregnancy. Chronic hypoxia is a common stress to maternal
cardiovascular homeostasis and causes increased risk of preeclampsia. Studies in 
pregnant sheep demonstrated that hypoxia during gestation downregulated ERa gene 
expression in uterine arteries. The present study tested the hypothesis that
hypoxia causes epigenetic repression of the ERa gene in uterine arteries via
heightened promoter methylation. Ovine ERa promoter of 2035 bp spanning from
-2000 to +35 of the transcription start site was cloned. No estrogen or
hypoxia-inducible factor response elements were found at the promoter. Two
transcription factor binding sites, USF(-15) and Sp1(-520), containing CpG
dinucleotides were identified, which had significant effects on the promoter
activity. The USF element binds transcription factors USF1 and USF2, and the Sp1 
element binds Sp1, as well as ERa through Sp1. Deletion of the Sp1 site abrogated
17ß-estradiol-induced increase in the promoter activity. In normoxic control
sheep, CpG methylation at the Sp1 but not the USF site was significantly
decreased in uterine arteries of pregnant as compared with nonpregnant animals.
In pregnant sheep exposed to long-term high-altitude hypoxia, CpG methylation at 
both Sp1 and USF sites in uterine arteries was significantly increased.
Methylation inhibited transcription factor binding and the promoter activity. The
results provide evidence of hypoxia causing heightened promoter methylation and
resultant ERa gene repression in uterine arteries and suggest new insights of
molecular mechanisms linking gestational hypoxia to aberrant uteroplacental
circulation and increased risk of preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3421058
PMID: 22777938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(18):9919-28. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00388-12. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Hepatitis C virus-mediated inhibition of cathepsin S increases invariant-chain
expression on hepatocyte surface.

Kim H(1), Mazumdar B, Bose SK, Meyer K, Di Bisceglie AM, Hoft DF, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA.

Hepatocytes are the main source of hepatitis C virus (HCV) replication and
contain the maximum viral load in an infected person. Chronic HCV infection is
characterized by weak cellular immune responses to viral proteins. Cathepsin S is
a lysosomal cysteine protease and controls HLA-DR-antigen complex presentation
through the degradation of the invariant chain. In this study, we examined the
effect of HCV proteins on cathepsin S expression and found it to be markedly
decreased in dendritic cells (DCs) exposed to HCV or in hepatocytes expressing
HCV proteins. The downregulation of cathepsin S was mediated by HCV core and NS5A
proteins involving inhibition of the transcription factors interferon regulatory 
factor 1 (IRF-1) and upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) in gamma interferon
(IFN-<U+03B3>)-treated hepatocytes. Inhibition of cathepsin S by HCV proteins increased 
cell surface expression of the invariant chain. In addition, hepatocytes stably
transfected with HCV core or NS5A inhibited HLA-DR expression. Together, these
results suggested that HCV has an inhibitory role on cathepsin S-mediated major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II maturation, which may contribute to
weak immunogenicity of viral antigens in chronically infected humans.

PMCID: PMC3446550
PMID: 22761382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002761. Epub 2012 Jun 
14.

The histone demethylase Jhdm1a regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Pan D(1), Mao C, Zou T, Yao AY, Cooper MP, Boyartchuk V, Wang YX.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression and Program in Molecular Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United
States of America.

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is required for maintaining blood glucose homeostasis;
yet, in diabetes mellitus, this process is unrestrained and is a major
contributor to fasting hyperglycemia. To date, the impacts of chromatin modifying
enzymes and chromatin landscape on gluconeogenesis are poorly understood. Through
catalyzing the removal of methyl groups from specific lysine residues in the
histone tail, histone demethylases modulate chromatin structure and, hence, gene 
expression. Here we perform an RNA interference screen against the known histone 
demethylases and identify a histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) demethylase, Jhdm1a, as 
a key negative regulator of gluconeogenic gene expression. In vivo, silencing of 
Jhdm1a promotes liver glucose synthesis, while its exogenous expression reduces
blood glucose level. Importantly, the regulation of gluconeogenesis by Jhdm1a
requires its demethylation activity. Mechanistically, we find that Jhdm1a
regulates the expression of a major gluconeogenic regulator, C/EBPa. This is
achieved, at least in part, by its USF1-dependent association with the C/EBPa
promoter and its subsequent demethylation of dimethylated H3K36 on the C/EBPa
locus. Our work provides compelling evidence that links histone demethylation to 
transcriptional regulation of gluconeogenesis and has important implications for 
the treatment of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3375226
PMID: 22719268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3466-75. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24223.

Statins modulate transcriptional activity of heme-oxygenase-1 promoter in NIH 3T3
Cells.

Mrad MF(1), Mouawad CA, Al-Hariri M, Eid AA, Alam J, Habib A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, American University of
Beirut, Lebanon.

Statins, inhibitors of HMG CoA reductase, have pleiotropic effects independent of
their capacity to lower cholesterol. Heme-oxygenase-1(HO-1) plays an important
role as an anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory enzyme. In the present study, we
used NIH 3T3 cells which express HO-1 to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
HO-1 induction by statins. Simvastatin or fluvastatin induced a significant
increase in HO-1 protein expression and mRNA levels. Both statins stimulated
activity of a mouse HO-1 promoter (-1,287 to +73<U+2009>bp)/luciferase reporter gene,
3.25<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23 (Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test) and 3.13<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.33
(Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test), respectively. This effect was more
pronounced in the short proximal promoter than the full promoter of HO-1. Gel
retardation experiments for C/EBP and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
DNA-binding activities using simvastatin- or fluvastatin-treated cells showed
significant nuclear protein-DNA complexes which were supershifted with antibodies
specific for C/EBP ß and d or USF-1 and USF-2. Point mutations of the proximal
HO-1 promoter (-149 to +73<U+2009>bp) for the myc/max which binds USF or the C/EBP
binding sequences showed a reduction in statin-induced reporter activity whereas 
no role of the distal C/EBP binding elements located at -4<U+2009>kb was observed.
Moreover, overexpression of mutated C/EBP ß and USF factor or the siRNA for both 
factors supported a role of these transcription factors in statin-dependent
induction of HO-1, with a clearer effect for C/EBP.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22689023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem J. 2012 Aug 15;446(1):89-98. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111942.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 activates GATA5 expression through an E-box motif.

Chen B(1), Hsu R, Li Z, Kogut PC, Du Q, Rouser K, Camoretti-Mercado B, Solway J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Medicine, Department of Medicine, University
of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
bchen@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Silencing of GATA5 gene expression as a result of promoter hypermethylation has
been observed in lung, gastrointestinal and ovarian cancers. However, the
regulation of GATA5 gene expression has been poorly understood. In the present
study, we have demonstrated that an E (enhancer)-box in the GATA5 promoter (bp
-118 to -113 in mice; bp -164 to -159 in humans) positively regulates GATA5
transcription by binding USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1). Using
site-directed mutagenesis, EMSA (electrophoretic mobility-shift analysis) and
affinity chromatography, we found that USF1 specifically binds to the E-box
sequence (5'-CACGTG-3'), but not to a mutated E-box. CpG methylation of this
E-box significantly diminished its binding of transcription factors. Mutation of 
the E-box within a GATA5 promoter fragment significantly decreased promoter
activity in a luciferase reporter assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified
that USF1 physiologically interacts with the GATA5 promoter E-box in mouse
intestinal mucosa, which has the highest GATA5 gene expression in mouse.
Co-transfection with a USF1 expression plasmid significantly increased GATA5
promoter-driven luciferase transcription. Furthermore, real-time and RT (reverse 
transcription)-PCR analyses confirmed that overexpression of USF1 activates
endogenous GATA5 gene expression in human bronchial epithelial cells. The present
study provides the first evidence that USF1 activates GATA5 gene expression
through the E-box motif and suggests a potential mechanism (disruption of the
E-box) by which GATA5 promoter methylation reduces GATA5 expression in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3677829
PMID: 22625849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Hypertension. 2012 Jun;59(6):1212-9. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.192971.
Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Gene trapping uncovers sex-specific mechanisms for upstream stimulatory factors 1
and 2 in angiotensinogen expression.

Park S(1), Liu X, Davis DR, Sigmund CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 3181 MERF, Roy J and Lucille A Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism (C/A) located within an E-box at the -20
position of the human angiotensinogen (AGT) promoter may regulate transcriptional
activation through differential recruitment of the transcription factors upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and 2. To study the contribution of USF1 on AGT gene
expression, mice carrying a (-20C) human AGT (hAGT) transgene were bred with mice
harboring a USF1 gene trap allele designed to knock down USF1 expression. USF1
mRNA was reduced relative to controls in liver (9 ± 1%), perigenital adipose (16 
± 3%), kidney (17 ± 1%), and brain (34 ± 2%) in double-transgenic mice. This
decrease was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed a decrease in USF1, with retention of USF2 
binding at the hAGT promoter in the liver of male mice. hAGT expression was
reduced in the liver and other tissues of female but not male mice. The decrease 
in endogenous AGT expression was insufficient to alter systolic blood pressure at
baseline but caused reduced systolic blood pressure in female USF1 gene trap mice
fed a high-fat diet. Treatment of USF1 knockdown males with intravenous
adenoviral short hairpin RNA targeting USF2 resulted in reduced expression of
USF1, USF2, and hAGT protein. Our data from chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
suggests that this decrease in hAGT is attributed to decreased USF2 binding to
the hAGT promoter. In conclusion, both USF1 and USF2 are essential for AGT
transcriptional regulation, and distinct sex-specific and tissue-specific
mechanisms are involved in the activities of these transcription factors in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3357008
PMID: 22547438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(12):6701-11. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00380-12. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Replication-uncoupled histone deposition during adenovirus DNA replication.

Komatsu T(1), Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

In infected cells, the chromatin structure of the adenovirus genome DNA plays
critical roles in its genome functions. Previously, we reported that in early
phases of infection, incoming viral DNA is associated with both viral core
protein VII and cellular histones. Here we show that in late phases of infection,
newly synthesized viral DNA is also associated with histones. We also found that 
the knockdown of CAF-1, a histone chaperone that functions in the
replication-coupled deposition of histones, does not affect the level of histone 
H3 bound on viral chromatin, although CAF-1 is accumulated at viral DNA
replication foci together with PCNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using
epitope-tagged histone H3 demonstrated that histone variant H3.3, which is
deposited onto the cellular genome in a replication-independent manner, is
selectively associated with both incoming and newly synthesized viral DNAs.
Microscopic analyses indicated that histones but not USF1, a transcription factor
that regulates viral late gene expression, are excluded from viral DNA
replication foci and that this is achieved by the oligomerization of the DNA
binding protein (DBP). Taken together, these results suggest that histone
deposition onto newly synthesized viral DNA is most likely uncoupled with viral
DNA replication, and a possible role of DBP oligomerization in this
replication-uncoupled histone deposition is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3393562
PMID: 22496236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):278-91. doi: 10.1038/ki.2012.102. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

In vivo regulation of the heme oxygenase-1 gene in humanized transgenic mice.

Kim J(1), Zarjou A, Traylor AM, Bolisetty S, Jaimes EA, Hull TD, George JF,
Mikhail FM, Agarwal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2012 Aug;82(3):253-5.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in heme degradation,
producing equimolar amounts of carbon monoxide, iron, and biliverdin. Induction
of HO-1 is a beneficial response to tissue injury in diverse animal models of
diseases including acute kidney injury. In vitro analysis has shown that the
human HO-1 gene is transcriptionally regulated by changes in chromatin
conformation, but whether such control occurs in vivo is not known. To enable
such an analysis, we generated transgenic mice, harboring an 87-kb bacterial
artificial chromosome expressing human HO-1 mRNA and protein and bred these mice 
with HO-1 knockout mice to generate humanized BAC transgenic mice. This
successfully rescued the phenotype of the knockout mice including reduced birth
rates, tissue iron overload, splenomegaly, anemia, leukocytosis, dendritic cell
abnormalities, and survival after acute kidney injury induced by rhabdomyolysis
or cisplatin nephrotoxicity. Transcription factors such as USF1/2, JunB, Sp1, and
CTCF were found to associate with regulatory regions of the human HO-1 gene in
the kidney following rhabdomyolysis. Chromosome conformation capture and
ChIP-loop assays confirmed this in the formation of chromatin looping in vivo.
Thus, these bacterial artificial chromosome humanized HO-1 mice are a valuable
model to study the human HO-1 gene, providing insight to the in vivo architecture
of the gene in acute kidney injury and other diseases.

PMCID: PMC3396739
PMID: 22495295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jun;32(6):1535-44. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.245639. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Potential role of upstream stimulatory factor 1 gene variant in familial combined
hyperlipidemia and related disorders.

Auer S(1), Hahne P, Soyal SM, Felder T, Miller K, Paulmichl M, Krempler F,
Oberkofler H, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Strubergasse
21, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic studies implicated upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) in
familial combined hyperlipidemia because the rs2073658 minor allele was
associated with reduced risk of familial combined hyperlipidemia and related
disorders. The molecular mechanisms whereby rs2073658 influences trait expression
have remained elusive.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma lipids, rs2073658 genotypes (N=372), and hepatic
transcript levels (N=96) of USF1 and genes involved in hepatic lipoprotein
production were determined in obese subjects. The rs2073658 minor allele was
associated with reduced plasma triglycerides (TGs) (P<0.001), hepatic USF1
(P<0.01), and microsomal TG transfer protein transcript levels (P<0.05).
Functional studies in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells showed that rs2073658 
is located in a forkhead box A2 (FOXA2) binding site and that major allele
constructs displayed higher transcriptional activity than minor allele
constructs. Knockdown of FOXA2 reduced the activity of major, but not minor
allele constructs. Furthermore, an interaction between hepatic FOXA2 transcript
levels and rs2073658 minor allele carrier status on hepatic USF1 transcript
levels was observed in vivo (P<0.05). USF1 activated the transcription of FOXA2
and FOXA2 strongly activated the transcription of microsomal TG transfer protein.
CONCLUSIONS: A feed-forward loop comprising activation of USF1 transcription by
FOXA2 and activation of FOXA2 transcription by USF1, driving microsomal TG
transfer protein expression, is modulated by rs2073658. Hence, rs2073658 likely
influences hepatic TG secretion.

PMID: 22460558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Thromb Res. 2012 Sep;130(3):451-7. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2012.02.045. Epub 2012
Mar 17.

A common polymorphism in the 5' region of the human protein c gene binds USF1.

Thain KR(1), Nakada TA, Boyd JH, Russell JA, Walley KR.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care Research Laboratories, Institute for Heart + Lung Health at St. 
Paul's Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Genetic variation in the Protein C gene (PROC) is associated with
altered risk of adverse outcome for a number of diseases. Common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoter region and the adjacent 5' region
of PROC are associated with Protein C expression. We tested the hypothesis that
common SNPs (minor allele frequency >10%) between the frequently studied promoter
SNPs -1654 (rs1799808) and -1641 (rs1799809), and the end of PROC intron 2 alter 
nuclear transcription factor binding.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used electrophoretic mobility shift assays with 25-mer 
oligonucleotides centered on each of the 10 SNPs assessed in this potential
regulatory region of the Protein C gene to test for differential binding to
nuclear factors isolated from Hep-G2 cells.
RESULTS: We found that the G-allele oligo of the intron 2 SNP rs2069915[G/A]
bound nuclear factors more avidly than the A-allele (p=1.9 × 10(-9), n=24).
Similarly, we found that the C-allele oligo of the intron 2 SNP rs2069916[C/T]
bound nuclear factors more avidly than the T-allele, (p=3.7 × 10(-6), n=19). Cold
competition and supershift assays suggested that the protein differentially
binding to the C-allele of rs2069916 was USF1. Notably, we observed minimal
nuclear factor binding to oligos containing haplotypes of the previously reported
-1654 and -1641 SNPs. Luciferase reporter assays that showed the A-T haplotype of
rs2069915 and rs2069916 drives transcription significantly more than the C-G
haplotype (t-test, P=0.015, n=12).
CONCLUSION: Differential transcription factor binding occurs for common SNPs in
the 5' intronic regions of PROC which may contribute to PROC regulation and
reported PROC SNP - phenotype associations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22425321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Brain Pathol. 2012 Nov;22(6):765-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00586.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 12.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) polymorphisms associate with Alzheimer's
disease-related neuropathological lesions: Tampere Autopsy Study.

Isotalo K(1), Kok EH, Luoto TM, Haikonen S, Haapasalo H, Lehtimäki T, Karhunen
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
karita.isotalo@uta.fi

The apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene associates with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and
cholesterol levels. Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) regulates lipid
metabolism genes, including APOE, and the AD Aß-precursor protein. We
investigated associations between 6 haplotype-tagging USF1 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (and haplotypes) and AD-related neuropathological lesions [senile
plaques (SP), neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) ] in an autopsy series comprising 603
cases (ages 0-97, mean 62 years, 215 women) that died out-of-hospital. In age-
and APOE-adjusted analyses, the minor G-allele of rs2774276, previously linked to
elevated cholesterol, associated with late-stage burnt out SP among women and
early non-neuritic SP among men. The G-allele of the previously unreported
rs10908821 showed significant risk of having SP, especially neuritic and burnt
out SP, among women but not men. USF1 haplotype GCGCAC carriers (risk alleles of 
rs2774276 and rs10908821) associated with SP risk, especially neuritic and
late-stage burnt out SP, among women but not men. Younger CCGCAC carriers (risk
allele of rs2774276 and protective of rs10908821) were more likely to have
non-neuritic and diffuse SP. Conversely, USF1 CCGCAC haplotype carriers had lower
NFT prevalence among 65+ year-olds. These results suggest USF1 has an independent
but gender- and age-associated effect on AD-related brain lesion development.

© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of
Neuropathology.

PMID: 22390463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Epigenomics. 2012 Feb;4(1):67-80. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.112.

Chromatin insulator elements: establishing barriers to set heterochromatin
boundaries.

Barkess G(1), West AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Epigenomic profiling has revealed that substantial portions of genomes in higher 
eukaryotes are organized into extensive domains of transcriptionally repressive
chromatin. The boundaries of repressive chromatin domains can be fixed by DNA
elements known as barrier insulators, to both shield neighboring gene expression 
and to maintain the integrity of chromosomal silencing. Here, we examine the
current progress in identifying vertebrate barrier elements and their binding
factors. We overview the design of the reporter assays used to define
enhancer-blocking and barrier insulators. We look at the mechanisms vertebrate
barrier proteins, such as USF1 and VEZF1, employ to counteract Polycomb- and
heterochromatin-associated repression. We also undertake a critical analysis of
whether CTCF could also act as a barrier protein. There is good evidence that
barrier elements in vertebrates can form repressive chromatin domain boundaries. 
Future studies will determine whether barriers are frequently used to define
repressive domain boundaries in vertebrates.

PMID: 22332659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1819(7):644-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.01.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Chromatin domains, insulators, and the regulation of gene expression.

Ghirlando R(1), Giles K, Gowher H, Xiao T, Xu Z, Yao H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Key Diseases, National Insitute of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892-0540, USA.

The DNA sequence elements called insulators have two basic kinds of properties.
Barrier elements block the propagation of heterochromatic structures into
adjacent euchromatin. Enhancer blocking elements interfere with interaction
between an enhancer and promoter when placed between them. We have dissected a
compound insulator element found at the 5' end of the chicken ß-globin locus,
which possesses both activities. Barrier insulation is mediated by two kinds of
DNA binding proteins: USF1/USF2, a heterodimer which recruits multiple enzyme
complexes capable of marking histone on adjacent nucleosomes with 'activating'
marks, and Vezf1, which protects against DNA methylation. We have found that the 
heterochromatic region upstream of the insulator element is maintained in its
silent state by a dicer-dependent mechanism, suggesting a mechanism for Vezf1
function in the insulator. Enhancer blocking function in the ß-globin insulator
element is conferred by a binding site for CTCF. Consistent with this property,
CTCF binding was found some years ago to be essential for imprinted expression at
the Igf2/H19 locus. Work in many laboratories has since demonstrated that CTCF
helps stabilize long-range interactions in the nucleus. We have recently shown
that in the case of the human insulin locus such an interaction, over a distance 
of ~300kb, can result in stimulation of a target gene which itself is important
for insulin secretion. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Chromatin in time and space.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3484685
PMID: 22326678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002470. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002470. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

USF-1 is critical for maintaining genome integrity in response to UV-induced DNA 
photolesions.

Baron Y(1), Corre S, Mouchet N, Vaulont S, Prince S, Galibert MD.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR6061 Genetic and Development Institute of Rennes, RTO Team, Rennes,
France.

An important function of all organisms is to ensure that their genetic material
remains intact and unaltered through generations. This is an extremely
challenging task since the cell's DNA is constantly under assault by endogenous
and environmental agents. To protect against this, cells have evolved effective
mechanisms to recognize DNA damage, signal its presence, and mediate its repair. 
While these responses are expected to be highly regulated because they are
critical to avoid human diseases, very little is known about the regulation of
the expression of genes involved in mediating their effects. The Nucleotide
Excision Repair (NER) is the major DNA-repair process involved in the recognition
and removal of UV-mediated DNA damage. Here we use a combination of in vitro and 
in vivo assays with an intermittent UV-irradiation protocol to investigate the
regulation of key players in the DNA-damage recognition step of NER sub-pathways 
(TCR and GGR). We show an up-regulation in gene expression of CSA and HR23A,
which are involved in TCR and GGR, respectively. Importantly, we show that this
occurs through a p53 independent mechanism and that it is coordinated by the
stress-responsive transcription factor USF-1. Furthermore, using a mouse model we
show that the loss of USF-1 compromises DNA repair, which suggests that USF-1
plays an important role in maintaining genomic stability.

PMCID: PMC3266871
PMID: 22291606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 1;188(5):2266-75. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002931. Epub 2012
Jan 27.

DNA double-strand breaks relieve USF-mediated repression of Dß2 germline
transcription in developing thymocytes.

Stone JL(1), McMillan RE, Skaar DA, Bradshaw JM, Jirtle RL, Sikes ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695, USA.

Activation of germline promoters is central to V(D)J recombinational
accessibility, driving chromatin remodeling, nucleosome repositioning, and
transcriptional read-through of associated DNA. We have previously shown that of 
the two TCRß locus (Tcrb) D segments, Dß1 is flanked by an upstream promoter that
directs its transcription and recombinational accessibility. In contrast,
transcription within the DJß2 segment cluster is initially restricted to the J
segments and only redirected upstream of Dß2 after D-to-J joining. The repression
of upstream promoter activity prior to Tcrb assembly correlates with evidence
that suggests DJß2 recombination is less efficient than that of DJß1. Because
inefficient DJß2 assembly offers the potential for V-to-DJß2 recombination to
rescue frameshifted V-to-DJß1 joints, we wished to determine how Dß2 promoter
activity is modulated upon Tcrb recombination. In this study, we show that
repression of the otherwise transcriptionally primed 5'Dß2 promoter requires
binding of upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-1 to a noncanonical E-box within the
Dß2 12-recombination signal sequence spacer prior to Tcrb recombination. USF
binding is lost from both rearranged and germline Dß2 sites in DNA-dependent
protein kinase, catalytic subunit-competent thymocytes. Finally, genotoxic dsDNA 
breaks lead to rapid loss of USF binding and gain of transcriptionally primed
5'Dß2 promoter activity in a DNA-dependent protein kinase, catalytic
subunit-dependent manner. Together, these data suggest a mechanism by which V(D)J
recombination may feed back to regulate local Dß2 recombinational accessibility
during thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC3288432
PMID: 22287717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Immunogenetics. 2012 May;64(5):361-70. doi: 10.1007/s00251-011-0597-6. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

The role of upstream stimulatory factor 1 in the transcriptional regulation of
the human TBX21 promoter mediated by the T-1514C polymorphism associated with
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Li J(1), Li J, You Y, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, 400038, China.

T-bet is a key regulator for the lineage commitment in CD4+ T helper (Th) 1 cells
by activating the hallmark production of interferon-<U+03B3>. Previously, two single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TBX21 promoter, T-1993C and T-1514C, have 
been shown by statistic studies to associate with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). The effect of -1993 SNP on the Yin Yang 1 transcription factor-mediated
promoter activity has been already indicated. This study aimed to investigate
roles of the T-1514C SNP on TBX21 transcription and its functional effect by
luciferase reporter, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and flow cytometric analysis of intracellular
T-bet, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IL-4 expression in activated CD4+ T cells. The TBX21 promoter
carrying -1514C possessed significantly lower transcriptional activity than that 
of -1514T and was markedly downregulated by the overexpression of upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) when compared with the promoter carrying -1514T.
EMSA indicated that the transcription factor USF-1 was bound to the -1514C allele
probe with the affinity higher than that to the -1514T allele probe. ChIP assay
suggested that USF-1 bound around -1514 of TBX21 genomic DNA in vivo in the human
T cell line Jurkat with -1514C/T. The individuals carrying -1514C allele were
determined to have significantly diminished expression of T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> and
increased IL-4 production in CD4+ T cells compared with those of -1514T allele.
The findings demonstrate that the T-1514C polymorphism affects TBX21 gene
expression and Th1 cytokine production by binding USF-1 to the SNP site.

PMID: 22258560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 22;86(3):77. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095596. Print 2012
Mar.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulates mouse Fshr promoter activity through an
e-box binding site.

Teino I(1), Kuuse S, Ingerpuu S, Maimets T, Tiido T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) mediates the toxicity of a variety of
environmental chemicals. Apart from this, an understanding is emerging that the
AHR has a fundamental role in female reproduction. Evidence suggests that AHR
participates in regulation of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (Fshr)
transcript level in mouse ovary by binding to the promoter of this gene in vivo. 
The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the molecular interplay of the Fshr 
promoter involved in the transactivation by AHR in mouse granulosa cells. We
found that AHR activates the Fshr promoter through the region from -209 to -99
bp. In this region, the importance of the E-box motif was revealed by
site-directed mutagenesis followed by promoter analysis. By focusing on the
DNA/protein interactions, we defined the fact that the intact E-box but not
upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1), which is known to bind this motif, is
necessary for AHR binding to mouse Fshr promoter. Furthermore, by constructing
AHR mutants defective in DNA interaction, we confirmed the importance of DNA
binding for AHR's ability to bind to and activate Fshr promoter. Collectively,
the present study demonstrates that AHR modulates Fshr transactivation by its
direct association through an E-box and not by recruitment via interaction with
USFs. These observations suggest that although AHR and USF may respond to
different signals, they compete on binding to the same E-box. Our data, together 
with that from one prior study suggesting involvement of E-box motif in
AHR-mediated transcription, provide novel understanding of the way in which AHR
may regulate its target genes through E-box sites.

PMID: 22116805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Endocrinology. 2012 Jan;153(1):492-500. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1310. Epub 2011 Nov 
8.

Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) oppositely regulate human type 1
iodothyronine deiodinase gene in liver.

Kanamoto N(1), Tagami T, Ueda-Sakane Y, Sone M, Miura M, Yasoda A, Tamura N, Arai
H, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
kyotetsu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase (D1), a selenoenzyme that catalyzes the
bioactivation of thyroid hormone, is expressed mainly in the liver. Its
expression and activity are modulated by several factors, but the precise
mechanism of its transcriptional regulation remains unclear. In the present
study, we have analyzed the promoter of human D1 gene (hDIO1) to identify factors
that prevalently increase D1 activity in the human liver. Deletion and mutation
analyses demonstrated that a forkhead box (FOX)A binding site and an E-box site
within the region between nucleotides -187 and -132 are important for hDIO1
promoter activity in the liver. EMSA demonstrated that FOXA1 and FOXA2
specifically bind to the FOXA binding site and that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) specifically binds to the E-box element. Overexpression of FOXA2 decreased 
hDIO1 promoter activity, and short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of FOXA2
increased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA. In contrast, overexpression of USF1/2
increased hDIO1 promoter activity. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
FOXA1 decreased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA, but knockdown of both FOXA1 and
FOXA2 restored it. The response of the hDIO1 promoter to USF was greatly
attenuated in the absence of FOXA1. Taken together, these results indicate that a
balance of FOXA1 and FOXA2 expression modulates hDIO1 expression in the liver.

PMID: 22067325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Gene. 2012 Jan 15;492(1):148-59. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.10.034. Epub 2011 Oct
19.

Identification and functional characterization of the human EXT1 promoter region.

Jennes I(1), Zuntini M, Mees K, Palagani A, Pedrini E, De Cock G, Fransen E,
Vanden Berghe W, Sangiorgi L, Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, and Antwerp University 
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in Exostosin-1 (EXT1) or Exostosin-2 (EXT2) cause the
autosomal dominant disorder multiple osteochondromas (MO). This disease is mainly
characterized by the appearance of multiple cartilage-capped protuberances
arising from children's metaphyses and is known to display clinical inter- and
intrafamilial variations. EXT1 and EXT2 are both tumor suppressor genes encoding 
proteins that function as glycosyltransferases, catalyzing the biosynthesis of
heparan sulfate. At present, however, very little is known about the regulation
of these genes. Two of the most intriguing questions concerning the pathogenesis 
of MO are how disruption of a ubiquitously expressed gene causes this
cartilage-specific disease and how the clinical intrafamilial variation can be
explained. Since mutations in the EXT1 gene are responsible for ~65% of the MO
families with known causal mutation, our aim was to isolate and characterize the 
EXT1 promoter region to elucidate the transcriptional regulation of this tumor
suppressor gene.
METHODS: In the present study, luciferase reporter gene assays were used to
experimentally confirm the in silico predicted EXT1 core promoter region.
Subsequently, we evaluated the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP's) 
on EXT1 promoter activity and transcription factor binding using luciferase
assays, electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Finally, a genotype-phenotype study was performed
with the aim to identify one or more genetic modifiers influencing the clinical
expression of MO.
RESULTS: Transient transfection of HEK293 cells with a series of luciferase
reporter constructs mapped the EXT1 core promoter at approximately -917 bp
upstream of the EXT1 start codon, within a 123 bp region. This region is
conserved in mammals and located within a CpG-island containing a CAAT- and a
GT-box. A polymorphic G/C-SNP at -1158 bp (rs34016643) was demonstrated to be
located in a USF1 transcription factor binding site, which is lost with the
presence of the C-allele resulting in a ~56% increase in EXT1 promoter activity. 
A genotype-phenotype study was suggestive for association of the C-allele with
shorter stature, but also with a smaller number of osteochondromas.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide for the first time insight into the molecular regulation 
of EXT1. Although a larger patient population will be necessary for statistical
significance, our data suggest the polymorphism rs34016643, in close proximity of
the EXT1 promoter, to be a potential regulatory SNP, which could be a primary
modifier that might explain part of the clinical variation observed in MO
patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22037484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Traffic. 2012 Feb;13(2):218-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01302.x. Epub 2011 
Nov 21.

The nucleoporin Nup358/RanBP2 promotes nuclear import in a cargo- and transport
receptor-specific manner.

Wälde S(1), Thakar K, Hutten S, Spillner C, Nath A, Rothbauer U, Wiemann S,
Kehlenbach RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry I, Faculty of Medicine, Georg-August-University of 
Göttingen, Humboldtallee 23, 37073, Göttingen, Germany.

In vertebrates, the nuclear pore complex (NPC), the gate for transport of
macromolecules between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, consists of approximately
30 different nucleoporins (Nups). The Nup and SUMO E3-ligase Nup358/RanBP2 are
the major components of the cytoplasmic filaments of the NPC. In this study, we
perform a structure-function analysis of Nup358 and describe its role in nuclear 
import of specific proteins. In a screen for nuclear proteins that accumulate in 
the cytoplasm upon Nup358 depletion, we identified proteins that were able to
interact with Nup358 in a receptor-independent manner. These included the
importin a/ß-cargo DBC-1 (deleted in breast cancer 1) and DMAP-1 (DNA
methyltransferase 1 associated protein 1). Strikingly, a short N-terminal
fragment of Nup358 was sufficient to promote import of DBC-1, whereas DMAP-1
required a larger portion of Nup358 for stimulated import. Neither the
interaction of RanGAP with Nup358 nor its SUMO-E3 ligase activity was required
for nuclear import of all tested cargos. Together, Nup358 functions as a cargo-
and receptor-specific assembly platform, increasing the efficiency of nuclear
import of proteins through various mechanisms.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21995724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Nov;9(11):1520-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0090. Epub 
2011 Oct 7.

Interaction of HIF and USF signaling pathways in human genes flanked by
hypoxia-response elements and E-box palindromes.

Hu J(1), Stiehl DP, Setzer C, Wichmann D, Shinde DA, Rehrauer H, Hradecky P,
Gassmann M, Gorr TA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Rampant activity of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 in cancer is frequently 
associated with the malignant progression into a harder-to-treat, increasingly
aggressive phenotype. Clearly, anti-HIF strategies in cancer cells are of
considerable clinical interest. One way to fine-tune, or inhibit, HIF's
transcriptional outflow independently of hydroxylase activities could be through 
competing transcription factors. A CACGTG-binding activity in human hepatoma
cells was previously found to restrict HIF's access to hypoxia response
cis-elements (HRE) in a Daphnia globin gene promoter construct (phb2). The CACGTG
factor, and its impact on hypoxia-responsive human genes, was analyzed in this
study by genome-wide computational scans as well as gene-specific quantitative
PCR, reporter and DNA-binding assays in hepatoma (Hep3B), cervical carcinoma
(HeLa), and breast carcinoma (MCF7) cells. Among six basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors known to target CACGTG palindromes, we identified upstream 
stimulatory factor (USF)-1/2 as predominant phb2 CACGTG constituents in Hep3B,
HeLa, and MCF7 cells. Human genes with adjacent or overlapping HRE and CACGTG
motifs included with lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) and Bcl-2/E1B 19 kDa
interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) hypoxia-induced HIF-1 targets. Parallel recruitment
of HIF-1a and USF1/2a to the respective promoter chromatin was verified for all
cell lines investigated. Mutual complementing (LDHA) or moderating (BNIP3)
cross-talk was seen upon overexpression or silencing of HIF-1a and USF1/2a.
Distinct (LDHA) or overlapping (BNIP3) promoter-binding sites for HIF-1 and USFs 
were subsequently characterized. We propose that, depending on abundance or
activity of its protein constituents, O(2)-independent USF signaling can function
to fine-tune or interfere with HIF-mediated transcription in cancer cells.

Mol Cancer Res; 9(11); 1520-36. ©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21984181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36215-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246116. Epub
2011 Aug 26.

The E-box binding factors Max/Mnt, MITF, and USF1 act coordinately with FoxO to
regulate expression of proapoptotic and cell cycle control genes by
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/glycogen synthase kinase 3 signaling.

Terragni J(1), Nayak G, Banerjee S, Medrano JL, Graham JR, Brennan JF, Sepulveda 
S, Cooper GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase/Akt signaling plays a critical role in cell
proliferation and survival, partly by regulation of FoxO transcription factors.
Previous work using global expression profiling indicated that inhibition of PI
3-kinase in proliferating cells led to induction of genes that promote cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis. The upstream regulatory regions of these genes had binding 
sites not only for FoxO, but also for Myc/Max transcription factors. In the
present study, we have addressed the role of Myc family members and related
E-box-binding proteins in the regulation of these genes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitations and RNA interference indicated that transcription was
repressed by Max-Mnt-Sin3a-histone deacetylase complexes in proliferating cells. 
Inhibition of PI 3-kinase led to a loss of Max/Mnt binding and transcriptional
induction by MITF and USF1, as well as FoxO. Both MITF and USF1 were activated by
glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3, with GSK3 phosphorylation sites on USF1
identified as the previously described activating site threonine 153 as well as
serine 186. siRNA against MITF as well as against FoxO3a protected cells from
apoptosis following PI 3-kinase inhibition. These results define a novel
E-box-regulated network that functions coordinately with FoxO to regulate
transcription of apoptotic and cell cycle regulatory genes downstream of PI
3-kinase/Akt/GSK3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3196102
PMID: 21873430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):695-700. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.83. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Association of variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and
function with type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

Chavali S(1), Mahajan A, Tabassum R, Dwivedi OP, Chauhan G, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

Variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and function are
known to cause monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes and are also associated with
complex form. In this study, we studied the genetic association of polymorphisms 
in such important genes with type 2 diabetes in the high-risk Indians. We
genotyped 91 polymorphisms in 19 genes (ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, INS, INSM1,
ISL1, KCNJ11, MAFA, MNX1, NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, PDX1,
USF1 and WFS1) in 2025 unrelated North Indians of Indo-European ethnicity
comprising of 1019 diabetic and 1006 non-diabetic subjects. HNF4A promoter P2
polymorphisms rs1884613 and rs2144908, which are in high linkage disequilibrium, 
showed significant association with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio (OR)=1.37 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.57), P=9.4 × 10(-6) for rs1884613 and OR=1.37
(95%CI 1.20-1.57), P=6.0 × 10(-6) for rs2144908), as previously shown in other
populations. We observed body mass index-dependent association of these variants 
with type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects. Variants in USF1, ABCC8,
ISL1 and KCNJ11 showed nominal association, while haplotypes in these genes were 
significantly associated. rs3812704 upstream of NEUROG3 significantly increased
risk for type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects (OR=1.68 (95%CI
1.25-2.24), P=4.9 × 10(-4)). Thus, pancreatic ß-cell development and function
genes contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

PMID: 21814221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Virology. 2011 Sep 15;418(1):57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.07.002. Epub 2011
Aug 2.

Identification and functional analysis of a second RBF-2 binding site within the 
HIV-1 promoter.

Dahabieh MS(1), Ooms M, Malcolm T, Simon V, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, Life 
Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall,
Vancouver, B.C. Canada. dahabieh@interchange.ubc.ca

Transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) is mediated by numerous
host transcription factors. In this study we characterized an E-box motif (RBE1) 
within the core promoter that was previously implicated in both transcriptional
activation and repression. We show that RBE1 is a binding site for the RBF-2
transcription factor complex (USF1, USF2, and TFII-I), previously shown to bind
an upstream viral element, RBE3. The RBE1 and RBE3 elements formed complexes of
identical mobility and protein constituents in gel shift assays, both with Jurkat
T-cell nuclear extracts and recombinant USF/TFII-I. Furthermore, both elements
are regulators of HIV-1 expression; mutations in LTR-luciferase reporters and in 
HIV-1 molecular clones resulted in decreased transcription, virion production,
and proviral expression in infected cells. Collectively, our data indicate that
RBE1 is a bona fide RBF-2 binding site and that the RBE1 and RBE3 elements are
necessary for mediating proper transcription from the HIV-1 LTR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3176309
PMID: 21813151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Diabetologia. 2011 Oct;54(10):2606-14. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2250-1. Epub 2011 
Jul 21.

Exendin-4 increases histone acetylase activity and reverses epigenetic
modifications that silence Pdx1 in the intrauterine growth retarded rat.

Pinney SE(1), Jaeckle Santos LJ, Han Y, Stoffers DA, Simmons RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The abnormal intrauterine milieu of intrauterine growth
retardation (IUGR) permanently alters gene expression and function of pancreatic 
beta cells leading to the development of diabetes in adulthood. Expression of the
pancreatic homeobox transcription factor Pdx1 is permanently reduced in IUGR
islets suggesting an epigenetic mechanism. Exendin-4 (Ex-4), a long-acting
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogue, given in the newborn period increases
Pdx1 expression and prevents the development of diabetes in the IUGR rat.
METHODS: IUGR was induced by bilateral uterine artery ligation in fetal life.
Ex-4 was given on postnatal days 1-6 of life. Islets were isolated at 1 week and 
at 3-12 months. Histone modifications, PCAF, USF1 and DNA methyltransferase
(Dnmt) 1 binding were assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays and
DNA methylation was quantified by pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: Phosphorylation of USF1 was markedly increased in IUGR islets in Ex-4
treated animals. This resulted in increased USF1 and PCAF association at the
proximal promoter of Pdx1, thereby increasing histone acetyl transferase (HAT)
activity. Histone H3 acetylation and trimethylation of H3K4 were permanently
increased, whereas Dnmt1 binding and subsequent DNA methylation were prevented at
the proximal promoter of Pdx1 in IUGR islets. Normalisation of these epigenetic
modifications reversed silencing of Pdx1 in islets of IUGR animals.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These studies demonstrate a novel mechanism whereby a
short treatment course of Ex-4 in the newborn period permanently increases HAT
activity by recruiting USF1 and PCAF to the proximal promoter of Pdx1 which
restores chromatin structure at the Pdx1 promoter and prevents DNA methylation,
thus preserving Pdx1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC4461231
PMID: 21779870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):965-76. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093013. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Upstream stimulatory factor induces Nr5a1 and Shbg gene expression during the
onset of rat Sertoli cell differentiation.

Wood MA(1), Mukherjee P, Toocheck CA, Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology, Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproduction Services, Magee Women's Research Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Within the testis, each Sertoli cell can support a finite number of developing
germ cells. During development, the cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and
the onset of differentiation establish the final number of Sertoli cells and,
thus, the total number of sperm that can be produced. The upstream stimulatory
factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2, respectively) differentially regulate numerous
Sertoli cell genes during differentiation. To identify genes that are activated
by USF proteins during differentiation, studies were conducted in Sertoli cells
isolated from 5- and 11-day-old rats, representing proliferating and
differentiating cells, respectively. Usf1 mRNA and USF1 protein levels were
increased between 5 and 11 days after birth. In vitro studies revealed that USF1 
and USF2 DNA-binding activity also increased at 11 days for the promoters of four
potential target genes, Fshr, Gata4, Nr5a1, and Shbg. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that USF recruitment increased in vivo
between 5 and 11 days after birth at the Fshr, Gata4, and Nr5a1 promoters.
Expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg, but not of Fshr or Gata4, mRNAs was elevated in
11-day-old Sertoli cells compared with 5-day-old Sertoli cells. Transient
transfection of USF1 and USF2 expression vectors up-regulated Nr5a1 and Shbg
promoter activity. RNA interference assays demonstrated that USF1 and USF2
contribute to Nr5a1 and Shbg expression in differentiating cells. Together, these
data indicate that increased USF levels induce the expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg
during the differentiation of Sertoli cells, whereas Fshr and Gata4 expression is
not altered by USF proteins during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3197915
PMID: 21734262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;30(12):995-1005. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.1268. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Enhancer-blocking activity is associated with hypersensitive site V sequences in 
the human growth hormone locus control region.

Jin Y(1), Oomah K, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Activation of the human growth hormone gene (hGH-N) is linked to a locus control 
region (LCR) containing four (I-III, V) hypersensitive sites (HS). Pit-1 binding 
to HS I/II is required for efficient pituitary expression. However, inclusion of 
HS III and V, located about 28 and 32 kb upstream of the hGH-N gene,
respectively, is also required for consistent hGH-N expression levels in vivo. HS
V is referred to as a boundary for the hGH LCR, but no specific enhancer blocking
or barrier function is reported. We examined a 547 bp fragment containing HS V
sequences (nucleotides -32,718/-32,172 relative to hGH-N) for enhancer-blocking
activity using a well-established transient gene transfer system and assessed
these sequences for CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), which is linked to
enhancer-blocking activity. The 547 bp HS V fragment decreased enhancer activity 
with a reverse-orientation preference when inserted between HS III enhancer
sequences and a minimal thymidine kinase promoter (TKp). These sequences are
associated with CTCF in human pituitary and nonpituitary chromatin.
Enhancer-blocking activity with an orientation preference was further localized
to a 45 bp sub-fragment, with evidence of CTCF and upstream binding factor 1
(USF1) binding; USF1 is linked more closely with barrier function. The presence
of yin and yang 1 (Yy1) that cooperates with CTCF in the regulation of
X-chromosome inactivation was also seen. A decrease in CTCF and Yy1 RNA levels
was associated with a significant reduction in enhancer-blocking activity.
Assessment of CpG-dinucleotides in the TKp indicates that the presence of HS V
sequences are associated with an increased incidence of CpG-dinucleotide
methylation of the GC box region. These data support association of CTCF and
enhancer-blocking activity with HS V that is consistent with a role as a (LCR)
boundary element and also implicates Yy1 in this process.

PMID: 21711161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 5;286(31):27836-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.262964. Epub 2011
Jun 16.

Histone deacetylase 9 is a negative regulator of adipogenic differentiation.

Chatterjee TK(1), Idelman G, Blanco V, Blomkalns AL, Piegore MG Jr, Weintraub DS,
Kumar S, Rajsheker S, Manka D, Rudich SM, Tang Y, Hui DY, Bassel-Duby R, Olson
EN, Lingrel JB, Ho SM, Weintraub NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA. tapan.chatterjee@uc.edu

Differentiation of preadipocytes into mature adipocytes capable of efficiently
storing lipids is an important regulatory mechanism in obesity. Here, we examined
the involvement of histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) in the regulation of adipogenesis. We find that among the various members 
of the HDAC and HAT families, only HDAC9 exhibited dramatic down-regulation
preceding adipogenic differentiation. Preadipocytes from HDAC9 gene knock-out
mice exhibited accelerated adipogenic differentiation, whereas HDAC9
overexpression in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes suppressed adipogenic differentiation,
demonstrating its direct role as a negative regulator of adipogenesis. HDAC9
expression was higher in visceral as compared with subcutaneous preadipocytes,
negatively correlating with their potential to undergo adipogenic differentiation
in vitro. HDAC9 localized in the nucleus, and its negative regulation of
adipogenesis segregates with the N-terminal nuclear targeting domain, whereas the
C-terminal deacetylase domain is dispensable for this function. HDAC9
co-precipitates with USF1 and is recruited with USF1 at the E-box region of the
C/EBPa gene promoter in preadipocytes. Upon induction of adipogenic
differentiation, HDAC9 is down-regulated, leading to its dissociation from the
USF1 complex, whereas p300 HAT is up-regulated to allow its association with USF1
and accumulation at the E-box site of the C/EBPa promoter in differentiated
adipocytes. This reciprocal regulation of HDAC9 and p300 HAT in the USF1 complex 
is associated with increased C/EBPa expression, a master regulator of adipogenic 
differentiation. These findings provide new insights into mechanisms of
adipogenic differentiation and document a critical regulatory role for HDAC9 in
adipogenic differentiation through a deacetylase-independent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3149373
PMID: 21680747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2011 Aug 4;118(5):1386-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-319111. Epub 2011
Jun 8.

Chromatin boundaries require functional collaboration between the hSET1 and NURF 
complexes.

Li X(1), Wang S, Li Y, Deng C, Steiner LA, Xiao H, Wu C, Bungert J, Gallagher PG,
Felsenfeld G, Qiu Y, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Chromatin insulators protect erythroid genes from being silenced during
erythropoiesis, and the disruption of barrier insulator function in erythroid
membrane gene loci results in mild or severe anemia. We showed previously that
the USF1/2-bound 5'HS4 insulator mediates chromatin barrier activity in the
erythroid-specific chicken ß-globin locus. It is currently not known how
insulators establish such a barrier. To understand the function of USF1, we
purified USF1-associated protein complexes and found that USF1 forms a
multiprotein complex with hSET1 and NURF, thus exhibiting histone H3K4
methyltransferase- and ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling activities,
respectively. Both SET1 and NURF are recruited to the 5'HS4 insulator by USF1 to 
retain the active chromatin structure in erythrocytes. Knock-down of NURF
resulted in a rapid loss of barrier activity accompanied by an alteration of
nucleosome positioning, increased occupancy of the nucleosome-free linker region 
at the insulator site, and increased repressive H3K27me3 levels in the vicinity
of the HS4 insulator. Furthermore, suppression of SET1 reduced barrier activity, 
decreased H3K4me2 and acH3K9/K14, and diminished the recruitment of BPTF at
several erythroid-specific barrier insulator sites. Therefore, our data reveal a 
synergistic role of hSET1 and NURF in regulating the USF-bound barrier insulator 
to prevent erythroid genes from encroachment of heterochromatin.

PMCID: PMC3152501
PMID: 21653943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011 Aug;301(2):F271-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00221.2011. Epub 2011 May 4.

Role of the USF1 transcription factor in diabetic kidney disease.

Sanchez AP(1), Zhao J, You Y, Declèves AE, Diamond-Stanic M, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Renal Translational Medicine, Division of Nephrology-Hypertension, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, Veterans Administration San
Diego HealthCare System, La Jolla, 92093, USA.

The predominant transcription factors regulating key genes in diabetic kidney
disease have not been established. The transcription factor upstream stimulatory 
factor 1 (USF1) is an important regulator of glucose-mediated transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß1 expression in mesangial cells; however, its role in the
development of diabetic kidney disease has not been evaluated. In the present
study, wild-type (WT; USF1 +/+), heterozygous (USF1 +/-), and homozygous (USF1
-/-) knockout mice were intercrossed with Akita mice (Ins2/Akita) to induce type 
1 diabetes. Mice were studied up to 36 wk of age. The degree of hyperglycemia and
kidney hypertrophy were similar in all groups of diabetic mice; however, the USF1
-/- diabetic mice had significantly less albuminuria and mesangial matrix
expansion than the WT diabetic mice. TGF-ß1 and renin gene expression and protein
were substantially increased in the WT diabetic mice but not in USF1 -/- diabetic
mice. The underlying pathway by which USF1 is regulated by high glucose was
investigated in mesangial cell culture. High glucose inhibited AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) activity and increased USF1 nuclear translocation.
Activation of AMPK with AICAR stimulated AMPK activity and reduced nuclear
accumulation of USF1. We thus conclude that USF1 is a critical transcription
factor regulating diabetic kidney disease and plays a critical role in
albuminuria, mesangial matrix accumulation, and TGF-ß1 and renin stimulation in
diabetic kidney disease. AMPK activity may play a key role in high
glucose-induced regulation of USF1.

PMCID: PMC3154594
PMID: 21543418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Kidney Int. 2011 Aug;80(4):358-68. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.43. Epub 2011 Mar 9.

A microRNA circuit mediates transforming growth factor-ß1 autoregulation in renal
glomerular mesangial cells.

Kato M(1), Arce L, Wang M, Putta S, Lanting L, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Diabetes Center, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California, USA. mkato@coh.org

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2011 Aug;80(4):334-7.

Enhanced transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) expression in renal cells
promotes fibrosis and hypertrophy during the progression of diabetic nephropathy.
The TGF-ß1 promoter is positively controlled by the E-box regulators, upstream
stimulatory factors (USFs), in response to diabetic (high glucose) conditions;
however, it is not clear whether TGF-ß1 is autoregulated by itself. As changes in
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in kidney disease, we tested their
involvement in this process. TGF-ß1 levels were found to be upregulated by
microRNA-192 (miR-192) or miR-200b/c in mouse mesangial cells. Amounts of
miR-200b/c were increased in glomeruli from type 1 (streptozotocin) and type 2
(db/db) diabetic mice, and in mouse mesangial cells treated with TGF-ß1 in vitro.
Levels of miR-200b/c were also upregulated by miR-192 in the mesangial cells,
suggesting that miR-200b/c are downstream of miR-192. Activity of the TGF-ß1
promoter was upregulated by TGF-ß1 or miR-192, demonstrating that the
miR-192-miR-200 cascade induces TGF-ß1 expression. TGF-ß1 increased the occupancy
of activators USF1 and Tfe3, and decreased that of the repressor Zeb1 on the
TGF-ß1 promoter E-box binding sites. Inhibitors of miR-192 decreased the
expression of miR-200b/c, Col1a2, Col4a1, and TGF-ß1 in mouse mesangial cells,
and in mouse kidney cortex. Thus, miRNA-regulated circuits may amplify TGF-ß1
signaling, accelerating chronic fibrotic diseases such as diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC3337779
PMID: 21389977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1332-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01186-10. Epub 2011 Jan
31.

Role of helix-loop-helix proteins during differentiation of erythroid cells.

Anantharaman A(1), Lin IJ, Barrow J, Liang SY, Masannat J, Strouboulis J, Huang
S, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
Genetics Institute, Center for Epigenetics, Shands Cancer Center, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins play a profound role in the process of
development and cellular differentiation. Among the HLH proteins expressed in
differentiating erythroid cells are the ubiquitous proteins Myc, USF1, USF2, and 
TFII-I, as well as the hematopoiesis-specific transcription factor Tal1/SCL. All 
of these HLH proteins exhibit distinct functions during the differentiation of
erythroid cells. For example, Myc stimulates the proliferation of erythroid
progenitor cells, while the USF proteins and Tal1 regulate genes that specify the
differentiated phenotype. This minireview summarizes the known activities of Myc,
USF, TFII-I, and Tal11/SCL and discusses how they may function sequentially,
cooperatively, or antagonistically in regulating expression programs during the
differentiation of erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3135301
PMID: 21282467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. BMC Genet. 2010 Dec 10;11:110. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-11-110.

Genetic study of the hepcidin gene (HAMP) promoter and functional analysis of the
c.-582A > G variant.

Parajes S(1), González-Quintela A, Campos J, Quinteiro C, Domínguez F, Loidi L.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Hepcidin acts as the main regulator of iron homeostasis through
regulation of intestinal absorption and macrophage release. Hepcidin deficiency
causes iron overload whereas its overproduction is associated with anaemia of
chronic diseases. The aims of the study were: to identify genetic variants in the
hepcidin gene (HAMP) promoter, to asses the associations between the variants
found and iron status parameters, and to functionally study the role on HAMP
expression of the most frequent variant.
RESULTS: The sequencing of HAMP promoter from 103 healthy individuals revealed
two genetic variants: The c.-153C > T with a frequency of 0.014 for allele T,
which is known to reduce hepcidin expression and the c.-582A > G with a 0.218
frequency for allele G. In an additional group of 224 individuals, the c.-582A > 
G variant genotype showed no association with serum iron, transferrin or ferritin
levels.The c.-582G HAMP promoter variant decreased the transcriptional activity
by 20% compared to c.-582A variant in cells from the human hepatoma cell line
HepG2 when cotransfected with luciferase reporter constructs and plasmid
expressing upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and by 12-14% when cotransfected 
with plasmid expressing upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2).
CONCLUSIONS: The c.-582A > G HAMP promoter variant is not associated with serum
iron, transferrin or ferritin levels in the healthy population. The in vitro
effect of the c.-582A > G variant resulted in a small reduction of the gene
transactivation by allele G compared to allele A. Therefore the effect of the
variant on the hepcidin levels in vivo would be likely negligible. Finally, the
c.-153C > T variant showed a frequency high enough to be considered when a
genetic analysis is done in iron overload patients.

PMCID: PMC3004809
PMID: 21143959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Gene. 2011 Mar 1;473(2):92-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.11.001. Epub 2010 Nov 13.

NF-Y and USF1 transcription factor binding to CCAAT-box and E-box elements
activates the CP27 promoter.

Ito Y(1), Zhang Y, Dangaria S, Luan X, Diekwisch TG.

Author information: 
(1)Brodie Laboratory for Craniofacial Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 801 South Paulina Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The maintenance and differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ES cells) depends on
the regulation of gene expression through the coordinated binding of
transcription factors to regulatory promoter elements. One of the genes involved 
in embryonic development is the chromatin factor CP27. Previously, we have shown 
that NF-Y interacted with the CP27 proximal promoter CCAAT-box. Here we report
that CP27 gene expression in mouse ES cells is controlled by CCAAT and E-box
cis-acting regulatory elements and their corresponding transcription factors NF-Y
and USF1. Specifically, USF1 interacts with the E-box of the CP27 proximal
promoter and NF-Y interacts with the CCAAT-box. NF-Y and USF1 also interacted
with each other and activated the CP27 promoter in a synergistic fashion.
Together, these studies demonstrate that gene expression of the chromatin factor 
CP27 is regulated through the interaction of the transcription factors NF-Y and
USF1 with the CP27 proximal promoter.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039062
PMID: 21078375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Nov 4;11:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-79.

Regulation of CEACAM1 transcription in human breast epithelial cells.

Gencheva M(1), Chen CJ, Nguyen T, Shively JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, 
CA 91010, USA.

BACKGROUND: Carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1) is a
transmembrane protein with multiple functions in different cell types. CEACAM1
expression is frequently mis-regulated in cancer, with down-regulation reported
in several tumors of epithelial origin and de novo expression of CEACAM1 in lung 
cancer and malignant melanoma. In this report we analyzed the regulation of
CEACAM1 expression in three breast cancer cell lines that varied in CEACAM1
expression from none (MCF7) to moderate (MDA-MB-468) to high (MCF10A, comparable 
to normal breast).
RESULTS: Using in vivo footprinting and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
we show that the CEACAM1 proximal promoter in breast cells is bound in its active
state by SP1, USF1/USF2, and IRF1/2. When down-regulated the CEACAM1 promoter
remains accessible to USF2 and partially accessible to USF1. Interferon-<U+03B3>
up-regulates CEACAM1 mRNA by a mechanism involving further induction of IRF-1 and
USF1 binding at the promoter. As predicted by this analysis, silencing of IRF1
and USF1 but not USF2 by RNAi resulted in a significant decrease in CEACAM1
protein expression in MDA-MB-468 cells. The inactive CEACAM1 promoter in MCF7
cells exhibits decreased histone acetylation at the promoter region, with no
evidence of H3K9 or H3K27 trimethylation, histone modifications often linked to
condensed chromatin structure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that transcription activators USF1 and IRF1
interact to modulate CEACAM1 expression and that the chromatin structure of the
promoter is likely maintained in a poised state that can promote rapid induction 
under appropriate conditions.

PMCID: PMC2991322
PMID: 21050451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Lipid Res. 2011 Feb;52(2):189-206. doi: 10.1194/jlr.R009720. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Genetic determinants of plasma triglycerides.

Johansen CT(1), Kathiresan S, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western 
Ontario, London, Ontario N6A 5K8, Canada.

Plasma triglyceride (TG) concentration is reemerging as an important
cardiovascular disease risk factor. More complete understanding of the genes and 
variants that modulate plasma TG should enable development of markers for risk
prediction, diagnosis, prognosis, and response to therapies and might help
specify new directions for therapeutic interventions. Recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified both known and novel loci associated
with plasma TG concentration. However, genetic variation at these loci explains
only ~10% of overall TG variation within the population. As the GWAS approach may
be reaching its limit for discovering genetic determinants of TG, alternative
genetic strategies, such as rare variant sequencing studies and evaluation of
animal models, may provide complementary information to flesh out knowledge of
clinically and biologically important pathways in TG metabolism. Herein, we
review genes recently implicated in TG metabolism and describe how some of these 
genes likely modulate plasma TG concentration. We also discuss lessons regarding 
plasma TG metabolism learned from various genomic and genetic experimental
approaches. Treatment of patients with moderate to severe hypertriglyceridemia
with existing therapies is often challenging; thus, gene products and pathways
found in recent genetic research studies provide hope for development of more
effective clinical strategies.

PMCID: PMC3023540
PMID: 21041806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Nutr Biochem. 2011 Jun;22(6):595-604. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2010.05.003. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Exogenous nucleosides modulate expression and activity of transcription factors
in Caco-2 cells.

Ortega Á(1), Gil Á, Sánchez-Pozo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemical Engineering, University Pablo 
de Olavide - Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine Centre
(CABIMER), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades
Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), 41092 Seville, Spain. maortega@upo.es

Dietary nucleotides (NTs) have an important role in cellular and humoral
immunity, intestinal growth, differentiation and recovery from tissue damage.
Nucleosides (NSs) are the best-absorbed chemical form of NTs in the intestinal
epithelium. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of NSs on the
activity and expression of multiple transcription factors (TFs) in Caco-2 cells, 
as a possible molecular mechanism by which NSs modulate gene expression in human 
intestinal cells. The effects of NS-supplemented media on human Caco-2 cell
proliferation, viability, protein and RNA concentration were determined, and the 
activity and expression profiles of multiple TFs were analyzed by using an
array-based technology. Exogenous NSs did not affect Caco-2 cell proliferation or
viability but increased the protein content in cytoplasm and nucleus and the
nuclear protein/RNA ratio. The addition of NSs to the media increased the
expression and activity of the TFs CCAAT displacement protein (CUX1), v-ets avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) and SMAD family member 2. In
contrast, NS addition decreased the expression and activity of the general
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), NFKB and
tumor protein p53. In conclusion, our results suggest that exogenous NSs affect
the expression and activity of several TFs involved in cell growth,
differentiation, apoptosis, immune response and inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20970311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Invest Clin. 2010 Jun;51(2):145-58.

[Fifty years studying hiperlipidemias: the case of familial combined
hyperlipidemia].

[Article in Spanish]

Aguilar-Salinas C(1), Gómez-Díaz R, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Endocrinología y Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición, México. caguilarsalinas@yahoo.com

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) is the most frequent primary
dyslipidemia. Its manifestations include hypercholesterolemia,
hypertriglyceridemia or the combination of both abnormalities. In spite of its
high frequency, the proper diagnosis is rarely done. For this purpose, the
measurement of a lipid profile is required in at least three first-degree
relatives. A critical review of the current literature in this field is presented
in this paper. Prospective studies have confirmed the atherogenicity of the
disease. It is possible to identify the FCHL causal genes with the current
methodology because it is an oligogenic disease. Based on the use of new
technologies, several loci that regulate apolipoprotein B concentrations have
been identified. In addition it was demostrated that variations of the activity
or the expression of various nuclear factors (USF1, TCF7L2, HNF4alfa) have a
major role in the pathophysiology of FCHL. These nuclear factors regulate the
expression of multiple genes involved in the metabolism of lipids or
carbohydrates.

PMID: 20928976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 8;5(9):e12630. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012630.

Complete biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 imprinting control region position 
results in fetal growth retardation and perinatal lethality.

Lee DH(1), Singh P, Tsark WM, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The H19/Igf2 imprinting control region (ICR) functions as an
insulator exclusively in the unmethylated maternal allele, where
enhancer-blocking by CTCF protein prevents the interaction between the Igf2
promoter and the distant enhancers. DNA methylation inhibits CTCF binding in the 
paternal ICR allele. Two copies of the chicken ß-globin insulator (ChßGI)(2) are 
capable of substituting for the enhancer blocking function of the ICR.
Insulation, however, now also occurs upon paternal inheritance, because unlike
the H19 ICR, the (ChßGI)(2) does not become methylated in fetal male germ cells. 
The (ChßGI)(2) is a composite insulator, exhibiting enhancer blocking by CTCF and
chromatin barrier functions by USF1 and VEZF1. We asked the question whether
these barrier proteins protected the (ChßGI)(2) sequences from methylation in the
male germ line.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genetically dissected the ChßGI in the mouse
by deleting the binding sites USF1 and VEZF1. The methylation of the mutant
versus normal (ChßGI)(2) significantly increased from 11% to 32% in perinatal
male germ cells, suggesting that the barrier proteins did have a role in
protecting the (ChßGI)(2) from methylation in the male germ line. Contrary to the
H19 ICR, however, the mutant (mChßGI)(2) lacked the potential to attain full de
novo methylation in the germ line and to maintain methylation in the paternal
allele in the soma, where it consequently functioned as a biallelic insulator.
Unexpectedly, a stricter enhancer blocking was achieved by CTCF alone than by a
combination of the CTCF, USF1 and VEZF1 sites, illustrated by undetectable Igf2
expression upon paternal transmission.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this in vivo model, hypomethylation at the ICR
position together with fetal growth retardation mimicked the human Silver-Russell
syndrome. Importantly, late fetal/perinatal death occurred arguing that strict
biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 ICR position is not tolerated in
development.

PMCID: PMC2935888
PMID: 20838620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Cycle. 2010 Sep 1;9(17):3428-37. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

Disparate chromatin landscapes and kinetics of inactivation impact differential
regulation of p53 target genes.

Gomes NP(1), Espinosa JM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA.

The p53 transcription factor regulates the expression of genes involved in
cellular responses to stress, including cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The p53 
transcriptional program is extremely malleable, with target gene expression
varying in a stress- and cell type-specific fashion. The molecular mechanisms
underlying differential p53 target gene expression remain elusive. Here we
provide evidence for gene-specific mechanisms affecting expression of three
important p53 target genes. First we show that transcription of the apoptotic
gene PUMA is regulated through intragenic chromatin boundaries, as revealed by
distinct histone modification territories that correlate with binding of the
insulator factors CTCF, Cohesins and USF1/2. Interestingly, this mode of
regulation produces an evolutionary conserved long non-coding RNA of unknown
function. Second, we demonstrate that the kinetics of transcriptional competence 
of the cell cycle arrest gene p21 and the apoptotic gene FAS are markedly
different in vivo, as predicted by recent biochemical dissection of their core
promoter elements in vitro. After a pulse of p53 activity in cells, assembly of
the transcriptional apparatus on p21 is rapidly reversed, while FAS
transcriptional activation is more sustained. Collectively these data add to a
growing list of p53-autonomous mechanisms that impact differential regulation of 
p53 target genes.

PMCID: PMC3047614
PMID: 20818159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Oct;45(2):94-100. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9431-0. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

Lithium chloride regulation of the substance P encoding preprotachykinin a, Tac1 
gene in rat hippocampal primary cells.

Haddley K(1), Spencer EM, Vasiliou SA, Howard M, Thippeswamy T, Bubb VJ, Quinn
JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, Merseyside
L69 3GE, UK.

In rat hippocampal cultures, the preprotachykinin A (PPTA/Tac1) gene, which
encodes the neuropeptide substance P, is regulated by the action of lithium. We
used reporter gene and expression constructs to demonstrate that this mechanism
of action of lithium is mediated via a previously characterised cis-regulatory
Ebox element in the proximal promoter, which binds members of the basic
Helix-Loop-Helix family of transcription factors. Consistent with this, in
hippocampal cells, both the expression of the endogenous gene and the function of
this promoter element are differentially regulated by the basic Helix-Loop-Helix 
factors, upstream stimulatory factor 1 and 2 (USF1/2). In addition, the genes for
USF1 and USF2 are differentially regulated by lithium in these cells. Our data
implicate USF1 as a major regulator of the action of lithium on the proximal PPTA
promoter.

PMID: 20690045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 30;398(3):495-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.106. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

AMPK activation represses the human gene promoter of the cardiac isoform of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase: Role of nuclear respiratory factor-1.

Adam T(1), Opie LH, Essop MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hatter Cardiovascular Research Institute, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Cape Town, Observatory 7925, South Africa.

The cardiac-enriched isoform of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACCbeta) produces
malonyl-CoA, a potent inhibitor of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1. AMPK
inhibits ACCbeta activity, lowering malonyl-CoA levels and promoting
mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Previously, AMPK increased promoter
binding of nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), a pivotal transcriptional
modulator controlling gene expression of mitochondrial proteins. We therefore
hypothesized that NRF-1 inhibits myocardial ACCbeta promoter activity via AMPK
activation. A human ACCbeta promoter-luciferase construct was transiently
transfected into neonatal cardiomyocytes+/-a NRF-1 expression construct. NRF-1
overexpression decreased ACCbeta gene promoter activity by 71+/-4.6% (p<0.001 vs.
control). Transfections with 5'-end serial promoter deletions revealed that
NRF-1-mediated repression of ACCbeta was abolished with a pPIIbeta-18/+65-Luc
deletion construct. AMPK activation dose-dependently reduced ACCbeta promoter
activity, while NRF-1 addition did not further decrease it. We also investigated 
NRF-1 inhibition in the presence of upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), a known
transactivator of the human ACCbeta gene promoter. Here NRF-1 blunted
USF1-dependent induction of ACCbeta promoter activity by 58+/-7.5% (p<0.001 vs.
control), reversed with a dominant negative NRF-1 construct. NRF-1 also
suppressed endogenous USF1 transcriptional activity by 55+/-6.2% (p<0.001 vs.
control). This study demonstrates that NRF-1 is a novel transcriptional inhibitor
of the human ACCbeta gene promoter in the mammalian heart. Our data extends AMPK 
regulation of ACCbeta to the transcriptional level.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Cancer. 2011 Apr 15;128(8):1836-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25524.

Role for transcription factor TFII-I in the suppression of SSeCKS/Gravin/Akap12
transcription by Src.

Bu Y(1), Gao L, Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Kinex Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The SSeCKS/Gravin/AKAP12 gene, encoding a kinase scaffolding protein with
metastasis-suppressing activity, is transcriptionally downregulated in
Src-transformed cells through the recruitment of HDAC1 to a Src-responsive
proximal promoter site charged with Sp1, Sp3 and USF1. However, the ectopic
expression of these proteins formed a suppressive complex in Src-transformed but 
not in parental NIH3T3 cells, suggesting the involvement of additional repressor 
factors. Transcription factor II-I (TFII-I) [general transcription factor 2i
(Gtf2i)] was identified by mass spectrometry as being associated with the SSeCKS 
promoter complex in NIH3T3/Src cells, and moreover, the Src-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of TFII-I significantly increased its binding to the SSeCKS
proximal promoter. siRNA-mediated knockdown of TFII-I or the expression of
TFII-I(Y248/249F) caused the derepression of SSeCKS in NIH3T3/Src cells. Taken
with previous data showing that the tyrosine phosphorylation of TFII-I
facilitates its nuclear translocation, these data suggest that Src-family
kinase-mediated phosphorylation converts a portion of TFII-I into a
transcriptional repressor.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2997892
PMID: 20568114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Pharmacogenomics J. 2011 Aug;11(4):307-14. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2010.43. Epub 2010
Jun 8.

Association of thymidylate synthase enhancer region polymorphisms with
thymidylate synthase activity in vivo.

de Bock CE(1), Garg MB, Scott N, Sakoff JA, Scorgie FE, Ackland SP, Lincz LF.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Foundation Laboratory, Division of Cancer and Cell Biology,
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Two known polymorphisms in the 5' enhancer region (ER) of the thymidylate
synthase (TS) gene, a variable number of tandem repeats of a 28<U+2009>bp sequence
(2R/3R) and a further G>C single nucleotide substitution within the repeats,
result in genotypes with 0-5 functional upstream stimulatory factor (USF) E-box
consensus elements. However, the relationship between these polymorphisms,
regulation of TS expression and patient response to fluoropyrimidine treatment
has been inconsistent. In this study, seven possible TSER allele configurations
showed similar patterns of luciferase gene expression regardless of cell type or 
USF-1 content, with no significant difference in promoter activity between the
wild-type 2RGC and 3RGGC (1.40±0.37 vs 1.43±0.32, P=0.90), whereas the minor
alleles, 2RCC and 3RGCC, were significantly reduced (0.84±0.17, P=0.01) and
increased (3.19±0.72, P=0.001) respectively. Patient plasma levels of
2'-deoxyuridine, a surrogate marker of TS activity, were significantly different 
between genotypes (P<0.001) and inversely related to luciferase activity (P=0.02)
but not to the absolute number of functional repeated elements (P=0.16),
suggesting that the position, rather than the number of functional USF E-box
repeats in the TSER, is responsible for determining gene expression in vitro and 
TS activity in vivo.

PMID: 20531375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Diabetologia. 2010 Sep;53(9):1971-5. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1772-2. Epub 2010
May 13.

Aberrant hepatic TRIB3 gene expression in insulin-resistant obese humans.

Oberkofler H(1), Pfeifenberger A, Soyal S, Felder T, Hahne P, Miller K, Krempler 
F, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Private
Medical University Salzburg, Müllner Hauptstr. 48, Salzburg, Austria.
h.oberkofler@salk.at

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The pseudokinase tribbles homologue 3 (Drosophila) (TRIB3)
negatively interferes with insulin-mediated phosphorylation and activation of
v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homologue 1 (AKT1, also known as protein
kinase B). Animal studies have shown that Trib3 expression was higher in the
fasting state and in animal models of diabetes, promoting hyperglycaemia
presumably by increasing glucose production in the liver. Less is known about the
role of TRIB3 in insulin resistance in humans, although a gain-of-function
mutation associated with abnormalities related to insulin resistance has been
described in TRIB3.
METHODS: We determined hepatic mRNA expression of TRIB3 and selected genes
encoding enzymes, transcription factors and coactivators involved in glucose
homeostasis. We also determined biochemical variables of intermediary metabolism 
in obese patients with varying degrees of insulin resistance.
RESULTS: In our study population hepatic TRIB3 mRNA expression was associated
with surrogate markers of insulin resistance. TRIB3 expression was significantly 
increased in a subgroup with high HOMA of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) compared
with a low HOMA-IR group (p = 0.0033). TRIB3 transcript levels were correlated
with PEPCK (also known as PCK2) mRNA expression (p = 0.0014) and mRNA expression 
of PPARGC1A (p = 0.0020), PPARGC1B (p < 0.0001), USF1 (p = 0.0017), FOXO1 (p =
0.0003) and SREBP-1c (also known as SREBF1; p = 0.0360). Furthermore ligands of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha/retinoid X receptor and
overexpression of its coactivator PPARGC1A as well as overexpression of SREBP-1c 
and its coactivator PPARGC1B increased TRIB3 promoter activity in HepG2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We have found evidence for a role of aberrant hepatic
TRIB3 transcript levels in insulin resistance in obese humans and identified
potential transcriptional pathways involved in regulation of TRIB3 gene
expression in the liver.

PMID: 20461355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Microbiol. 2010 May;76(3):648-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07114.x. Epub
2010 Mar 10.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae downregulates MHC-class II expression by two cell
type-specific mechanisms.

Peschel G(1), Kernschmidt L, Cirl C, Wantia N, Ertl T, Dürr S, Wagner H, Miethke 
T, Rodríguez N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene, Technische
Universität München, Trogerstr. 30, 81675 München, Germany.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae was shown to prevent IFN gamma-inducible upregulation of
MHC-class II molecules by secreting chlamydial protease-like activity factor
(CPAF) into the cytosol of those host cells which support the complete bacterial 
replication cycle. CPAF acts by degrading upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1). 
However, in cells like bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMM), which restrict
chlamydial replication, we show that CPAF expression is barely detectable and the
expression of USF-1 is induced upon infection with C. pneumoniae. Nevertheless,
the infection still reduced base line and prevented IFN gamma-inducible MHC-class
II expression. Similar results were obtained with heat-inactivated C. pneumoniae.
In contrast, reduction of MHC-class II molecules was not observed in
MyD88-deficient BMM. Reduction of IFN gamma-inducible MHC-class II expression by 
C. pneumoniae in BMM was mediated in part by the MAP-kinase p38. Infection of
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) with C. pneumoniae, which allow chlamydial
replication, induced the expression of CPAF and decreased USF-1 and MHC-class II 
expression. Treatment of these cells with heat-inactivated C. pneumoniae reduced 
USF-1 and MHC-class II expression to a much lower extent. In summary, C.
pneumoniae downregulates MHC-class II expression by two cell type-specific
mechanisms which are either CPAF-independent and MyD88-dependent like in BMM or
CPAF-dependent like in MEFs.

PMID: 20233301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Aug;12(8):1124-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01457.x.
Epub 2010 Feb 23.

H. pylori-induced promoter hypermethylation downregulates USF1 and USF2
transcription factor gene expression.

Bussière FI(1), Michel V, Mémet S, Avé P, Vivas JR, Huerre M, Touati E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, Paris, France.

Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with the development of gastric
adenocarcinoma. Upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 regulate the
transcription of genes related to immune response, cell cycle and cell
proliferation. A decrease in their expression is observed in human gastric
epithelial cells infected with H. pylori, associated to a lower binding to their 
DNA E-box recognition site as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. DNA 
methylation leads to gene silencing. The treatment of cells with 5'-azacytidine, 
an inhibitor of DNA methylation, restored the USF1 and USF2 gene expression in
the presence of infection. Using promoter PCR methylation assay, a DNA
hypermethylation was shown in the promoter region of USF1 and USF2 genes, in
infected cells. The inhibition of USF1 and USF2 expression by H. pylori and the
DNA hypermethylation in their gene promoter region was confirmed in gastric
tissues isolated from 12 to 18 months infected mice. Our study demonstrated the
involvement of USF1 and USF2 as molecular targets of H. pylori and the key role
of DNA methylation in their regulation. These mechanisms occurred in the context 
of metaplastic lesions, suggesting that alteration of USF1 and USF2 levels could 
participate in the promotion of neoplastic process during H. pylori infection.

PMID: 20180799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 22;11:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-9.

Regulation of UGT1A1 and HNF1 transcription factor gene expression by DNA
methylation in colon cancer cells.

Bélanger AS(1), Tojcic J, Harvey M, Guillemette C.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenomics Laboratory, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 2705 
Laurier, Quebec, G1V 4G2, Canada.

BACKGROUND: UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) is a pivotal enzyme involved
in metabolism of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan commonly used to
treat metastatic colorectal cancer. We previously demonstrated aberrant
methylation of specific CpG dinucleotides in UGT1A1-negative cells, and revealed 
that methylation state of the UGT1A1 5'-flanking sequence is negatively
correlated with gene transcription. Interestingly, one of these CpG dinucleotides
(CpG -4) is found close to a HNF1 response element (HRE), known to be involved in
activation of UGT1A1 gene expression, and within an upstream stimulating factor
(USF) binding site.
RESULTS: Gel retardation assays revealed that methylation of CpG-4 directly
affect the interaction of USF1/2 with its cognate sequence without altering the
binding for HNF1-alpha. Luciferase assays sustained a role for USF1/2 and
HNF1-alpha in UGT1A1 regulation in colon cancer cells. Based on the differential 
expression profiles of HNF1A gene in colon cell lines, we also assessed whether
methylation affects its expression. In agreement with the presence of CpG islands
in the HNF1A promoter, treatments of UGT1A1-negative HCT116 colon cancer cells
with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor restore HNF1A gene expression, as observed
for UGT1A1.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that basal UGT1A1 expression in colon cells is
positively regulated by HNF1-alpha and USF, and negatively regulated by DNA
methylation. Besides, DNA methylation of HNF1A could also play an important role 
in regulating additional cellular drug metabolism and transporter pathways. This 
process may contribute to determine local inactivation of drugs such as the
anticancer agent SN-38 by glucuronidation and define tumoral response.

PMCID: PMC2835698
PMID: 20096102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 18;11:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-5.

Upstream stimulating factors 1 and 2 enhance transcription from the
placenta-specific promoter 1.1 of the bovine cyp19 gene.

Fürbass R(1), Tomek W, Vanselow J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit Molecular Biology, Research Institute for the Biology of Farm
Animals (FBN), Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2, 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.
fuerbass@fbn-dummerstorf.de

BACKGROUND: Placenta-derived oestrogens have an impact on the growth and
differentiation of the trophoblast, and are involved in processes initiating and 
facilitating birth. The enzyme that converts androgens into oestrogens, aromatase
cytochrome P450 (P450arom), is encoded by the Cyp19 gene. In the placenta of the 
cow, expression of Cyp19 relies on promoter 1.1 (P1.1). Our recent studies of
P1.1 in vitro and in a human trophoblast cell line (Jeg3) revealed that
interactions of placental nuclear protein(s) with the E-box element at position
-340 are required for full promoter activity. The aim of this work was to
identify and characterise the placental E-box (-340)-binding protein(s) (E-BP) as
a step towards understanding how the expression of Cyp19 is regulated in the
bovine placenta.
RESULTS: The significance of the E-box was confirmed in cultured primary bovine
trophoblasts. We enriched the E-BP from placental nuclear extracts using
DNA-affinity Dynabeads and showed by Western blot analysis and supershift EMSA
experiments that the E-BP is composed of the transcription factors upstream
stimulating factor (USF) 1 and USF2. Depletion of the USFs by RNAi and expression
of a dominant-negative USF mutant, were both associated with a significant
decrease in P1.1-dependent reporter gene expression. Furthermore, scatter plot
analysis of P1.1 activity vs. USF binding to the E-box revealed a strong positive
correlation between the two parameters.
CONCLUSION: From these results we conclude that USF1 and USF2 are activators of
the bovine placenta-specific promoter P1.1 and thus act in the opposite mode as
in the case of the non-orthologous human placenta-specific promoter.

PMCID: PMC2822775
PMID: 20082704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Obes Facts. 2009;2(4):235-42. doi: 10.1159/000227288. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

Gene-gene interaction between APOA5 and USF1: two candidate genes for the
metabolic syndrome.

Singmann P(1), Baumert J, Herder C, Meisinger C, Holzapfel C, Klopp N, Wichmann
HE, Klingenspor M, Rathmann W, Illig T, Grallert H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Munchen, German Research Center
for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The metabolic syndrome, a major cluster of risk factors for
cardiovascular diseases, shows increasing prevalence worldwide. Several studies
have established associations of both apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5) gene variants and
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) gene variants with blood lipid levels and
metabolic syndrome. USF1 is a transcription factor for APOA5.
METHODS: We investigated a possible interaction between these two genes on the
risk for the metabolic syndrome, using data from the German population-based KORA
survey 4 (1,622 men and women aged 55-74 years). Seven APOA5 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were analyzed in combination with six USF1 SNPs, applying
logistic regression in an additive model adjusting for age and sex and the
definition for metabolic syndrome from the National Cholesterol Education
Program's Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP (AIII)) including medication.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence for metabolic syndrome was 41%. Two SNP
combinations showed a nominal gene-gene interaction (p values 0.024 and 0.047).
The effect of one SNP was modified by the other SNP, with a lower risk for the
metabolic syndrome with odds ratios (ORs) between 0.33 (95% CI = 0.13-0.83) and
0.40 (95% CI = 0.15-1.12) when the other SNP was homozygous for the minor allele.
Nevertheless, none of the associations remained significant after correction for 
multiple testing.
CONCLUSION: Thus, there is an indication of an interaction between APOA5 and USF1
on the risk for metabolic syndrome.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2919429
PMID: 20054229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2009 Oct;2(5):522-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.108.840421.
Epub 2009 Jun 12.

Functional variant disrupts insulin induction of USF1: mechanism for
USF1-associated dyslipidemias.

Naukkarinen J(1), Nilsson E, Koistinen HA, Söderlund S, Lyssenko V, Vaag A,
Poulsen P, Groop L, Taskinen MR, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), National Institute for Health
and Welfare, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) gene is associated with
familial combined hyperlipidemia, the most common genetic dyslipidemia in humans,
as well as with various dyslipidemic changes in numerous other studies. Typical
of complex disease-associated genes, neither the explicit mutations have been
described nor the functional consequences for risk allele carriers been reported 
at the cellular or tissue level.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we aimed at describing the molecular
mechanism through which the strongest associating intronic single-nucleotide
polymorphism variant in USF1 is involved in the development of dyslipidemia. The 
effects of the risk variant on gene expression were studied in 2 relevant human
tissues, fat and muscle. Global transcript profiles of 47 fat biopsies
ascertained for carriership of the risk allele were tested for differential
expression of known USF1 target genes as well as for broader effects on the
transcript profile. Allelic imbalance of USF1 in fat was assessed using a
quantitative sequencing approach. The possible allele-specific effect of insulin 
on the expression of USF1 was studied in 118 muscle biopsies before and after a
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. The risk allele of single-nucleotide
polymorphism rs2073658 seems to eradicate the inductive effect of insulin on the 
expression of USF1 in muscle and fat. The expression of numerous target genes is 
in turn perturbed in adipose tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: In risk allele carriers, a defective response of USF1 to insulin
results in the suboptimal response of relevant target genes that contributes to
the enhanced risk of developing dyslipidemia and coronary heart disease.

PMID: 20031629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochem J. 2010 Feb 9;426(2):159-70. doi: 10.1042/BJ20091266.

Glucose induces expression of rat pyruvate carboxylase through a carbohydrate
response element in the distal gene promoter.

Pedersen KB(1), Buckley RS, Scioneaux R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido Street, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
kpeder@lsuhsc.edu

Pyruvate carboxylase is an enzyme of the so-called pyruvate cycling pathways,
which have been proposed to contribute to glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in
pancreatic beta-cells. In the rat insulinoma cell line 832/13, transcripts from
both the distal and proximal gene promoter for pyruvate carboxylase are
up-regulated by glucose, with pyruvate carboxylase being expressed mainly from
the distal gene promoter. At position -408 to -392 relative to the transcription 
start site, the distal gene promoter was found to contain a ChoRE (carbohydrate
response element). Its deletion abolishes glucose responsiveness of the promoter,
and the sequence can mediate glucose responsiveness to a heterologous gene
promoter. ChREBP (carbohydrate response element-binding protein) and its
dimerization partner Mlx (Max-like protein X) bind to the ChoRE in vitro. ChREBP 
further binds to the distal promoter region at a high glucose concentration in
situ. The E-box-binding transcription factors USF1/2 (upstream stimulatory factor
1/2) and E2A variant 2 [also known as E47 and TCF3 (transcription factor 3)] can 
also bind to the ChoRE. Overexpression of E2A diminishes the magnitude of the
glucose response from the pyruvate carboxylase ChoRE. This illustrates that
competition between ChREBP-Mlx and other factors binding to the ChoRE affects
glucose responsiveness. We conclude that a ChoRE in the distal gene promoter
contributes to the glucose-mediated expression of pyruvate carboxylase.

PMID: 20001964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Feb 15;19(4):597-608. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp526. Epub 2009 Dec 
8.

Upstream transcription factor 1 influences plasma lipid and metabolic traits in
mice.

Wu S(1), Mar-Heyming R, Dugum EZ, Kolaitis NA, Qi H, Pajukanta P, Castellani LW, 
Lusis AJ, Drake TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) has been associated with familial combined
hyperlipidemia, the metabolic syndrome, and related conditions, but the
mechanisms involved are unknown. In this study, we report validation of Usf1 as a
causal gene of cholesterol homeostasis, insulin sensitivity and body composition 
in mouse models using several complementary approaches and identify associated
pathways and gene expression network modules. Over-expression of human USF1 in
both transgenic mice and mice with transient liver-specific over-expression
influenced metabolic trait phenotypes, including obesity, total cholesterol
level, LDL/VLDL cholesterol and glucose/insulin ratio. Additional analyses of
trait and hepatic gene expression data from an F2 population derived from
C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ strains in which there is a naturally occurring variation in
Usf1 expression supported a causal role for Usf1 for relevant metabolic traits.
Gene network and pathway analyses of the liver gene expression signatures in the 
F2 population and the hepatic over-expression model suggested the involvement of 
Usf1 in immune responses and metabolism, including an Igfbp2-centered module. In 
all three mouse model settings, notable sex specificity was observed, consistent 
with human studies showing differences in association with USF1 gene
polymorphisms between sexes.

PMCID: PMC2807368
PMID: 19995791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Feb;30(2):346-52. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.188912. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Genetic association and interaction analysis of USF1 and APOA5 on lipid levels
and atherosclerosis.

Laurila PP(1), Naukkarinen J, Kristiansson K, Ripatti S, Kauttu T, Silander K,
Salomaa V, Perola M, Karhunen PJ, Barter PJ, Ehnholm C, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare and
Institute for Molecular Medicine, Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: USF1 is a ubiquitous transcription factor governing the expression of 
numerous genes of lipid and glucose metabolism. APOA5 is a well-established
candidate gene regulating triglyceride (TG) levels and has been identified as a
downstream target of upstream stimulatory factor. No detailed studies about the
effect of APOA5 on atherosclerotic lesion formation have been conducted, nor has 
its potential interaction with USF1 been examined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed allelic variants of USF1 and APOA5 in families
(n=516) ascertained for atherogenic dyslipidemia and in an autopsy series of
middle-aged men (n=300) with precise quantitative measurements of atherosclerotic
lesions. The impact of previously associated APOA5 variants on TGs was observed
in the dyslipidemic families, and variant rs3135506 was associated with size of
fibrotic aortic lesions in the autopsy series. The USF1 variant rs2516839,
associated previously with atherosclerotic lesions, showed an effect on TGs in
members of the dyslipidemic families with documented coronary artery disease. We 
provide preliminary evidence of gene-gene interaction between these variants in
an autopsy series with a fibrotic lesion area in the abdominal aorta (P=0.0028), 
with TGs in dyslipidemic coronary artery disease subjects (P=0.03), and with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P=0.008) in a large population cohort of
coronary artery disease patients (n=1065) in which the interaction for TGs was
not replicated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings in these unique samples reinforce the roles of APOA5
and USF1 variants on cardiovascular phenotypes and suggest that both genes
contribute to lipid levels and aortic atherosclerosis individually and possibly
through epistatic effects.

PMCID: PMC3224996
PMID: 19910639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Dec;37(22):7498-508. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp823.

Molecular interactions between HNF4a, FOXA2 and GABP identified at regulatory DNA
elements through ChIP-sequencing.

Wallerman O(1), Motallebipour M, Enroth S, Patra K, Bysani MS, Komorowski J,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, SE-751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Gene expression is regulated by combinations of transcription factors, which can 
be mapped to regulatory elements on a genome-wide scale using ChIP experiments.
In a previous ChIP-chip study of USF1 and USF2 we found evidence also of binding 
of GABP, FOXA2 and HNF4a within the enriched regions. Here, we have applied
ChIP-seq for these transcription factors and identified 3064 peaks of enrichment 
for GABP, 7266 for FOXA2 and 18783 for HNF4a. Distal elements with USF2 signal
was frequently bound also by HNF4a and FOXA2. GABP peaks were found at
transcription start sites, whereas 94% of FOXA2 and 90% of HNF4a peaks were
located at other positions. We developed a method to accurately define TFBS
within peaks, and found the predicted sites to have an elevated conservation
level compared to peak centers; however the majority of bindings were not
evolutionary conserved. An interaction between HNF4a and GABP was seen at TSS,
with one-third of the HNF4a positive promoters being bound also by GABP, and this
interaction was verified by co-immunoprecipitations.

PMCID: PMC2794179
PMID: 19822575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;26(5):499-503. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2009.05.004.

[Linkage analysis of a family with familial hypertriglyceridemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang X(1), Lin Y, Liu B, Ma S, Yang Y, Yang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Provincial Key Laboratory for Human Disease Gene, Sichuan Academy of
Medical Science and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan,
610072, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To perform linkage analysis and mutation screening in a Chinese family
with familial hpertriglyceridemia (FHTG).
METHODS: Thirty-two family members including 12 hypertriglyceridemia patients
participated in the study. Genotyping and haplotype analysis for 22 subjects were
performed using short tandem repeat (STR) microsatellite polymorphism markers on 
16 candidate genes and/or loci related to lipid metabolism. Two of the sixteen
known candidate genes, APOA2 and USF1 were screened for mutation by direct DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: No linkage was found between the candidate genes/loci of APOA5, LIPI,
RP1, APOC2, ABC1, LMF1, APOA1-APOC3-APOA4, LPL, APOB, CETP, LCAT, LDLR, APOE and 
the phenotype in this family. The two-point Lod scores (theta =0) were all less
than-1.0 for all the markers tested. Linkage analysis suggested linkage to
chromosome 1q23.3-24.2 between the disease phenotype and STR marker D1S194 with a
two-point maximum Lod score of 2.44 at theta =0. Fine mapping indicated that the 
disease gene was localized to a 5.87 cM interval between D1S104 and D1S196. No
disease-causing mutation was detected in the APOA2 and USF1 genes.
CONCLUSION: The above mentioned candidate genes were excluded as the disease
causing genes for this family. The results implied that there might be a novel
gene/locus for FHTG on chromosome 1q23.3-1q24.2.

PMID: 19806567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000642. Epub 2009 
Sep 11.

A systems genetics approach implicates USF1, FADS3, and other causal candidate
genes for familial combined hyperlipidemia.

Plaisier CL(1), Horvath S, Huertas-Vazquez A, Cruz-Bautista I, Herrera MF,
Tusie-Luna T, Aguilar-Salinas C, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

We hypothesized that a common SNP in the 3' untranslated region of the upstream
transcription factor 1 (USF1), rs3737787, may affect lipid traits by influencing 
gene expression levels, and we investigated this possibility utilizing the
Mexican population, which has a high predisposition to dyslipidemia. We first
associated rs3737787 genotypes in Mexican Familial Combined Hyperlipidemia (FCHL)
case/control fat biopsies, with global expression patterns. To identify sets of
co-expressed genes co-regulated by similar factors such as transcription factors,
genetic variants, or environmental effects, we utilized weighted gene
co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). Through WGCNA in the Mexican FCHL fat
biopsies we identified two significant Triglyceride (TG)-associated co-expression
modules. One of these modules was also associated with FCHL, the other FCHL
component traits, and rs3737787 genotypes. This USF1-regulated FCHL-associated
(URFA) module was enriched for genes involved in lipid metabolic processes. Using
systems genetics procedures we identified 18 causal candidate genes in the URFA
module. The FCHL causal candidate gene fatty acid desaturase 3 (FADS3) was
associated with TGs in a recent Caucasian genome-wide significant association
study and we replicated this association in Mexican FCHL families. Based on a
USF1-regulated FCHL-associated co-expression module and SNP rs3737787, we
identify a set of causal candidate genes for FCHL-related traits. We then provide
evidence from two independent datasets supporting FADS3 as a causal gene for FCHL
and elevated TGs in Mexicans.

PMCID: PMC2730565
PMID: 19750004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000637. Epub 2009 
Sep 4.

The variant rs1867277 in FOXE1 gene confers thyroid cancer susceptibility through
the recruitment of USF1/USF2 transcription factors.

Landa I(1), Ruiz-Llorente S, Montero-Conde C, Inglada-Pérez L, Schiavi F, Leskelä
S, Pita G, Milne R, Maravall J, Ramos I, Andía V, Rodríguez-Poyo P, Jara-Albarrán
A, Meoro A, del Peso C, Arribas L, Iglesias P, Caballero J, Serrano J, Picó A,
Pomares F, Giménez G, López-Mondéjar P, Castello R, Merante-Boschin I, Pelizzo
MR, Mauricio D, Opocher G, Rodríguez-Antona C, González-Neira A, Matías-Guiu X,
Santisteban P, Robledo M.

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

In order to identify genetic factors related to thyroid cancer susceptibility, we
adopted a candidate gene approach. We studied tag- and putative functional SNPs
in genes involved in thyroid cell differentiation and proliferation, and in genes
found to be differentially expressed in thyroid carcinoma. A total of 768 SNPs in
97 genes were genotyped in a Spanish series of 615 cases and 525 controls, the
former comprising the largest collection of patients with this pathology from a
single population studied to date. SNPs in an LD block spanning the entire FOXE1 
gene showed the strongest evidence of association with papillary thyroid
carcinoma susceptibility. This association was validated in a second stage of the
study that included an independent Italian series of 482 patients and 532
controls. The strongest association results were observed for rs1867277
(OR[per-allele] = 1.49; 95%CI = 1.30-1.70; P = 5.9x10(-9)). Functional assays of 
rs1867277 (NM_004473.3:c.-283G>A) within the FOXE1 5' UTR suggested that this
variant affects FOXE1 transcription. DNA-binding assays demonstrated that,
exclusively, the sequence containing the A allele recruited the USF1/USF2
transcription factors, while both alleles formed a complex in which
DREAM/CREB/alphaCREM participated. Transfection studies showed an
allele-dependent transcriptional regulation of FOXE1. We propose a FOXE1
regulation model dependent on the rs1867277 genotype, indicating that this SNP is
a causal variant in thyroid cancer susceptibility. Our results constitute the
first functional explanation for an association identified by a GWAS and thereby 
elucidate a mechanism of thyroid cancer susceptibility. They also attest to the
efficacy of candidate gene approaches in the GWAS era.

PMCID: PMC2727793
PMID: 19730683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):28510-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.022244. Epub
2009 Aug 31.

Hepatocyte growth factor family negatively regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis via 
induction of orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner in primary
hepatocytes.

Chanda D(1), Li T, Song KH, Kim YH, Sim J, Lee CH, Chiang JY, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is tightly balanced by opposing stimulatory (glucagon)
and inhibitory (insulin) signaling pathways. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a 
pleiotropic growth factor that mediates diverse biological processes. In this
study, we investigated the effect of HGF and its family member,
macrophage-stimulating factor (MSP), on hepatic gluconeogenesis in primary
hepatocytes. HGF and MSP significantly repressed expression of the key hepatic
gluconeogenic enzyme genes, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), and
glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc-6-Pase) and reduced glucose production. HGF and MSP
activated small heterodimer partner (SHP) gene promoter and induced SHP mRNA and 
protein levels, and the effect of HGF and MSP on SHP gene expression was
demonstrated to be mediated via activation of the AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) signaling pathway. We demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor-1
(USF-1) specifically mediated HGF effect on SHP gene expression, and inhibition
of USF-1 by dominant negative USF-1 significantly abrogated HGF-mediated
activation of the SHP promoter. Elucidation of the mechanism showed that USF-1
bound to E-box-1 in the SHP promoter, and HGF increased USF-1 DNA binding on the 
SHP promoter via AMPK and DNA-dependent protein kinase-mediated pathways.
Adenoviral overexpression of USF-1 significantly repressed PEPCK and Glc-6-Pase
gene expression and reduced glucose production. Knockdown of endogenous SHP
expression significantly reversed this effect. Finally, knockdown of SHP or
inhibition of AMPK signaling reversed the ability of HGF to suppress hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha-mediated up-regulation of PEPCK and Glc-6-Pase gene
expression along with the HGF- and MSP-mediated suppression of gluconeogenesis.
Overall, our results suggest a novel signaling pathway through HGF/AMPK/USF-1/SHP
to inhibit hepatic gluconeogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2781394
PMID: 19720831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Biomed Sci. 2009 Sep;5(3):305-12.

A Common Polymorphism of Upstream Transcription Factor 1 Gene is associated with 
Lipid Profile: A Study in Chinese Type 2 Diabetes Families.

Song Y(1), Li N, He L, Xun T, Chen D, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University, Beijing, China; Key Laboratory of Epidemiology, Ministry of
Education, Beijing, China.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) is capable of controlling various members 
in glucose and lipid metabolism pathways. Much evidence suggests that the
rs3737787 polymorphism in the USF1 gene may lead to alteration of lipid
metabolism. The objective of this study was to test the association between
rs3737787 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its related lipid metabolic
traits in the Chinese population. A total of 287 eligible T2DM families were
chosen in Beijing. A set of questionnaires was administered to obtain information
on demographic characteristics. Physical measurements were recorded. DNA was
extracted from blood samples and genotyped using PCR-RFLP method. Statistical
analyses including linkage analysis and family-based association test were
performed to detect the relationship between rs3737787 and T2DM related traits.
In the non-parametric linkage analysis, it was observed that rs3737787 is
potentially linked with triglyceride and apolipoprotein E levels, where the
logarithm of the odds scores were 0.87 (p=0.02) and 1.96 (p=0.001), respectively.
Similar results were obtained in the multi-factorial generalized estimating
equation analysis. Using different statistical approaches, in this study, we have
confirmed that the single nucleotide polymorphism rs3737787 is related to
triglyceride and apolipoprotein E levels in type 2 diabetes mellitus families.

PMCID: PMC3614780
PMID: 23675152  [PubMed]


127. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Mar;19(3):321-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0397.

Increased levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and other interconnected transcription
factors characterize primitive sets of hematopoietic stem cells.

Panepucci RA(1), Oliveira LH, Zanette DL, Viu Carrara Rde C, Araujo AG, Orellana 
MD, Bonini de Palma PV, Menezes CC, Covas DT, Zago MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao
Preto-USP, Center for Cell Therapy and Regional Blood Center, Araraquara, São
Paulo, Brazil. rapane@gmail.com

As previously shown, higher levels of NOTCH1 and increased NF-kappaB signaling is
a distinctive feature of the more primitive umbilical cord blood (UCB) CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), as compared to bone marrow (BM). Differences
between BM and UCB cell composition also account for this finding. The CD133
marker defines a more primitive cell subset among CD34+ HSC with a proposed
hemangioblast potential. To further evaluate the molecular basis related to the
more primitive characteristics of UCB and CD133+ HSC, immunomagnetically purified
human CD34+ and CD133+ cells from BM and UCB were used on gene expression
microarrays studies. UCB CD34+ cells contained a significantly higher proportion 
of CD133+ cells than BM (70% and 40%, respectively). Cluster analysis showed that
BM CD133+ cells grouped with the UCB cells (CD133+ and CD34+) rather than to BM
CD34+ cells. Compared with CD34+ cells, CD133+ had a higher expression of many
transcription factors (TFs). Promoter analysis on all these TF genes revealed a
significantly higher frequency (than expected by chance) of NF-kappaB-binding
sites (BS), including potentially novel NF-kappaB targets such as RUNX1, GATA3,
and USF1. Selected transcripts of TF related to primitive hematopoiesis and
self-renewal, such as RUNX1, GATA3, USF1, TAL1, HOXA9, HOXB4, NOTCH1, RELB, and
NFKB2 were evaluated by real-time PCR and were all significantly positively
correlated. Taken together, our data indicate the existence of an interconnected 
transcriptional network characterized by higher levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and 
other important TFs on more primitive HSC sets.

PMID: 19686049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Immunol. 2009 Sep;46(15):3009-17. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.06.013. Epub
2009 Jul 9.

Promoter activity 5' of Dbeta2 is coordinated by E47, Runx1, and GATA-3.

McMillan RE(1), Sikes ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695, USA.

V(D)J recombination involves the stepwise assembly of B and T cell receptor genes
as lymphocytes progress through the early stages of development. While the
mechanisms that restrict each step in recombination to its appropriate
developmental stage are largely unknown, they share many of the components that
regulate transcription. For example, enhancer-dependent modifications in histone 
acetylation and methylation are essential for both germline transcription and
rearrangement of antigen receptor genes. Promoters positioned proximal to
individual D and J gene segments in Tcra, Tcrb, Tcrd, IgH, and Igk also
contribute to antigen receptor gene assembly, though their effects appear more
localized than those of enhancers. Tcrb assembly initiates with D-to-J joining at
each of the two D-J-C gene segment clusters in DN1/2 thymocytes. DJ joints are
fused with Vbeta elements to complete Tcrb recombination in DN3 cells. We have
previously shown that Dbeta2 is flanked by upstream and downstream promoters,
with the 5' promoter being held inactive until D-to-J recombination deletes the
NFkappaB-dependent 3' promoter. We now report that activity of the 5' promoter
reflects a complex interplay among Runx1, GATA-3, and E47 transcription factors. 
In particular, while multiple E47 and Runx1 binding sites clustered near the
Dbeta2 5'RS and overlapping inr elements define the core 5'PDbeta2, they act in
concert with an array of upstream GATA-3 sites to overcome the inhibitory effects
of a 110bp distal polypurine.polypyrimidine (R.Y) tract. The dependence of
5'PDbeta2 on E47 is consistent with the reported role of E proteins in post-DN1
thymocyte development and V-to-DJbeta recombination.

PMCID: PMC2732994
PMID: 19592096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Asia Pac J Public Health. 2008 Oct;20 Suppl:257-61.

Diversity in genes responsible for lifestyle-related diseases in Asia-Pacific
region.

Yanagisawa Y(1), Munkhtulga L, Nakayama K, Iwamoto S, Charupoonphol P,
Supannnatas S, Kuartei S, Chimedregzen U, Kawabata T, Kaneko Y, Watanabe S,
Sakuma M, Komatsu F, Hasegawa K, Kagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Jichi Medical University, Japan.

In Asia-Pacific countries, both environmental modernization and hereditary traits
of Mongoloid reported to cause rapid increase in lifestyle-related diseases
(LRD). However, reproducibility of reported responsive-factors is low. To examine
this, a decision-tree method of complexity-model was applied to select
LRD-responsive-factors. Genomic DNA was collected from Asia-Pacific regions.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on genomic DNA were determined as
hereditary-trait-factor. Three indices of LRD (BMI, body fat, and serum leptin
levels) were classified according to published criteria. WEKA Machine-learning
system was used as decision-tree software. Age was added as a factor with
different dimension. Selected factors were validated by other statistical
methods. In Thai-males, GLUT) (glucose-transporter 1)-SNP was most-responsive to 
body fat, followed by USF1-SNP (transcription-factor for lipid metabolism).
Differences between genotypes were validated (P = .002 for GLUT1 by Levene's, P =
.071 for USF1 by ANOVA). Responsive-factors of Thai-females, Palau-males and
Palau-females, were consisted with SNPs and age, and varied by groups. Convincing
responsive-factors were not selected from mixed-data. Decision-tree-analysis
successfully selected the convincing results. Responsive-factors differed by
ethnic group and gender.

PMID: 19533890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jul;37(12):e85. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp381. Epub 2009 May
18.

Identification of candidate regulatory SNPs by combination of
transcription-factor-binding site prediction, SNP genotyping and haploChIP.

Ameur A(1), Rada-Iglesias A, Komorowski J, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Disease-associated SNPs detected in large-scale association studies are
frequently located in non-coding genomic regions, suggesting that they may be
involved in transcriptional regulation. Here we describe a new strategy for
detecting regulatory SNPs (rSNPs), by combining computational and experimental
approaches. Whole genome ChIP-chip data for USF1 was analyzed using a novel motif
finding algorithm called BCRANK. 1754 binding sites were identified and 140
candidate rSNPs were found in the predicted sites. For validating their
regulatory function, seven SNPs found to be heterozygous in at least one of four 
human cell samples were investigated by ChIP and sequence analysis (haploChIP).
In four of five cases where the SNP was predicted to affect binding, USF1 was
preferentially bound to the allele containing the consensus motif. Allelic
differences in binding for other proteins and histone marks further reinforced
the SNPs regulatory potential. Moreover, for one of these SNPs, H3K36me3 and
POLR2A levels at neighboring heterozygous SNPs indicated effects on
transcription. Our strategy, which is entirely based on in vivo data for both the
prediction and validation steps, can identify individual binding sites at base
pair resolution and predict rSNPs. Overall, this approach can help to pinpoint
the causative SNPs in complex disorders where the associated haplotypes are
located in regulatory regions.AVAILABILITY: BCRANK is available from Bioconductor
(http://www.bioconductor.org/).

PMCID: PMC2709586
PMID: 19451166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3783-91. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1261. Epub 2009 May 
7.

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) transiently blocks FSH receptor transcription 
by increasing inhibitor of deoxyribonucleic acid binding/differentiation-2 and
decreasing upstream stimulatory factor expression in rat Sertoli cells.

Viswanathan P(1), Wood MA, Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Magee Women's Research Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

FSH acts through the FSH receptor (FSHR) to modulate cell processes that are
required to support developing spermatozoa. Within the testis, only Sertoli cells
possess receptors for FSH and are the major targets for this regulator of
spermatogenesis. FSH stimulation of Sertoli cells for 24-48 h is known to induce 
Fshr mRNA expression through an E-box motif (CACGTG) located 25 bp upstream of
the transcription start site. In contrast, FSH stimulation for 8 h inhibits Fshr 
transcription. DNA-protein binding studies performed using nuclear extracts from 
Sertoli cells show that protein binding to the Fshr promoter E-box was reduced
68% after 6 h of FSH stimulation but increased 191% over basal levels after 48 h 
of stimulation. The proteins binding to the Fshr E-box were identified as
upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-1 and -2. FSH stimulation transiently decreased
USF1 levels and increased the expression of the inhibitor of DNA
binding/differentiation (ID)-2 repressor protein with the same kinetics as the
decreased USF/E-box interactions. Overexpression of ID2 resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease in USF-driven Fshr promoter activity in the MSC-1 Sertoli
cell line, and ID2 inhibited USF binding to the Fshr E-box. Together, these
studies suggest that stimulation of Sertoli cells with FSH transiently decreases 
expression of the USF1 activator and induces accumulation of the ID2 repressor,
to block USF binding to the Fshr promoter and delay activation of Fshr
transcription. This FSH-regulated mechanism may explain the cyclical changes in
Fshr expression that occurs in Sertoli cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2717885
PMID: 19423764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Apr;1791(4):229-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.01.017.
Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Upstream Stimulatory Factors 1 and 2 activate the human hepatic lipase promoter
via E-box dependent and independent mechanisms.

van Deursen D(1), van Leeuwen M, Vaulont S, Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR, Erasmus MC, 
NL-3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

We studied the transcriptional regulation of the HL gene by USF1 and USF2 in
HepG2 cells. The transcriptional activity of the HL(-685/+13) promoter construct 
was increased up to 25-fold by co-transfection with USF1 and USF2. Silencing of
USF1 by RNA interference reduced promoter activity by 30-40%. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed binding of endogenous USF1 and USF2 to the
proximal HL promoter region. In gel shift assays, USF1 and USF2 bound to E-boxes 
at -307/-312 and -510/-516, and to the TATA-Inr region. Although the -514C-->T
substitution abolished in vitro USF binding to the -510/-516 E-box, the increase 
in HL promoter activity by USF1 and USF2 was unaffected. Deletion and mutation
analysis of the HL promoter region, and insertion of multiple E-box copies in
front of a heterologous promoter, revealed that upregulation by USFs was mainly
mediated through the -307/-312 E-box and the TATA-Inr region. We conclude that in
HepG2 cells USF1 and USF2 regulate transcriptional activity of the HL gene
through their binding to the E-box at -307/-312 and the TATA-Inr region.

PMID: 19416648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Hum Genomics. 2009 Apr;3(3):221-35.

A general integrative genomic feature transcription factor binding site
prediction method applied to analysis of USF1 binding in cardiovascular disease.

Wang T(1), Furey TS, Connelly JJ, Ji S, Nelson S, Heber S, Gregory SG, Hauser ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Transcription factors are key mediators of human complex disease processes.
Identifying the target genes of transcription factors will increase our
understanding of the biological network leading to disease risk. The prediction
of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) is one method to identify these
target genes; however, current prediction methods need improvement. We chose the 
transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor 1 ( USF1 ) to evaluate the
performance of our novel TFBS prediction method because of its known genetic
association with coronary artery disease (CAD) and the recent availability of
USF1 chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray (ChIP-chip) results. The specific
goals of our study were to develop a novel and accurate genome-scale method for
predicting USF1 binding sites and associated target genes to aid in the study of 
CAD. Previously published USF1 ChIP-chip data for 1 per cent of the genome were
used to develop and evaluate several kernel logistic regression prediction
models. A combination of genomic features (phylogenetic conservation, regulatory 
potential, presence of a CpG island and DNaseI hypersensitivity), as well as
position weight matrix (PWM) scores, were used as variables for these models. Our
most accurate predictor achieved an area under the receiver operator
characteristic curve of 0.827 during cross-validation experiments, significantly 
outperforming standard PWM-based prediction methods. When applied to the whole
human genome, we predicted 24,010 USF1 binding sites within 5 kilobases upstream 
of the transcription start site of 9,721 genes. These predictions included 16 of 
20 genes with strong evidence of USF1 regulation. Finally, in the spirit of
genomic convergence, we integrated independent experimental CAD data with these
USF1 binding site prediction results to develop a prioritised set of candidate
genes for future CAD studies. We have shown that our novel prediction method,
which employs genomic features related to the presence of regulatory elements,
enables more accurate and efficient prediction of USF1 binding sites. This method
can be extended to other transcription factors identified in human disease
studies to help further our understanding of the biology of complex disease.

PMCID: PMC2742312
PMID: 19403457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2009 Apr 28;11:e13. doi: 10.1017/S1462399409001057.

Transcription factors in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy.

Sanchez AP(1), Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0711, USA.

Approximately a third of patients with diabetes develop diabetic kidney disease, 
and diabetes is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease in most developed
countries. Hyperglycaemia is known to activate genes that ultimately lead to
extracellular matrix accumulation, the hallmark of diabetic nephropathy. Several 
transcription factors have been implicated in glucose-mediated expression of
genes involved in diabetic nephropathy. This review focuses on the transcription 
factors upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and 2), activator protein 1
(AP-1), nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, cAMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB),
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), and stimulating protein 1 (Sp1). In
response to high glucose, several of these transcription factors regulate the
gene encoding the profibrotic cytokine transforming growth factor beta, as well
as genes for a range of other proteins implicated in inflammation and
extracellular matrix turnover, including thrombospondin 1, the chemokine CCL2,
osteopontin, fibronectin, decorin, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 and aldose
reductase. Identifying the molecular mechanisms by which diabetic nephropathy
occurs has important clinical implications as therapies can then be tailored to
target those at risk. Strategies to specifically target transcription factor
activation and function may be employed to halt the progression of diabetic
nephropathy.

PMID: 19397838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18851-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808605200. Epub 2009
Apr 23.

Target gene specificity of USF-1 is directed via p38-mediated
phosphorylation-dependent acetylation.

Corre S(1), Primot A, Baron Y, Le Seyec J, Goding C, Galibert MD.

Author information: 
(1)Signaling and Development Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted RH8 OTL, United Kingdom.

How transcription factors interpret the output from signal transduction pathways 
to drive distinct programs of gene expression is a key issue that underpins
development and disease. The ubiquitously expressed basic-helix-loop-helix
leucine zipper upstream stimulating factor-1 binds E-box regulatory elements
(CANNTG) to regulate a wide number of gene networks. In particular, USF-1 is a
key component of the tanning process. Following UV irradiation, USF-1 is
phosphorylated by the p38 stress-activated kinase on threonine 153 and directly
up-regulates expression of the POMC, MC1R, TYR, TYRP-1 and DCT genes. However,
how phosphorylation on Thr-153 might affect the activity of USF-1 is unclear.
Here we show that, in response to DNA damage, oxidative stress and cellular
infection USF-1 is acetylated in a phospho-Thr-153-dependent fashion.
Phospho-acetylated USF-1 is nuclear and interacts with DNA but displays altered
gene regulatory properties. Phospho-acetylated USF-1 is thus proposed to be
associated with loss of transcriptional activation properties toward several
target genes implicated in pigmentation process and cell cycle regulation. The
identification of this critical stress-dependent USF-1 modification gives new
insights into understanding USF-1 gene expression modulation associated with
cancer development.

PMCID: PMC2707245
PMID: 19389701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell. 2009 Mar 20;136(6):1056-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.12.040.

A role of DNA-PK for the metabolic gene regulation in response to insulin.

Wong RH(1), Chang I, Hudak CS, Hyun S, Kwan HY, Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Toxicology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a central enzyme in lipogenesis and
transcriptionally activated in response to feeding and insulin signaling. The
transcription factor USF is required for the activation of FAS transcription, and
we show here that USF phosphorylation by DNA-PK, which is dephosphorylated by PP1
in response to feeding, triggers a switch-like mechanism. Under fasting
conditions, USF-1 is deacetylated by HDAC9, causing promoter inactivation. In
contrast, feeding induces the recruitment of DNA-PK to USF-1 and its
phosphorylation, which then allows recruitment of P/CAF, resulting in USF-1
acetylation and FAS promoter activation. DNA break/repair components associated
with USF induce transient DNA breaks during FAS activation. In DNA-PK-deficient
SCID mice, feeding-induced USF-1 phosphorylation/acetylation, DNA breaks, and FAS
activation leading to lipogenesis are impaired, resulting in decreased
triglyceride levels. Our study demonstrates that a kinase central to the DNA
damage response mediates metabolic gene activation.

PMCID: PMC2768498
PMID: 19303849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nutrients. 2009 Feb;1(2):133-47. doi: 10.3390/nu1020133. Epub 2009 Oct 29.

Activation of hepatic lipase expression by oleic acid: possible involvement of
USF1.

van Deursen D(1), van Leeuwen M, Akdogan D, Adams H, Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School (COEUR), Erasmus MC, P.O.
Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.vandeursen@erasmusmc.nl

Polyunsaturated fatty acids affect gene expression mainly through peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and sterol regulatory element binding
proteins (SREBPs), but how monounsaturated fatty acids affect gene expression is 
poorly understood. In HepG2 cells, oleate supplementation has been shown to
increase secretion of hepatic lipase (HL). We hypothesized that oleate affects HL
gene expression at the transcriptional level. To test this, we studied the effect
of oleate on HL promoter activity using HepG2 cells and the proximal HL promoter 
region (700 bp). Oleate increased HL expression and promoter activity 1.3-2.1
fold and reduced SREBP activity by 50%. Downregulation of SREBP activity by
incubation with cholesterol+25-hydroxycholesterol had no effect on HL promoter
activity. Overexpression of SREBP2, but not SREBP1, reduced HL promoter activity,
which was effected mainly through the USF1 binding site at -307/-312. Oleate
increased the nuclear abundance of USF1 protein 2.7 ± 0.6 fold, while USF1 levels
were reduced by SREBP2 overexpression. We conclude that oleate increases HL gene 
expression via USF1. USF1 may be an additional fatty acid sensor in liver cells.

PMCID: PMC3257599
PMID: 22253973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 16;9:110. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-110.

Upstream stimulatory factors are involved in the P1 promoter directed
transcription of the A beta H-J-J locus.

Finotti A(1), Treves S, Zorzato F, Gambari R, Feriotto G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Section,
University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara 74, 44100 Ferrara, Italy.
fntlss@unife.it

BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing of the locus A beta H-J-J generates functionally
distinct proteins: the enzyme aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase (AAH),
truncated homologs of AAH with a role in calcium homeostasis humbug and junctate 
and a structural protein of the sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes junctin. AAH and
humbug are over expressed in a broad range of malignant neoplasms. We have
previously reported that this locus contains two promoters, P1 and P2. While AAH 
and humbug are expressed in most tissues under the regulation of the P1 promoter,
AAH, junctin and junctate are predominantly expressed in excitable tissues under 
the control of the P2 promoter. We previously demonstrated that Sp transcription 
factors positively regulate the P1 promoter.
RESULTS: In the present study, we extended the functional characterization of the
P1 promoter of the A beta H-J-J locus. We demonstrated by quantitative Real-time 
RT-PCR that mRNAs from the P1 promoter are actively transcribed in all the human 
cell lines analysed. To investigate the transcription mechanism we transiently
transfected HeLa cells with sequentially deleted reporter constructs containing
different regions of the -661/+81 P1 nucleotide sequence. Our results showed that
(i) this promoter fragment is a powerful activator of the reporter gene in HeLa
cell line, (ii) the region spanning 512 bp upstream of the transcription start
site exhibits maximal level of transcriptional activity, (iii) progressive
deletions from -512 gradually reduce reporter expression. The region responsible 
for maximal transcription contains an E-box site; we characterized the molecular 
interactions between USF1/2 with this E-box element by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and supershift analysis. In addition, our USF1 and USF2 chromatin
immunoprecipitation results demonstrate that these transcription factors bind the
P1 promoter in vivo. A functional role of USF1/USF2 in upregulating P1-directed
transcription was demonstrated by analysis of the effects of (i) in vitro
mutagenesis of the P1/E-box binding site, (ii) RNA interference targeting USF1
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that USF factors positively regulate the core of 
P1 promoter, and, together with our previously data, we can conclude that both Sp
and USF DNA interaction and transcription activity are involved in the P1
promoter dependent expression of AAH and humbug.

PMCID: PMC2625362
PMID: 19087304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2009 Feb 12;113(7):1547-54. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-164954. Epub 2008
Nov 13.

An insulator with barrier-element activity promotes alpha-spectrin gene
expression in erythroid cells.

Gallagher PG(1), Nilson DG, Steiner LA, Maksimova YD, Lin JY, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8064, USA. patrick.gallagher@yale.edu

Understanding mechanisms controlling expression of the alpha-spectrin gene is
important for understanding erythropoiesis, membrane biogenesis, and
spectrin-linked hemolytic anemia. We showed previously that a minimal
alpha-spectrin promoter directed low levels of expression only in early erythroid
development, indicating elements outside the promoter are required for expression
in adult erythrocytes. Addition of noncoding exon 1' and intron 1' conferred a
10-fold increase in activity in reporter gene assays. In this report, we used a
transgenic mouse model to show that addition of exon 1' and intron 1' to the
alpha-spectrin promoter conferred tissue-specific expression of a linked
(A)gamma-globin gene in erythroid cells at all developmental stages. Expression
was nearly position-independent, as 21 of 23 lines expressed the transgene, and
gamma-globin protein was present in 100% of erythrocytes, indicating uniform
expression. Additional in vivo studies revealed that exon 1' functions as an
insulator with barrier-element activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that this region was occupied by the upstream stimulatory factors
1/2 (USF1/USF2), similar to the well-characterized chicken HS4 insulator. These
data identify the first barrier element described in an erythrocyte membrane
protein gene and indicate that exon 1' and intron 1' are excellent candidate
regions for mutations in patients with spectrin-linked hemolytic anemia.

PMCID: PMC2644083
PMID: 19008453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;296(1):C116-23. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00267.2007. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Interactions between ROS and AMP kinase activity in the regulation of PGC-1alpha 
transcription in skeletal muscle cells.

Irrcher I(1), Ljubicic V, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, Rm. 302, Farquharson Life Sciences
Bldg., York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, ON, Canada M3J 1P3.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play an important role in cellular function via the
activation of signaling cascades. ROS have been shown to affect mitochondrial
biogenesis, morphology, and function. Their beneficial effects are likely
mediated via the upregulation of transcriptional regulators such as peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 protein-alpha (PGC-1alpha).
However, the ROS signals that regulate PGC-1alpha transcription in skeletal
muscle are not understood. Here we examined the effect of H2O2 on the regulation 
of PGC-1alpha expression, and its relationship to AMPK activation. We demonstrate
that 24 h of exogenous H2O2 treatment increased PGC-1alpha promoter activity and 
mRNA expression. Both effects were blocked with the addition of N-acetylcysteine,
a ROS scavenger. These effects were mediated, in part, via upstream stimulatory
factor-1/Ebox DNA binding and involved 1) interactions with downstream sequences 
and 2) the activation of AMPK. Elevated ROS led to the activation of AMPK, likely
via a decline in ATP levels. The activation of AMPK using
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-d-ribofuranoside increased PGC-1alpha
promoter activity and mRNA levels but reduced ROS production. Thus the net effect
of AMPK activation on PGC-1alpha expression was a result of increased
transcriptional activation, counterbalanced by reduced ROS production. The
effects of H2O2 on PGC-1alpha expression differed depending on the level of ROS
within the cell. Low levels of ROS result in reduced PGC-1alpha mRNA in the
absence of an effect on PGC-1alpha promoter activation. In contrast, elevated
levels of H2O2 induce PGC-1alpha transcription indirectly, via AMPK activation.
These data identify unique interactions between ROS and AMPK activation on the
expression of PGC-1alpha in muscle cells.

PMID: 19005163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jan;1791(1):39-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2008.09.005. 
Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Identification of cis-acting promoter sequences required for expression of the
glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 1 gene in mice.

Yoshida M(1), Harada N, Yamamoto H, Taketani Y, Nakagawa T, Yin Y, Hattori A,
Zenitani T, Hara S, Yonemoto H, Nakamura A, Nakano M, Mawatari K, Teshigawara K, 
Arai H, Hosaka T, Takahashi A, Yoshimoto K, Nakaya Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute of Health Biosciences,
University of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima City,
770-8503, Japan.

Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 1 (GPAT1) is a rate limiting enzyme in de
novo glycerophospholipid synthesis. The murine GPAT1 promoter sequence (the
"classical" sequence) was reported previously. However, the organization of this 
DNA sequence does not fully match the mouse genome sequences on NCBI/GenBank.
Here we have identified net cis-acting promoter sequences for the mouse GPAT1
gene: promoter 1a which includes part of the classical sequence and the
downstream promoter 1b. Promoter 1a facilitates transcription of two alternative 
GPAT1 transcript variants, GPAT1-V1 and V2, while promoter 1b produces a third
transcript variant, GPAT1-V3. Upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF-1) controlled
both promoters whereas sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1)
exclusively regulated promoter 1a activity in vitro. Feeding increased GPAT1-V1
and V2, but not V3 mRNA levels in mouse liver. The obese condition of db/db mice 
did not alter the hepatic expression levels of any of the three GPAT1 variants.
Feeding enhanced hepatic mRNA levels, intranuclear protein levels and promoter
1a-binding levels of SREBP-1, but not of USF-1. Thus, promoter 1a was exclusively
activated by routine feeding in vivo. Our results indicate differential roles of 
the two promoters in the regulation of hepatic GPAT1 gene expression in mice.

PMID: 18983939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. FEBS Lett. 2008 Nov 26;582(28):3903-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.10.032. Epub
2008 Oct 29.

Specific interaction of TFII-I with an upstream element on the HIV-1 LTR
regulates induction of latent provirus.

Malcolm T(1), Kam J, Pour PS, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, LSI, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

RBF-2 is a factor comprised of a USF1/2 heterodimer, whose association with a
highly conserved upstream element (RBEIII) on the HIV-1 LTR requires a co-factor 
TFII-I. We have identified specific nucleotides, immediately 3' of RBEIII that
are required for stable association of TFII-I with this region of the LTR.
Mutations that inhibit interaction of TFII-I with DNA also prevent stimulation of
USF binding to RBEIII, and render the integrated LTR unresponsive to T cell
signaling. These results demonstrate an essential role of TFII-I bound at an
upstream LTR element for viral replication.

PMID: 18976654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003614. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

AMP-activated protein kinase-regulated activation of the PGC-1alpha promoter in
skeletal muscle cells.

Irrcher I(1), Ljubicic V, Kirwan AF, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The mechanisms by which PGC-1alpha gene expression is controlled in skeletal
muscle remains largely undefined. Thus, we sought to investigate the
transcriptional regulation of PGC-1alpha using AICAR, an activator of AMPK, that 
is known to increase PGC-1alpha expression. A 2.2 kb fragment of the human
PGC-1alpha promoter was cloned and sequence analysis revealed that this TATA-less
sequence houses putative consensus sites including a GC-box, a CRE, several IRSs,
a SRE, binding sites for GATA, MEF2, p 53, NF-kappaB, and EBox binding proteins. 
AMPK activation for 24 hours increased PGC-1alpha promoter activity with
concomitant increases in mRNA expression. The effect of AICAR on transcriptional 
activation was mediated by an overlapping GATA/EBox binding site at -495 within
the PGC-1alpha promoter based on gel shift analyses that revealed increases in
GATA/EBox DNA binding. Mutation of the EBox within the GATA/EBox binding site in 
the promoter reduced basal promoter activity and completely abolished the AICAR
effect. Supershift analyses identified USF-1 as a DNA binding transcription
factor potentially involved in regulating PGC-1alpha promoter activity, which was
confirmed in vivo by ChIP. Overexpression of either GATA-4 or USF-1 alone
increased the p851 PGC-1alpha promoter activity by 1.7- and 2.0-fold
respectively, while co-expression of GATA-4 and USF-1 led to an additive increase
in PGC-1alpha promoter activity. The USF-1-mediated increase in PGC-1alpha
promoter activation led to similar increases at the mRNA level. Our data identify
a novel AMPK-mediated regulatory pathway that regulates PGC-1alpha gene
expression. This could represent a potential therapeutic target to control
PGC-1alpha expression in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2570798
PMID: 18974883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Korean Med Sci. 2008 Oct;23(5):870-6. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2008.23.5.870.

Overexpression of USF increases TGF-beta1 protein levels, but G1 phase arrest was
not induced in FRTL-5 cells.

Kim KS(1), Jung HS, Chung YJ, Jung TS, Jang HW, Lee MS, Kim KW, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Jungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) is a potent inhibitor of cellular
growth and proliferation by G1 phase arrest or apoptosis. We investigated the
association of TGF-beta1 with the anti-proliferative effect of upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) in Fischer rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5) cells.
[methyl-(3)H] thymidine uptake was measured after treatment of FRTL-5 cells with 
TGF-beta1 to identify its anti-proliferative effect. USF-1 and USF-2 proteins
were in vitro translated, and an electrophoretic mobility shift assay was
performed to identify the interaction between USF and the TGF-beta1 promoter.
FRTL-5 cells were transfected with USF cDNA, and then the expression of TGF-beta1
was examined with Northern and Western blotting. The cell cycle-regulating
proteins associated with TGF-beta1 were also measured. TGF-beta1 significantly
inhibited [methyl-(3)H] thymidine uptake in FRTL-5 cells. Two specific binding
sites for USF were found in the TGF-beta1 promoter: -1,846 approximately -1,841
(CACATG) and -621 approximately -616 (CATGTG). Overexpression of USF increased
both the mRNA levels and protein levels of TGF-beta1. However, the expression of 
cyclin D1, CDK4, cyclin E, and CDK2, and the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma
protein remained unchanged. Overexpression of USF in FRTL-5 cells increased the
expression of TGF-beta10 through specific binding to TGF-beta1 promoter. However,
the USF-induced expression of TGF-beta1 did not cause G1 arrest.

PMCID: PMC2580023
PMID: 18955796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):6795-805. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn752. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

Positional distribution of human transcription factor binding sites.

Koudritsky M(1), Domany E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

We developed a method for estimating the positional distribution of transcription
factor (TF) binding sites using ChIP-chip data, and applied it to recently
published experiments on binding sites of nine TFs: OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HNF1A,
HNF4A, HNF6, FOXA2, USF1 and CREB1. The data were obtained from a genome-wide
coverage of promoter regions from 8-kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) to 2-kb downstream. The number of target genes of each TF ranges from few
hundred to several thousand. We found that for each of the nine TFs the estimated
binding site distribution is closely approximated by a mixture of two components:
a narrow peak, localized within 300-bp upstream of the TSS, and a distribution of
almost uniform density within the tested region. Using Gene Ontology (GO) and
Enrichment analysis, we were able to associate (for each of the TFs studied) the 
target genes of both types of binding with known biological processes. Most GO
terms were enriched either among the proximal targets or among those with a
uniform distribution of binding sites. For example, the three stemness-related
TFs have several hundred target genes that belong to 'development' and
'morphogenesis' whose binding sites belong to the uniform distribution.

PMCID: PMC2588498
PMID: 18953043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):G1211-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90360.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Regulation of basal core promoter activity of human organic cation transporter 1 
(OCT1/SLC22A1).

Kajiwara M(1), Terada T, Asaka J, Aoki M, Katsura T, Ikai I, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Human organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1/SLC22A1) plays important roles in the
hepatic uptake of cationic drugs. The functional characteristics of this
transporter have been well evaluated, but molecular information regarding
transcriptional regulation is limited. In the present study, therefore, we
examined the gene regulation of OCT1 gene focusing on basal core expression. An
approximately 2.5-kb fragment of the OCT1 promoter region was isolated, and
promoter activity was measured by luciferase assay in the human liver cell lines 
Huh7 and HepG2. Deletion analysis suggested that the region spanning -141/-69 was
essential for the basal core transcriptional activity and that this region
contained the sequence of a cognate E-box (CACGTG). The E-box is known to be
bound by the basal transcription factors, upstream stimulating factors (USFs),
and the functional involvements of USF1 and USF2 were confirmed by a
transactivation effect, a mutational analysis of the E-box, and an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The transactivation effect of USFs on the
OCT1 promoter was further stimulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, a
liver-enriched transcription factor. There were no polymorphisms in the proximal 
promoter region (about 400 bp) of OCT1 gene (n = 109). These findings indicated
that both USF1 and USF2 bind to an E-box sequence located in the OCT1 core
promoter region and are required for the basal gene expression of this
transporter.

PMID: 18845576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Gene. 2008 Dec 15;426(1-2):72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.08.023. Epub 2008 Sep 
11.

Enhancement of prostaglandin D(2) production through cyclooxygenase-2 and
lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase by upstream stimulatory factor 1 in human
brain-derived TE671 cells under serum starvation.

Fujimori K(1), Aritake K, Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biodefense and Regulation, Osaka University of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 4-20-1 Nasahara, Takatsuki, Osaka 569-1094, Japan.

We found that prostaglandin (PG) D(2) production was induced through
transcriptional activation of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and lipocalin-type PGD
synthase (L-PGDS) genes under serum-starved conditions in human brain-derived
TE671 cells. Analysis of promoter and intron regions of the human L-PGDS gene
demonstrated that an atypical E-box within intron 4 mediated serum
starvation-induced up-regulation of L-PGDS gene expression. The results of
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
showed that upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 bound to this atypical E-box.
USF1 gene expression was also enhanced during serum starvation in TE671 cells
through activation of p38 mitogen activated protein kinase, and the efficiency of
the binding of USF1 to the atypical E-box was clearly increased by serum
starvation. Administration of USF1 siRNA suppressed both L-PGDS and COX-2 gene
expression and PGD(2) production. Moreover, NS-398, a COX-2 inhibitor and AT-56, 
an L-PGDS inhibitor, suppressed PGD(2) production in TE671 cells cultured under
the serum-starved condition. These results indicate that PGD(2) production
stimulated by serum starvation is mediated by both COX-2 and L-PGDS through
enhancement of USF1 in TE671 cells.

PMID: 18817855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Circ Res. 2008 Oct 24;103(9):940-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180653. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

Upstream stimulatory factor is required for human angiotensinogen expression and 
differential regulation by the A-20C polymorphism.

Dickson ME(1), Tian X, Liu X, Davis DR, Sigmund CD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Medical Scientist Training Programs, Roy J and Lucille A Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Among naturally occurring polymorphisms in the 5' flanking region of the human
angiotensinogen (AGT) gene, the -20 and -217 polymorphisms have the strongest
effects on AGT regulation in AGT-expressing cells derived from liver, kidney,
brain, and fat. These polymorphisms may affect allele-specific transcription
factor binding, and the high-expressing alleles are both relatively common. We
show herein that the -20C allele has higher transcriptional activity than -20A,
and the -20A allele confers no additional transactivation potential beyond that
of a mutated vector. Gel-shift assays show that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF)1 and USF2 preferentially bind the -20C allele, whereas the -20A allele
retains a low affinity USF binding site. Plasmid immunoprecipitation assays
confirmed preferential association of USF1 with the -20C allele in transfected
HepG2 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that USF1 binds to the
endogenous AGT -20C allele in CCF cells, the only cell line tested that carries
the -20C allele, and to the human AGT promoter in liver and adipose tissue from
transgenic mice. Transduction of AGT-expressing cells with short hairpin RNAs
specifically targeting USF1 or USF2, resulted in cell- and allele-specific
attenuation of AGT promoter activity. In vivo, knockdown of USF expression in the
liver of transgenic mice expressing the -20C allele of AGT resulted in lower AGT 
expression, a decrease in circulating human AGT protein but no change in
expression of GAPDH or hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha. We conclude that USF1
functionally and differentially regulates AGT expression via the -20 polymorphism
and that the differential expression exhibited by -20 can be accounted for by
differential association with USF1.

PMCID: PMC2678906
PMID: 18802024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Nov 14;376(2):347-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.155. Epub 2008 Sep 7.

Interaction of USF1/USF2 and alpha-Pal/Nrf1 to Fmr-1 promoter increases in mouse 
brain during aging.

Prasad S(1), Singh K.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Lab, CAS in Zoology, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005, India. drsprasad_bhu@yahoo.co.uk

Fragile X syndrome is caused due to silencing of FMR-1 gene transcription leading
to loss of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). To investigate whether
the transcriptional mechanism is linked to aging, we have studied interaction of 
the transcription factors USF1/USF2 and alpha-Pal/Nrf1 to E-box and GC-box,
respectively, in Fmr-1 promoter in the brain of young, adult, and old mouse using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Our data reveal that the interaction
of these transcription factors to their respective promoter sequences increases
in mouse brain as a function of age. The finding on the interaction of the above 
transcription factors to their cognate sequences is novel as the current
investigation has been carried out in intact and aging mouse. The present finding
is important in respect to age- and FMRP-dependent brain function.

PMID: 18782566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jan;80(1):24-33. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070037. Epub 2008 
Sep 3.

USF1/2 transcription factor DNA-binding activity is induced during rat Sertoli
cell differentiation.

Wood MA(1), Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology, Department of Cell Biology and
Molecular Physiology, Magee Women's Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Each Sertoli cell can support a finite number of developing germ cells. During
development of the testis, the cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and the
onset of differentiation determine the final number of Sertoli cells and, hence, 
the number of sperm that can be produced. We hypothesize that the transition from
proliferation to differentiation is facilitated by E-box transcription factors
that induce the expression of differentiation-promoting genes. The relative
activities of E-box proteins were studied in primary Sertoli cells isolated from 
5-, 11-, and 20-day-old rats, representing proliferating, differentiating, and
differentiated cells, respectively. E-box DNA-binding activity is almost
undetectable 5 days after birth but peaks with initiation of differentiation 11
days after birth and remains elevated. Upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1
and USF2) were found to be the predominant E-box proteins present within
DNA-protein complexes formed after incubating E-box-containing probes with
nuclear extracts from developing Sertoli cells. The known potentiator of Sertoli 
cell differentiation, thyroxine, increases USF DNA-binding activity in Sertoli
cells before differentiation (5-day-old Sertoli cells) but not after
differentiation is initiated (11- and 20-day-old Sertoli cells). The
developmental-specific increase in USF1 and USF2 DNA-binding activity may
facilitate the switch from proliferation to differentiation and, thus, determine 
the ultimate number of Sertoli cells present within the testes and the upper
limit of fertility.

PMCID: PMC2804807
PMID: 18768914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Mol Biol. 2008 Nov 14;383(3):502-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.036. Epub 2008 
Aug 22.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate OSCAR gene expression in RANKL-mediated
osteoclast differentiation.

Kim JH(1), Kim K, Jin HM, Youn BU, Song I, Choi HS, Kim N.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Regulation of Bone Metabolism and Disease,
Research Institute Medical Sciences, Chonnam National University Medical School, 
Dong-Ku, Gwangju 501-746, Korea.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand (RANKL) induces osteoclast
differentiation from hematopoietic precursors via regulation of various
transcription factors. Here, we show that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs),
which are basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factors, are
involved in RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis and regulation of
osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR) gene expression, which is an important
costimulatory receptor for osteoclast differentiation. USF-1 and USF-2 are
expressed in hematopoietic osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts.
Interestingly, down-regulation of USF-1 by RNA interference or overexpression of 
a dominant-negative form of USF-1 attenuates osteoclast formation and expression 
of OSCAR during osteoclastogenesis. Promoter analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal that USFs bind directly to an E-box site in the
OSCAR promoter region and activate OSCAR. In addition, USFs interact and
cooperate with nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 in regulating OSCAR gene
expression. Taken together, our results indicate that USFs serve as modulators in
the induction of OSCAR and RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis.

PMID: 18762192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):2078-87. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1125-6. Epub 2008 
Aug 30.

Glucose increases hepatic lipase expression in HepG2 liver cells through
upregulation of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2.

van Deursen D(1), Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR, Erasmus MC, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Elevated hepatic lipase (HL, also known as LIPC) expression is a
key factor in the development of the atherogenic lipid profile in type 2 diabetes
and insulin resistance. Recently, genetic screens revealed a possible association
of type 2 diabetes and familial combined hyperlipidaemia with the USF1 gene.
Therefore, we investigated the role of upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) in the
regulation of HL.
METHODS: Levels of USF1, USF2 and HL were measured in HepG2 cells cultured in
normal- or high-glucose medium (4.5 and 22.5 mmol/l, respectively) and in livers 
of streptozotocin-treated rats.
RESULTS: Nuclear extracts of cells cultured in high glucose contained 2.5 +/-
0.5-fold more USF1 and 1.4 +/- 0.2-fold more USF2 protein than cells cultured in 
normal glucose (mean +/- SD, n = 3). This coincided with higher DNA binding of
nuclear proteins to the USF consensus DNA binding site. Secretion of HL (2.9 +/- 
0.5-fold), abundance of HL mRNA (1.5 +/- 0.2-fold) and HL (-685/+13) promoter
activity (1.8 +/- 0.3-fold) increased in parallel. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, the proximal HL promoter region was
immunoprecipitated with anti-USF1 and anti-USF2 antibodies. Co-transfection with 
USF1 or USF2 cDNA stimulated HL promoter activity 6- to 16-fold. USF and glucose 
responsiveness were significantly reduced by removal of the -310E-box from the HL
promoter. Silencing of the USF1 gene by RNA interference reduced glucose
responsiveness of the HL (-685/+13) promoter region by 50%. The hyperglycaemia in
streptozotocin-treated rats was associated with similar increases in USF
abundance in rat liver nuclei, but not with increased binding of USF to the rat
Hl promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Glucose increases HL expression in HepG2 cells via
elevation of USF1 and USF2. This mechanism may contribute to the development of
the dyslipidaemia that is typical of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18758746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Brain Res. 2008 Oct 21;1236:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.007. Epub 2008 
Aug 13.

Role of upstream stimulating factors in the transcriptional regulation of the
neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter KCC2.

Markkanen M(1), Uvarov P, Airaksinen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, Viikinkaari 4, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

The neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter (KCC2) maintains a low intracellular Cl(-)
concentration in neurons and is necessary for fast hyperpolarizing responses to
GABA and glycine. The mammalian KCC2 gene (alias Slc12a5) generates two
neuron-specific isoforms by using alternative promoters and first exons.
Expression of the major isoform, KCC2b, is strongly upregulated during neuronal
maturation, and is modulated by neuronal activity, trauma, and neurotrophic
factors. In the present study, we have focused on the regulatory influence of the
upstream stimulating factors USF1 and USF2 via an E-box control element in the
KCC2b promoter (E-boxKCC2b). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay in cell lines
and chromatin immunoprecipitation in neurons demonstrated binding of endogenous
USF1 and USF2 to the E-box(KCC2b) element. Mutation of the E-boxKCC2b site
resulted in reduced KCC2b promoter activity in cell lines and cortical neurons.
Overexpression of a dominant-negative form of USF confirmed the involvement of
endogenous USF proteins in the regulation of the KCC2b gene. The results suggest 
that binding of USF proteins to the E-boxKCC2b may contribute to the upregulation
of KCC2b gene expression in developing brain.

PMID: 18755167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Aug;16(4):960-3.

[Mechanisms underlying the expression regulation of HOXB4 transcription in
hematopoietic stem cells - review].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, Affiliated Hospital,
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100071, China.

As a member of the hox gene family, hoxB4 gene encodes a class of DNA-dependent
homeobox domain nucleoprotein, which is a specific transcription factor, playing 
an important role in regulating the balance between self-renewal and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Therefore, it is important to
understand the mechanisms involved in regulating expression of hoxB4 in the HSC. 
Previous studies have suggested that some hoxB4 upstream regulatory factors, such
as USF-1 (upstream activating factor -1), USF-2 (upstream activating factor -2)
and NF-Y complex, as well as hematopoietic cytokines, such as platelet growth
factor (TPO) and Wnt3a protein, play important regulatory roles in the expression
of hoxB4 in hematopoietic stem cells. In this review the structure and biological
characteristics of hoxB4, mechanisms involved in regulating expression of hoxB4
in the HSC are summarized.

PMID: 18718100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 1;105(2):487-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21844.

Intricate gene regulatory networks of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins support
regulation of bone-tissue related genes during osteoblast differentiation.

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Li ZY, Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are key regulators of neurogenesis, 
myogenesis and osteogenesis. Here the relative contributions of multiple classes 
of HLH factors to the expression of bone related genes during osteoblast
maturation were compared. We examined the expression of a panel of HLH proteins
(e.g., Twist1/2, USF1/2, c-Myc, Id1 approximately 4, E12/47, Stra13) and one Zn
finger protein (Snail which recognizes a subset of E-boxes), during osteoblast
differentiation and their functional contributions to bone phenotypic gene
regulation. While expression of Twist1, Stra13, E12/47 and Snail transcripts
remains relatively constant, expression of Twist2 as well as the inhibitory
factors Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 decreases and USF1 is up-regulated during
osteoblastic differentiation of MC3T3 cells. Forced expression of selected HLH
transcription factors shows that Myc, Snail and USF factors increase expression
of the bone markers osteocalcin (OC) and/or alkaline phosphatase (AP), while
E12/47, Twist and Id factors decrease their expression. None of these factors
affect Runx2 gene expression. Interestingly, Snail enhances expression of
osteoblast markers, while Twist1 and Twist2 factors are cross-regulated and
inhibit bone specific gene expression and other HLH proteins (e.g., Id)
indirectly. Thus, our data suggest that the integrated activities of negative and
positive E-box related regulatory factors control osteoblast differentiation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2612593
PMID: 18655182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(18):5785-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00245-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
14.

Retinoic acid utilizes CREB and USF1 in a transcriptional feed-forward loop in
order to stimulate MKP1 expression in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
podocytes.

Lu TC(1), Wang Z, Feng X, Chuang P, Fang W, Chen Y, Neves S, Maayan A, Xiong H,
Liu Y, Iyengar R, Klotman PE, He JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Nef-induced podocyte proliferation and dedifferentiation via mitogen-activated
protein kinase 1,2 (MAPK1,2) activation plays a role in human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) nephropathy pathogenesis. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) reverses the
HIV-induced podocyte phenotype by activating cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A
(PKA) and inhibiting MAPK1,2. Here we show that atRA, through cAMP and PKA,
triggers a feed-forward loop involving CREB and USF1 to induce biphasic
stimulation of MKP1. atRA stimulated CREB and USF1 binding to the MKP1 gene
promoter, as shown by gel shifting and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. CREB
directly mediated the early phase of atRA-induced MKP1 stimulation; whereas the
later phase was mediated by CREB indirectly through induction of USF1. These
findings were confirmed by a reporter gene assay using the MKP1 promoter with
mutation of CRE or Ebox binding sites. Consistent with these findings, the
biological effects of atRA on podocytes were inhibited by silencing either MKP1, 
CREB, or USF1 with small interfering RNA. atRA also induced CREB phosphorylation 
and MKP1 expression and reduced MAPK1,2 phosphorylation in kidneys of HIV type
1-infected transgenic mice. We conclude that atRA induces sustained activation of
MKP1 to suppress Nef-induced activation of the Src-MAPK1,2 pathway, thus
returning the podocyte to a more differentiated state. The mechanism involves a
feed-forward loop where activation of one transcription factor (TF) (CREB) leads 
to induction of a second TF (USF1).

PMCID: PMC2546933
PMID: 18625721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Aug;38(8):2325-36. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838189.

The IFN-gamma-induced transcriptional program of the CIITA gene is inhibited by
statins.

Lee SJ(1), Qin H, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

Statins are 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors 
that exert anti-inflammatory effects. IFN-gamma induction of class II MHC
expression, which requires the class II transactivator (CIITA), is inhibited by
statins; however, the molecular basis for suppression is undetermined. We
describe that statins inhibit IFN-gamma-induced class II MHC expression by
suppressing CIITA gene expression, which is dependent on the HMG-CoA reductase
pathway. In addition, CIITA expression is inhibited by GGTI-298 or Clostridium
difficile Toxin A, specific inhibitors of Rho family protein prenylation,
indicating the involvement of small GTPases. Rac1 is involved in IFN-gamma
inducible expression of CIITA, and statins inhibit IFN-gamma-induced Rac1
activation, contributing to the inhibitory effect of statins. IFN-gamma induction
of the CIITA gene is regulated by the transcription factors STAT-1alpha,
interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-1. We 
previously reported that statins inhibit constitutive STAT-1alpha expression.
IRF-1, a STAT-1 dependent gene, is also inhibited by statins. Therefore, statin
treatment results in decreased recruitment of STAT-1alpha and IRF-1 to the
endogenous CIITA promoter IV (pIV). The recruitment of USF-1 to CIITA pIV is also
reduced by statins, as is the recruitment of RNA polymerase II (Pol II), p300 and
Brg-1. These data indicate that statins inhibit the transcriptional program of
the CIITA gene.

PMCID: PMC2692880
PMID: 18601229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Eur J Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;159(4):407-16. doi: 10.1530/EJE-08-0356. Epub 2008 Jul
1.

Genetic variants in the USF1 gene are associated with low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels and incident type 2 diabetes mellitus in women: results from
the MONICA/KORA Augsburg case-cohort study, 1984-2002.

Holzapfel C(1), Baumert J, Grallert H, Müller AM, Thorand B, Khuseyinova N,
Herder C, Meisinger C, Hauner H, Wichmann HE, Koenig W, Illig T, Klopp N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) regulates genes of glucose and 
lipid metabolism. Polymorphisms in the USF1 gene showed association with familial
combined hyperlipidemia and lipid parameters. The aim of our study was to examine
the associations between USF1 polymorphisms and lipid parameters as well as
incident type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in German Caucasians.
DESIGN: We genotyped eight polymorphisms in the USF1 gene in 2067 middle-aged
(35-74 years) individuals including 498 incident T2DM cases and 1569 non-cases of
the population-based case-cohort study from the MONICA/KORA Augsburg project.
METHODS: Six polymorphisms and their haplotypes were analyzed using multivariable
linear regression and Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: Polymorphism rs3737787 was inversely associated with incident T2DM in
women with decreased risk for female heterozygotes compared with women homozygous
for the major allele (Hazard ratio=0.57; 95% confidence intervals: 0.38-0.87;
P=0.008). After correction for multiple testing, significance remained.
Polymorphisms rs3813609 and rs1556259 were significantly associated with
reduction in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (p(NOM)=0.001;
p(NOM)=0.00002) in women. Analyses also indicated associations of haplotypes with
LDL cholesterol in women, but the association lost statistical significance after
correction for multiple testing. Total serum cholesterol (TC) and high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were weakly associated (P<0.05) with USF1
polymorphisms in women. No significant associations were found in men.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large population-based study, statistically significant
associations of USF1 polymorphisms with incident T2DM and LDL cholesterol were
found in women, but not in men. Genetic variants in the USF1 gene showed weak or 
no associations with TC and HDL cholesterol.

PMID: 18593823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jul;8(6):376-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.05.003. Epub
2008 May 25.

Upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2 are differentially expressed during
Xenopus embryonic development.

Fujimi TJ(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2 are members of the basic
helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factor family. They are considered 
to play critical roles in cell-cycle regulation and chromatin remodeling. Their
gene expression patterns are considered ubiquitous but have not been fully
investigated in terms of embryogenesis. We examined the expression of the genes
encoding USF1 and USF2 in Xenopus laevis during embryonic development. Expression
of both genes was first detected as maternal transcripts and was observed
continuously throughout development. However, in situ hybridization analysis
revealed that the two genes were expressed differentially. In the late blastula, 
both genes were expressed in the blastocoel roof and marginal zone. At the
gastrula stage, USF2 was strongly expressed in the sensorial layer of the
ectoderm and in the mesoderm, whereas USF1 expression was hardly detectable. From
the neurula stage onward, expression of both genes was markedly enhanced in the
neural tissues, neural crest, eye and otic vesicle. However, spatial expression
of the genes within the neural tube differed in that the strongest USF1 signals
were observed in the lateral region of the basal plate and the strongest USF2
ones in the dorsal region of the neural tube. Expression of the two genes
occurred in different mesoderm derivatives at the tailbud stage (USF1, somite;
USF2, pronephros and lateral plate mesoderm of the tail region). USF1 was
expressed in the notochord of the early neurula, but was lost at the stage.

PMID: 18585979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Circ J. 2008 Jul;72(7):1158-64.

Allelic variants of upstream transcription factor 1 associate with carotid artery
intima-media thickness: the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns study.

Collings A(1), Höyssä S, Fan M, Kähönen M, Hutri-Kähönen N, Marniemi J, Juonala
M, Viikari JS, Raitakari OT, Lehtimäki TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere
University Hospital, PO Box 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland. Auni.Collings@pshp.fi

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms of the upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) have been
associated with familial combined hyperlipidemia and coronary heart disease. The 
impact of this gene on subclinical atherosclerosis is unknown. Associations of 3 
allelic variants of the USF1 gene and their haplotypes with carotid artery intima
- media thickness (IMT), carotid artery compliance (CAC) and brachial artery flow
mediated dilatation (FMD) were studied in a population of Finnish healthy young
adults.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The study population comprised 2,281 individuals
participating in the Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns study. IMT, CAC and FMD
values were measured by ultrasound examination. Genotypes were analysed using the
5' nuclease assay. A significant difference in IMT was found for usf1s1
(rs3737787) and usf1s8 (rs2516838) genotypes (p-values 0.046 and 0.021,
respectively). Moreover, there was a significant difference between groups in
haplotype 1 and haplotype 2 for IMT (p-values 0.011 and 0.028 respectively). In
multivariate stepwise linear regression models adjusted by age, sex, body mass
index, systolic and diastolic blood pressures, smoking, C-reactive protein,
glucose, high- and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterols and triglycerides there
were significant associations for the usf1s1 minor genotype AA to predict low IMT
(p=0.038) and usf1s8 minor genotype GG to predict high IMT (p=0.003). There was
also a significant association for haplotype 2 to predict low IMT in the
otherwise similar multivariate model (p=0.006). No associations were found for
polymorphisms and CAC, FMD or serum lipids.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs2516838 and rs3737787 polymorphisms of USF1 influence the
carotid artery IMT, which is a new finding.

PMID: 18577828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jul 25;380(5):789-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.04.057. Epub 2008 
Apr 30.

Glucose regulates the expression of the apolipoprotein A5 gene.

Nowak M(1), Helleboid-Chapman A, Jakel H, Moitrot E, Rommens C, Pennacchio LA,
Fruchart-Najib J, Fruchart JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Lille, Département d'Athérosclérose, Lille, France.

The apolipoprotein A5 gene (APOA5) is a key player in determining triglyceride
concentrations in humans and mice. Since diabetes is often associated with
hypertriglyceridemia, this study explores whether APOA5 gene expression is
regulated by alteration in glucose homeostasis and the related pathways.
d-Glucose activates APOA5 gene expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
hepatocytes, and the glycolytic pathway involved was determined using d-glucose
analogues and metabolites. Together, transient transfections, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that this
regulation occurs at the transcriptional level through an increase of USF1/2
binding to an E-box in the APOA5 promoter. We show that this phenomenon is not
due to an increase of mRNA or protein expression levels of USF. Using protein
phosphatases 1 and 2A inhibitor, we demonstrate that d-glucose regulates the
APOA5 gene via a dephosphorylation mechanism, resulting in an enhanced
USF1/2-promoter binding. Last, subsequent suppressions of USF1/2 and phosphatases
mRNA through siRNA gene silencing abolished the regulation. We demonstrate that
the APOA5 gene is up regulated by d-glucose and USF through phosphatase
activation. These findings may provide a new cross-talk between glucose and lipid
metabolism.

PMID: 18572192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Endocrinology. 2008 Oct;149(10):5297-306. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1199. Epub 2008
Jun 19.

In vivo regulation of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor by the transcription 
factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 and upstream stimulatory factor 2 is cell
specific.

Hermann BP(1), Hornbaker K, Rice DA, Sawadogo M, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Pituitary FSH promotes pubertal timing and normal gametogenesis by binding its
receptor (FSHR) located on Sertoli and granulosa cells of the testis and ovary,
respectively. Studies on Fshr transcription provide substantial evidence that
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and USF2, basic helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper proteins, regulate Fshr through an E-box within its promoter. However,
despite the strong in vitro support for USF1 and USF2 in Fshr regulation, there
is currently no in vivo corroborating evidence. In the present study, chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated specific binding of USF1 and USF2 to the Fshr
promoter in both Sertoli and granulosa cells, in vivo. Control cells lacking Fshr
expression showed no USF-Fshr promoter binding, thus correlating USF-promoter
binding to gene activity. Evaluation of Fshr expression in Usf1 and Usf2 null
mice further explored USF's role in Fshr transcription. Loss of either gene
significantly reduced ovarian Fshr levels, whereas testis levels were unaltered. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of USF-Fshr promoter binding in Usf-null
mice indicated differences in the composition of promoter-bound USF dimers in
granulosa and Sertoli cells. Promoter-bound USF dimer levels declined in
granulosa cells from both null mice, despite increased USF2 levels in Usf1-null
ovaries. However, compensatory increases in promoter-bound USF homodimers were
evident in Usf-null Sertoli cells. In summary, this study provides the first in
vivo evidence that USF1 and USF2 bind the Fshr promoter and revealed differences 
between Sertoli and granulosa cells in compensatory responses to USF loss and the
USF dimeric composition required for Fshr transcription.

PMCID: PMC2582914
PMID: 18566134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Dermatol Sci. 2008 Oct;52(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2008.03.013. Epub
2008 Jun 2.

Expressional changes in the intracellular melanogenesis pathways and their
possible role in the pathogenesis of vitiligo.

Kingo K(1), Aunin E, Karelson M, Rätsep R, Silm H, Vasar E, Kõks S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Centre of Molecular and Clinical
Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

BACKGROUND: Main pathway in human melanocytes through which signal from the
melanocortin system reaches the melanogenesis enzymes is cAMP/PKA pathway and it 
is modulated by Wnt and MAPK pathways. In our previous study we established
significant increase of melanocortin receptor expression in unaffected skin of
vitiligo patients compared to healthy subjects.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the gene expression profile of the
intracellular signalling pathways linking melanocortin system with enzymes
involved in melanogenesis.
METHODS: Using QRT-PCR method, mRNA expression levels of eight genes related to
signal transduction from the melanocortin system to melanogenesis enzymes was
measured in lesional and non-lesional skin of vitiligo patients and in the skin
of healthy control subjects. Following genes were analyzed in the study: MITF,
CREB1, p38, USF1, PIK3CB (PI3K), RPS6KB1, LEF1 and BCL2.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of MITF, LEF1, p38, PIK3CB and RPS6KB1 were decreased in
lesional skin of vitiligo patients compared to skin of healthy control subjects. 
We also found increased expression of USF1 and BCL2 in non-lesional skin of
vitiligo patients compared to skin of healthy control subjects. mRNA levels of
MITF and BCL2 were decreased in lesional skin of vitiligo patients compared to
non-lesional skin of vitiligo patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Present study indicates increased expression of the genes of the
intracellular melanogenesis pathway in the non-lesional skin of vitiligo
patients. This finding suggests activation of melanogenesis pathway in the
non-lesional skin of vitiligo.

PMID: 18514490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):F165-70. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.90257.2008. Epub 2008 May 28.

Kidney-specific expression of human organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2/SLC22A2)
is regulated by DNA methylation.

Aoki M(1), Terada T, Kajiwara M, Ogasawara K, Ikai I, Ogawa O, Katsura T, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan.

Human organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2/SLC22A2), which is specifically
expressed in the kidney, plays critical roles in the renal secretion of cationic 
compounds. Tissue expression and membrane localization of OCT2 are closely
related to the tissue distribution, pharmacological effects, and/or adverse
effects of its substrate drugs. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
kidney-specific expression of OCT2 have not been elucidated. In the present
study, therefore, we examined the contribution of DNA methylation of the promoter
region for the OCT2 gene to its tissue-specific expression using human tissue
samples. In vivo methylation status of the proximal promoter region of OCT2 and
that of OCT1, a liver-specific organic cation transporter, were investigated by
bisulfite sequencing using human genomic DNA extracted from the kidney and liver.
All CpG sites in the OCT2 proximal promoter were hypermethylated in the liver,
while hypomethylated in the kidney. On the other hand, the promoter region of
OCT1 was hypermethylated in both the kidney and liver. The level of methylation
of the OCT2 promoter was especially low at the CpG site in the E-box, the binding
site of the basal transcription factor upstream stimulating factor (USF) 1. In
vitro methylation of the OCT2 proximal promoter dramatically reduced the
transcriptional activity, and an electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that
methylation at the E-box inhibited the binding of USF1. These results indicate
that kidney-specific expression of human OCT2 is regulated by methylation of the 
proximal promoter region, interfering with the transactivation by USF1.

PMID: 18508876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 27;283(26):18218-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802332200. Epub 2008
May 5.

Tip60 is regulated by circadian transcription factor clock and is involved in
cisplatin resistance.

Miyamoto N(1), Izumi H, Noguchi T, Nakajima Y, Ohmiya Y, Shiota M, Kidani A,
Tawara A, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Histone modification is important for maintaining chromatin structure and
function. Recently, histone acetylation has been shown to have a critical
regulatory role in both transcription and DNA repair. We report here that
expression of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) genes is associated with cisplatin 
resistance. We found that Tip60 is overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant cells.
The expression of two other HAT genes, HAT1 and MYST1, did not differ between
drug-sensitive and -resistant cells. Knockdown of Tip60 expression rendered cells
sensitive to cisplatin but not to oxaliplatin, vincristine, and etoposide. Tip60 
expression is significantly correlated with cisplatin sensitivity in human lung
cancer cell lines. Interestingly, the promoter region of the Tip60 gene contains 
several E boxes, and its expression was regulated by the E-box binding circadian 
transcription factor Clock but not by other E-box binding transcription factors
such as c-Myc, Twist, and USF1. Hyperacetylation of H3K14 and H4K16 was found in 
cisplatin-resistant cells. The microarray study reveals that several genes for
DNA repair are down-regulated by the knockdown of Tip60 expression. Our data show
that HAT gene expression is required for cisplatin resistance and suggest that
Clock and Tip60 regulate not only transcription, but also DNA repair, through
periodic histone acetylation.

PMID: 18458078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jul;94(3):352-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.03.011. Epub
2008 Apr 28.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) in risk of type 2 diabetes: association
study in 2000 Dutch Caucasians.

Meex SJ(1), van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, van der Kallen CJ, van Greevenbroek MM,
Schalkwijk CG, Feskens EJ, Blaak EE, Wijmenga C, Hofker MH, Stehouwer CD, de
Bruin TW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maastricht, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht
(CARIM), Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
steven.meex@intmed.unimaas.nl

Type 2 diabetes shares substantial genetic and phenotypic overlap with familial
combined hyperlipidemia. Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), a well-established
susceptibility gene for familial combined hyperlipidemia, is postulated to be
such a shared genetic determinant. We evaluated two established variants in
familial combined hyperlipidemia (rs2073658 and rs3737787) for association with
type 2 diabetes in two Dutch case-control samples (N=2011). The first
case-control sample comprised 501 subjects with type 2 diabetes from the Breda
cohort and 920 healthy blood bank donors of Dutch Caucasian origin. The second
case-control sample included 211 subjects with type 2 diabetes, and 379
normoglycemic controls. SNP rs2073658 and SNP rs3737787 were in perfect linkage
disequilibrium. In the first case-control sample, prevalence of the major allele 
was higher in patients than in controls (75% versus 71%, OR=1.25, p=0.018). A
similar effect-size and -direction was observed in the second case-control sample
(76% versus 72%, OR=1.22, p=0.16). A combined analysis strengthened the evidence 
for association (OR=1.23, p=0.006). Notably, the increased risk for type 2
diabetes could be ascribed to the major allele, and its high frequency translated
to a substantial population attributable risk of 14.5%. In conclusion, the major 
allele of rs2073658 in the USF1 gene is associated with a modestly increased risk
to develop type 2 diabetes in Dutch Caucasians, with considerable impact at the
population level.

PMID: 18445538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 24;27(32):4446-55. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.85. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

The transcription-repression domain of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein targets
p300 at the promoter.

Green M(1), Panesar NK, Loewenstein PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63104, USA. green@slu.edu

Extensive mutational/functional analysis of the transcription-repression domain
encoded in the N-terminal 80 amino acids of the adenovirus E1A 243R oncoprotein
suggests a model for the molecular mechanism of E1A repression: E1A accesses
transcriptional co-activators such as p300 on specific promoters and then
interacts with TBP to disrupt the TBP-TATA complex. In support of this model, as 
reported here, a basal core promoter activated by tethering p300 is repressible
by E1A at the promoter level as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis. Sequestration of p300 by E1A does not play a significant role, as
indicated by dose-response measurements. Furthermore, when the core promoter is
transcriptionally activated by tethering activation domains of several
transcription factors that can recruit p300 (p65, MyoD, cMyb and TFE3),
transcription is repressible by E1A. However, when the core promoter is activated
by factors not known to recruit p300 (USF1 and USF2), transcription is resistant 
to E1A repression. Finally, tethering p300 to the non-repressible adenovirus
major late promoter (MLP) renders it repressible by E1A. ChIP analysis shows that
E1A occupies the repressed MLP. These findings provide support for the hypothesis
that p300 can serve as a scaffold for the E1A repression domain to access
specific cellular gene promoters involved in growth regulation.

PMID: 18408753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Nov;42(11):663-4.

[Regulation of osteopontin expression in odontoblasts by upstream stimulatory
factor 1].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu LA(1), Wen LY, Yang FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, College of Stomatology, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulation effects of upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1) on osteopontin expression in odontoblasts.
METHODS: Odontoblast MDPC-23 was cultured and stably transfected with PCMV-USF1
or A-USF plasmids. Total RNA was extracted and osteopontin expression examined by
semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Gray value of osteopontin was measured and statistic
analysis performed.
RESULTS: Clones of stable PCMV-USF1 and A-USF plasmids transfection were
obtained. Compared with the control, osteopontin was upregulated in PCMV-USF1
transfection group, and downregulated in A-USF transfection group.
CONCLUSIONS: Upstream stimulatory factor 1 could regulate the osteopontin
expression in odontoblasts, which could be blocked partly by A-USF.

PMID: 18307922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Korean Med Sci. 2008 Feb;23(1):83-8. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2008.23.1.83.

Body mass index is associated with USF1 haplotype in Korean premenopausal women.

Lee SK(1), Kim HJ, Kim BJ, Jo YS, Park KS, Baik HW, Hyun SH, Lee JC, Kim SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Eulji University,
Daejeon, Korea.

The upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) gene has been shown to play an essential
role as the cause of familial combined hyperlipidemia, and there are several
association studies on the relationship between USF1 and metabolic disorders. In 
this study, we analyzed two single nucleotide polymorphisms in USF1 rs2073653
(306A>G) and rs2516840 (1748C>T) between the case (dyslipidemia or obesity) group
and the control group in premenopausal females, postmenopausal females, and males
among 275 Korean subjects. We observed a statistically significant difference in 
the GC haplotype between body mass index (BMI) > or =25 kg/m2) and BMI <25 kg/m2 
groups in premenopausal females ( chi2=4.23, p=0.04). It seems that the USF1 GC
haplotype is associated with BMI in premenopausal Korean females.

PMCID: PMC2526481
PMID: 18303204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 May;28(5):983-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.156463. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

Association analysis of allelic variants of USF1 in coronary atherosclerosis.

Kristiansson K(1), Ilveskoski E, Lehtimäki T, Peltonen L, Perola M, Karhunen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland.

OBJECTIVE: USF1 regulates the transcription of more than 40 cardiovascular
related genes and is well established as a gene associated with familial combined
hyperlipidemia, a condition increasing the risk for coronary heart disease. No
detailed data, however, exists on the impact of this gene to the critical outcome
at the tissue level: different types of atherosclerotic lesions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed the USF1 in 2 autopsy series of altogether 700
middle-aged men (the Helsinki Sudden Death Study) with quantitative morphometric 
measurements of coronary atherosclerosis. SNP rs2516839, tagging common USF1
haplotypes, associated with the presence of several types of atherosclerotic
lesions, particularly with the proportion of advanced atherosclerotic plaques
(P=0.02) and area of calcified lesions (P<0.001) of the coronary arteries.
Importantly, carriers of risk alleles of rs2516839 also showed a 2-fold risk for 
sudden cardiac death (genotype TT versus CC; OR 2.10, 95% CI 1.17 to 3.75,
P=0.04). The risk effect of rs2516839 was present also in aorta samples of the
men.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings in this unique study sample suggest that USF1
contributes to atherosclerosis, the pathological arterial wall phenotype
resulting in coronary heart disease and in its most dramatic consequence-sudden
cardiac death.

PMCID: PMC2687549
PMID: 18276913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008 Apr;121(4):1006-1012.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2007.11.015. Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Binding of upstream stimulatory factor 1 to the E-box regulates the 4G/5G
polymorphism-dependent plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 expression in mast
cells.

Ma Z(1), Jhun B, Jung SY, Oh CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA
Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90502, USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 is a key regulator of the
fibrinolytic system. PAI-1 levels are markedly elevated in the asthmatic airways.
The 4G/5G polymorphism of the PAI-1 gene is associated with allergic asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the mechanisms of the 4G/5G-dependent PAI-1 expression
in mast cells (MCs), a major source of PAI-1 and key effector cells in asthma.
METHODS: Transcription of PAI-1 was assessed by transiently transfecting human MC
line (HMC-1) cells with the luciferase-tagged PAI-1 promoters containing the 4G
or 5G allele (4G-PAI-1 or 5G-PAI-1 promoter). Upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-1
and the E-box interactions were studied by electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
and supershift assays. Expression of USF-1 was determined by Western blot
analysis.
RESULTS: The 4G-PAI-1 promoter has higher promoter activity than the 5G-PAI-1
promoter in stimulated HMC-1 cells, and the E-box adjacent to the 4G/5G site
(E-4G/5G) regulates the genotype-specific PAI-1 transcription. USF-1 binds to the
E-4G with greater affinity than to the E-5G. USF-1 level is increased in HMC-1
cells after stimulation, and elevated USF-1 enhances PAI-1 transcription.
Overexpression of wild-type USF-1 or dominant-negative USF remedies the
4G/5G-dependent PAI-1 transcription.
CONCLUSION: Binding of USF-1 to the E-4G/5G regulates the 4G/5G
polymorphism-dependent PAI-1 expression in MCs.

PMID: 18234320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genome Res. 2008 Mar;18(3):380-92. doi: 10.1101/gr.6880908. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Whole-genome maps of USF1 and USF2 binding and histone H3 acetylation reveal new 
aspects of promoter structure and candidate genes for common human disorders.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Ameur A, Kapranov P, Enroth S, Komorowski J, Gingeras TR,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden

Transcription factors and histone modifications are crucial regulators of gene
expression that mutually influence each other. We present the DNA binding
profiles of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1, USF2) and acetylated
histone H3 (H3ac) in a liver cell line for the whole human genome using ChIP-chip
at a resolution of 35 base pairs. We determined that these three proteins bind
mostly in proximity of protein coding genes transcription start sites (TSSs), and
their bindings are positively correlated with gene expression levels. Based on
the spatial and functional relationship between USFs and H3ac at protein coding
gene promoters, we found similar promoter architecture for known genes and the
novel and less-characterized transcripts human mRNAs and spliced ESTs.
Furthermore, our analysis revealed a previously underestimated abundance of genes
in a bidirectional conformation, where USFs are bound in between TSSs. After
taking into account this promoter conformation, the results indicate that H3ac is
mainly located downstream of TSS, and it is at this genomic location where it
positively correlates with gene expression. Finally, USF1, which is associated to
familial combined hyperlipidemia, was found to bind and potentially regulate
nuclear mitochondrial genes as well as genes for lipid and cholesterol
metabolism, frequently in collaboration with GA binding protein transcription
factor alpha (GABPA, nuclear respiratory factor 2 [NRF-2]). This expands our
understanding about the transcriptional control of metabolic processes and its
alteration in metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2259102
PMID: 18230803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Pharmacol. 2008 Apr;73(4):1085-91. doi: 10.1124/mol.107.041814. Epub 2008 Jan
15.

Salicylate alters the expression of calcium response transcription factor 1 in
the cochlea: implications for brain-derived neurotrophic factor transcriptional
regulation.

Singer W(1), Panford-Walsh R, Watermann D, Hendrich O, Zimmermann U, Köpschall I,
Rohbock K, Knipper M.

Author information: 
(1)HNO-Klinik, Universität Tübingen, Elfriede-Aulhorn-Strasse 5, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a key neurotrophin whose expression
is altered in response to neurological activity, influencing both short- and
long-term synaptic changes. The BDNF gene consists of eight upstream exons
(I-VII), each of which has a distinct promoter and can be independently spliced
to the ninth coding exon (IX). We showed recently that the expression of BDNF
exon IV in the cochlea is altered after exposure to salicylate, an ototoxic drug 
that in high doses is able to induce hearing loss and tinnitus. These changes
were a crucial trigger for plasticity changes in the central auditory system.
BDNF exon IV expression is regulated via interaction between calcium-response
elements CaRE1, CaRE2, and CaRE3/Cre (CaREs) that are bound by the transcription 
factors CaRF1, upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1/2), and cAMP/Ca(2+)
response element-binding protein (CREB), respectively. To determine whether the
salicylate-induced changes in cochlear BDNF exon IV expression include a
differential use of the CaRE binding proteins, we studied the level of the
corresponding binding proteins in the spiral ganglion neurons before and after
systemic application of concentrated salicylate using in situ hybridization and
RT-PCR. BDNF exon IV and CaRF1 expression were up-regulated after application of 
salicylate, whereas USF1/2 and CREB mRNA expression remained unaffected. The
changes in BDNF exon IV and CaRF1 expression were also dose-dependent. The data
show Ca(2+) and CaRF1 as messengers of trauma (salicylate)-induced altered BDNF
levels in the cochlea. Furthermore, they also provide the first evidence that a
differential regulation of BDNF transcription factors might participate in
BDNF-mediated plasticity changes.

PMID: 18198284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5441-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708662200. Epub 2007
Dec 31.

Control of the calcitonin gene-related peptide enhancer by upstream stimulatory
factor in trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Park KY(1), Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA.

The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a key player in
migraine. However, the transcription factors controlling CGRP expression in the
migraine-relevant trigeminal ganglion neurons are unknown. Previous in vitro
studies demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and USF2 bind to
the CGRP neuroendocrine-specific 18-bp enhancer, yet discrepant overexpression
results in cell lines, and the ubiquitous nature of the USF cast doubts about its
role. To test the functional role of USF, we first demonstrated that small
interfering RNAs directed against USF1 and USF2 reduced endogenous CGRP RNA and
preferentially targeted the USF binding site at the 18-bp enhancer in the
neuronal-like CA77 cell line. In cultured rat trigeminal ganglion neurons,
knockdown of either USF1 or USF2 reduced CGRP promoter activity. Conversely,
overexpression of USF1 or USF2 increased promoter activity. The activation was
even greater upon cotransfection with an upstream activator of mitogen-activated 
protein kinases and was synergistic in a heterologous cell line. To begin to
address the paradox of how ubiquitous USF proteins might direct neuronal-specific
activity, we examined USF expression and used a series of adenoviral reporters in
the cultured ganglia. Unexpectedly, there was more intense USF immunostaining in 
neurons than nonneuronal cells. Importantly, the 18-bp USF enhancer driving a
minimal promoter was sufficient for neuronal specificity, although it was not the
only site that directed neuronal expression. These results demonstrate that USF1 
and USF2 are important contributors to neuronal-specific and mitogen-activated
protein kinase regulation of the CGRP gene in trigeminal ganglion neurons.

PMID: 18167349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;22(4):904-14. doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0302. Epub 2007 Dec
28.

Upstream stimulatory factor-2 regulates steroidogenic factor-1 expression in
endometriosis.

Utsunomiya H(1), Cheng YH, Lin Z, Reierstad S, Yin P, Attar E, Xue Q, Imir G,
Thung S, Trukhacheva E, Suzuki T, Sasano H, Kim JJ, Yaegashi N, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Local estrogen biosynthesis is a major factor in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Aberrant expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) and aromatase in endometriotic tissue leads to an up-regulation of
estrogen production. The transcription factor steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1)
activates the promoters of both StAR and aromatase in endometriotic tissue. We
investigated differences in SF-1 expression in endometriotic tissue and normally 
located endometrium to elucidate the mechanism underlying increased StAR and
aromatase activities in endometriosis. Serial deletion and site-directed mutants 
of the SF-1 promoter showed that an E-box sequence was critical for its activity 
in endometriotic stromal cells. EMSAs showed that the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) 1 and 2 in nuclear extracts from endometrial and endometriotic stromal
cells bound to the E-box. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation-PCR assay, however,
demonstrated in intact cells that binding activity of USF2 to the SF-1 promoter
was strikingly higher than that of USF1 in endometriotic stromal cells and that
USF1 or USF2 binding activity was hardly detectable in endometrial stromal cells.
Moreover, knockdown of USF2 but not USF1 resulted in robust and consistent
down-regulation of SF-1 and its target genes StAR and aromatase in endometriotic 
stromal cells. USF2 but not USF1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly
higher in endometriotic vs. endometrial stromal cells. In vivo, USF2 mRNA and
immunoreactive USF2 levels in endometriotic tissues were strikingly higher than
those in endometrium. Taken together, the elevated levels of USF2 in
endometriosis account for, in part, the aberrant expression of SF-1 and its
target gene StAR and aromatase.

PMCID: PMC2276471
PMID: 18165439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Diabetologia. 2008 Mar;51(3):464-72. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

USF1 gene variants contribute to metabolic traits in men in a longitudinal
32-year follow-up study.

Auro K(1), Kristiansson K, Zethelius B, Berne C, Lannfelt L, Taskinen MR,
Jauhiainen M, Perola M, Peltonen L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute,
Biomedicum, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic variants of upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) have 
previously been associated with dyslipidaemias in family studies. Our aim was to 
further address the role of USF1 in metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular traits 
at the population level in a large Swedish male cohort (n=2,322) with multiple
measurements for risk factors during 32 years of follow-up.
METHODS: Participants, born in 1920-1924, were examined at 50, 60, 70 and 77
years of age. The follow-up period for cardiovascular events was 1970-2002. We
genotyped three haplotype tagging polymorphisms capturing the major allelic
variants of USF1.
RESULTS: SNP rs2774279 was associated with the metabolic syndrome. The minor
allele of rs2774279 was less common among individuals with metabolic syndrome
than among healthy controls [p=0.0029 when metabolic syndrome was defined
according to the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel
III; p=0.0073 when defined according to the International Diabetes Federation
(IDF)]. The minor allele of rs2774279 was also associated with lower BMI, lower
fasting glucose values and higher HDL-cholesterol concentrations in longitudinal 
analyses. With SNP rs2073658, a borderline association with metabolic syndrome
was observed (p=0.036, IDF), the minor allele being the risk-increasing allele.
The minor allele of rs2073658 also associated with higher total and
LDL-cholesterol, apolipoprotein B-100 and lipoprotein(a) concentrations in
longitudinal analyses. Importantly, these trends with respect to the allelic
variants prevailed throughout the follow-up time of three decades.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that USF1 variants associate with
the metabolic syndrome at population level and influence the cardiovascular risk 
factors throughout adulthood in a consistent, longitudinal manner.

PMID: 18097648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Sep;42(9):559-60.

[Expression, subcellular localization and nuclear translocation of transcription 
factor up stream stimulatory factor-1 in odontoblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu LA(1), Wen LY, Yang FS, Wang XJ, Fang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, College of Stomatology, The Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expression and subcellular localization of
transcription factor USF1 in odontoblasts and investigate whether nuclear
translocation occurs under stimuli.
METHODS: Odontoblasts MDPC-23 were cultured on coverslips and divided into 2
groups. Group 1 received no stimuli, and group 2 was stimulated by nicotine with 
various concentrations respectively for 1h. Then the mountings of odontoblasts
were prepared and immunocytochemical staining was performed with specific USF1
antibody via SABC method. Hela cells were used as positive control.
RESULTS: The staining was positive in the cytoplasm of odontoblasts in group 1,
but in the nuclei of Hela cells and in 100 mg/L nicotine-stimulated odontoblasts 
in group 2.
CONCLUSIONS: There exists USF1 protein in odontoblasts, which locates in the
cytoplasm and could translocate into nuclei under the stimulation of nicotine.

PMID: 18070436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 18;283(3):1317-23. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Interplay between E-box and NF-kappaB in regulation of A20 gene by DRB
sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF).

Amir-Zilberstein L(1), Dikstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The NF-kappaB target gene A20 serves as a paradigm for gene-specific control of
transcription elongation. This gene is regulated by the elongation factor DSIF
(DRB sensitivity-inducing factor) under basal and NF-kappaB-activated states by
two distinct mechanisms. Prior to NF-kappaB stimulation, the A20 gene is occupied
by polymerase II, and elongation is inhibited by DSIF. This inhibition is
mediated by an upstream promoter element termed ELIE (elongation inhibitory
element). Upon NF-kappaB activation, inhibition of the A20 gene by DSIF persists,
but now NF-kappaB and the core promoter regulate DSIF instead of ELIE. Here we
investigated the regulation of DSIF by ELIE and the regulatory switch from ELIE
to NF-kappaB following NF-kappaB induction. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
revealed two distinct protein complexes that specifically interact with ELIE, one
of which is the E-box protein USF1. Interestingly, USF1 is displaced from the A20
promoter upon induction of NF-kappaB. A mutation in the E-box section of ELIE
diminished the binding of USF1 and DSIF recruitment. Consistent with these
findings, the E-box is crucial for DSIF inhibition in resting, but not
NF-kappaB-stimulated, cells. These findings reveal a dynamic regulation of DSIF
involving either E-box or NF-kappaB depending on the physiological circumstances.

PMID: 17962196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 30;374(3):580-90. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

cHS4 insulator-mediated alleviation of promoter interference during cell-based
expression of tandemly associated transgenes.

Yahata K(1), Maeshima K, Sone T, Ando T, Okabe M, Imamoto N, Imamoto F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Expression of multiple transgenes in cells or whole organisms is a powerful tool 
for basic research of various biological functions and potentially for clinical
applications such as gene therapy. As a model system for this purpose, multi-cDNA
expression clones were constructed harboring two tandemly situated fluorescent
protein cDNAs as reporter genes on a single plasmid. When 293 cells were
transfected transiently, the downstream gene displayed significantly lower
expression when compared with the upstream cDNA. Such transcriptional
interference was markedly alleviated by inserting an insulator cassette of cHS4
elements derived from the chicken beta-globin locus at a site between two
neighboring cDNAs. The introduction of cHS4 resulted in a drastic increase of the
expression level of the downstream cDNA, ensuring comparable expression levels of
the tandem transgenes. Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we
demonstrated that CTCF and USF1 that recruit histone-modifying complexes are
bound to the cHS4 region. Depletion of CTCF or USF1 by siRNA resulted in relief
of the diminished effect. Our data thus indicate that CTCF and histone modifiers 
recruited by USF1 cooperatively mediate the suppression of transcriptional
interference between apposed genes, presumably by facilitating active chromatin
conformation over the transgenes.

PMID: 17945255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Biol Rep. 2008 Dec;35(4):677-84. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Differential expression of Fmr-1 mRNA and FMRP in female mice brain during aging.

Singh K(1), Prasad S.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology laboratory, CAS in Zoology, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

Fragile X syndrome is caused by silencing of FMR-1 gene due to unusual expansion 
of CGG repeats (>200 repeats) and their hypermethylation in 5'-UTR. As a
consequence, the expression of the RNA binding protein FMRP is stopped. Absence
of this protein leads to several morphological and neurological symptoms. The
symptoms of the syndrome in males are different than that in the females. We have
previously reported that the Fmr1 gene is down regulated in males as a function
of age. In the present communication, we have investigated expression of Fmr-1
mRNA, FMRP and analysis of interaction of trans-acting factors with E- and GC
boxes in Fmr-1 promoter in female mouse brain as a function of age. Our Northern 
and Western blots data reveal that the level of Fmr-1 transcript decreases in
adult as compared to young mouse but significantly increases in old age and that 
of FMRP decreases in brain of female old mouse as compared to young and adult
age. The immunohistochemical analysis supported the results obtained from Western
blot studies. Our EMSA data reveal that the intensity of USF1/USF2-E Box complex 
gradually increases during aging having significantly highest intensity in old
age mouse whereas the intensity of alpha-Pal/Nrf1- GC-Box complex gradually
decreases as a function of age. The increased intensity of the complex in old age
mouse is correlated to higher level of Fmr-1 transcript in old age. The elevated 
level of Fmr-1 transcript in old mouse brain may be attributed to USF1/USF2
dependent increased transcription of Fmr-1 gene in old age and decrease in FMRP
to altered translation of the transcript or high turn over of FMRP during aging. 
The present finding indicates age and sex as factors affecting the expression of 
Fmr-1 gene in mouse brain.

PMID: 17899445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Dec;27(12):2736-42. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

USF1 gene variants, cardiovascular risk, and mortality in European Americans:
analysis of two US cohort studies.

Reiner AP(1), Carlson CS, Jenny NS, Durda JP, Siscovick DS, Nickerson DA, Tracy
RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Box 357236, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA. apreiner@u.washington.edu

OBJECTIVE: A common haplotype of the upstream transcription factor 1 gene (USF1) 
has been associated with decreased susceptibility to familial combined
hyperlipidemia (FCHL) and, paradoxically, with increased risk of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) and all-cause mortality.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed associations between USF1 tagSNPs, CVD risk
factors, and aging-related phenotypes using data from 2 large population-based
cohorts, Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) and the
Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS), comprising younger and older adults,
respectively. In CARDIA, each additional copy of the FCHL low-risk allele was
associated with 2.4 mg/dL lower levels of LDL cholesterol (P=0.01) and decreased 
risk of subclinical atherosclerosis as assessed by coronary artery calcium (odds 
ratio 0.79; 95%CI 0.63 to 0.98). Whereas there was little association between
USF1 genotype and metabolic or CVD traits in older adults from CHS, the USF1
low-risk dyslipidemia allele was associated with higher plasma C-reactive protein
and interleukin (IL)-6 levels and with increased risk of mortality, particularly 
attributable to noncardiovascular causes.
CONCLUSIONS: There appears to be a complex and possibly age-dependent
relationship between USF1 genotype, atherosclerosis phenotypes, and CVD risk.
USF1 may influence mortality through pathways distinct from atherosclerosis.
Alternatively, linkage disequilibrium with neighboring polymorphisms in other
genes such as F11R may be responsible for the observed USF1 genotype-phenotype
associations in older adults.

PMID: 17885212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. DNA Seq. 2008 Jun;19(3):185-94.

Comparison of promoter regions of SOX3, SOX14 and SOX18 orthologs in mammals.

Kovacevic-Grujicic N(1), Mojsin M, Djurovic J, Petrovic I, Stevanovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia.
grooy@eunet.yu

SOX proteins constitute a large family of diverse and well conserved
transcription factors implicated in the control of various developmental
processes. Previously we have cloned and characterized human SOX3, SOX14 and
SOX18 genes and performed functional characterization of their promoter regions. 
To better understand organization and function of SOX3, SOX14 and SOX18 promoters
and to determine evolutionary conserved regulatory regions, we performed
comparative genomic analyses of orthologous genes promoters. Mammalian orthologs 
of the human SOX3, SOX14 and SOX18 genes show high sequence identity in their
promoter regions, particularly within basal promoters of the respective human
genes. Binding sites for transcription factors NF-Y, Sp1 and USF1, previously
shown to play critical roles in transcriptional regulation of these human genes, 
are highly conserved in sequence and position among diverse mammalian species.
Conservation of binding sites might indicate their highly significant roles in
maintaining the transcriptional regulation of these genes among different
species.

PMID: 17852354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7991-8002. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

USF1 recruits histone modification complexes and is critical for maintenance of a
chromatin barrier.

Huang S(1), Li X, Yusufzai TM, Qiu Y, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0540, USA. sumingh@ufl.edu

The insulator element at the 5' end of the chicken beta-globin locus acts as a
barrier, protecting transgenes against silencing effects of adjacent
heterochromatin. We showed earlier that the transcription factor USF1 binds
within the insulator and that this site is important for generating in adjacent
nucleosomes histone modifications associated with active chromatin and, by
inference, with barrier function. To understand the mechanism of USF1 action, we 
have characterized USF1-containing complexes. USF1 interacts directly with the
histone H4R3-specific methyltransferase PRMT1. USF1, PRMT1, and the histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) PCAF and SRC-1 form a complex with both H4R3 histone
methyltransferase and HAT activities. Small interfering RNA downregulation of
USF1 results in localized loss of H4R3 methylation, and other histone
modifications associated with euchromatin, at the insulator. A dominant negative 
peptide that interferes with USF1 binding to DNA causes silencing of an insulated
reporter construct, indicating abolition of barrier function. These results show 
that USF1 plays a direct role in maintaining the barrier, supporting a model in
which the insulator works as a barrier by maintaining a local environment of
active chromatin.

PMCID: PMC2169148
PMID: 17846119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biophys J. 2008 Jan 1;94(1):193-7. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Low resolution structural models of the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
domain of upstream stimulatory factor 1 and its complexes with DNA from small
angle X-ray scattering data.

Lamber EP(1), Wilmanns M, Svergun DI.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Outstation, D-22603 Hamburg,
Germany.

The upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix
leucine zipper (b/HLH/Z) transcription factor family, recognizing the CACGTG DNA 
motive as a dimer and playing an important role in the regulation of
transcription in a variety of cellular and viral promoters. In this study we
investigate the USF1 b/HLH/Z domain and its complexes with DNA by small angle
x-ray scattering. We present low resolution structural models of monomeric
b/HLH/Z USF1 in the absence of DNA and USF1 dimeric (b/HLH/Z)(2)-DNA and
tetrameric (b/HLH/Z)(4)-DNA(2) complexes. The data reveal a
concentration-dependent USF1 dimer (b/HLH/Z)(2)-DNA-tetramer (b/HLH/Z)(4)-DNA(2) 
equilibrium. The ability of b/HLH/Z USF1 to form a tetrameric assembly on two
distant DNA binding sites as a consequence of increased protein concentration
suggest a USF1 concentration-dependant mechanism of transcription activation
involving DNA loop formation.

PMCID: PMC2134867
PMID: 17827227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Drug Metab Rev. 2007;39(2-3):419-42.

Mechanisms regulating human FMO3 transcription.

Klick DE(1), Hines RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, and The Children's Research Institute, Medical
College of Wisconsin, and Children's Hospital and Health System, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) are important oxidative drug metabolizing
enzymes. FMO3 is the primary human adult liver FMO enzyme, but is developmentally
regulated. FMO3 promoter characterization using in vitro DNA binding assays with 
HepG2 cell and fetal and adult liver nuclear protein, as well as FMO3/reporter
construct transient expression in HepG2 cells, provided evidence for specific
mechanisms contributing to both developmental and constitutive adult regulation. 
NFY, USF1, an unidentified GC box binding protein, and YY1 appear to play major
roles regulating constitutive FMO3 transcription, while Pbx(2) as a heterodimer
with an unidentified Hox isoform also may contribute to FMO3 developmental
expression.

PMID: 17786630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Oct;27(10):2222-7. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

USF1 contributes to high serum lipid levels in Dutch FCHL families and U.S.
whites with coronary artery disease.

Lee JC(1), Weissglas-Volkov D, Kyttälä M, Sinsheimer JS, Jokiaho A, de Bruin TW, 
Lusis AJ, Brennan ML, van Greevenbroek MM, van der Kallen CJ, Hazen SL, Pajukanta
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) characterized by high serum
total cholesterol and/or triglycerides (TGs) is a common dyslipidemia
predisposing to coronary artery disease (CAD). Recently, the upstream
transcription factor 1 (USF1) was linked and associated with FCHL and TGs in
Finnish FCHL families. Here we examined the previously associated rs3737787 SNP
in extended Dutch FCHL families (n=532) and in a cohort of US subjects who
underwent diagnostic coronary angiography (n=1533).
METHODS AND RESULTS: In males of the Dutch FCHL families, we observed significant
sex-dependent associations between the common allele of rs3737787 and FCHL, TGs, 
and related metabolic traits (P=0.02 to 0.006). In the U.S. Whites, sex-dependent
associations with TGs and related metabolic traits were observed for the common
allele of rs3737787 in males (P=0.04 to 0.02) and rare allele in females (P=0.05 
to 0.002). This intriguing relationship was further supported by the highly
significant genotype x sex interactions observed for TGs in the Dutch and TGs and
body mass index (BMI) in U.S. White subjects with CAD (P=0.0005 to 0.00004).
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that USF1 influences several cardiovascular risk
factors in a sex-dependent manner in Dutch FCHL families and U.S. Whites with
CAD. A significant interaction between sex and genotype was shown to affect TGs
and BMI.

PMID: 17673701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):26725-39. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

v-Src-mediated down-regulation of SSeCKS metastasis suppressor gene promoter by
the recruitment of HDAC1 into a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

Bu Y(1), Gelman IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton 
Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

SSeCKS (Src-suppressed C kinase substrate), also called gravin/AKAP12, is a large
scaffolding protein with metastasis suppressor activity. Two major isoforms of
SSeCKS are expressed in most cell and tissue types under the control of two
independent promoters, designated alpha and beta, separated by 68 kb. SSeCKS
transcript and protein levels are severely decreased in Src- and Ras-transformed 
fibroblasts and in many epithelial tumors. By dissecting its promoters with
progressive deletion analysis, we identified the sequence between -106 and -49 in
the alpha proximal promoter as the minimal v-Src-responsive element, which
contains E- and GC-boxes bound by USF1 and Sp1/Sp3, respectively. Both E- and
GC-boxes are crucial for v-Src-responsive and basal promoter activities. v-Src
does not alter USF1 binding levels at the E-box, but it increases Sp1/Sp3 binding
to the GC-box despite no change in their cellular protein abundance. SSeCKS alpha
and beta transcript levels in v-Src/3T3 cells can be restored by treatment with
the histone deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, but not with the DNA
demethylation agent, 5-azacytidine. Chromatin changes are found only on the alpha
promoter even though the beta proximal promoter contains a similar E- and GC-box 
arrangement. Recruitment of HDAC1 is necessary and sufficient to cause repression
of alpha proximal promoter activity, and the addition of Sp1 and/or Sp3
potentiates the repression. Our data suggest that suppression of the beta
promoter is facilitated by Src-induced changes in the alpha promoter
chromatinization mediated by a USF1-Sp1-Sp3 complex.

PMID: 17626016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Regul Pept. 2007 Dec 4;144(1-3):25-33. Epub 2007 May 26.

An upstream CRE-E-box element is essential for gastrin-dependent activation of
the cyclooxygenase-2 gene in human colon cancer cells.

Ansorge N(1), Jüttner S, Cramer T, Schmidt WE, Höcker M, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik I, St. Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany.
n.ansorge@gmx.net

Cyclooxygenase-2, the inducible enzyme of arachidonic acid metabolism and
prostaglandin synthesis, is over expressed in colorectal cancer. Inhibition of
COX-1/-2 by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is associated with a decreased 
risk for these malignancies, whereas high serum gastrin levels elevate this risk.
As gastrin exhibits trophical effects on colonic epithelium we sought to explore 
whether it is capable to induce COX-2 expression in a human colon cancer cell
line. The aim of this study is the description of the gastrin evoked effects on
the transcriptional activity of the COX-2 gene in colorectal cancer cells and the
identification of regulatory promoter elements. Reporter gene assays were
performed with the gastrin-stimulated human colorectal cancer cell-line Colo-320,
which was stable transfected with the human cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptor
cDNA and COX-2-promoter-luciferase constructs containing different segments of
the 5'-region of the COX-2 gene or with mutated promoter constructs.
Transcription factors were characterized with electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. Gastrin-dependent induction of COX-2 mRNA was shown using "real-time"
PCR. Resulting elevated Prostaglandin E2-levels were measured using ELISA.
Gastrin stimulated the PGE2-generation and COX-2-mRNA expression in human
Colo-320-B cells potently, obviously by transactivating the COX-2-promoter using 
a region between - 68 bp and + 70 bp. Further examinations identified a CRE-E-box
element between - 56 bp and - 48 bp mediating the gastrin-effects on the COX-2
gene. Transcription factors binding to this promoter element were USF-1 und -2.
These results show the necessity to perform succeeding studies, which could
describe possible mechanisms in which gastrin and COX-2 contribute to the
induction of colorectal carcinomas.

PMID: 17604853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Gene. 2007 Aug 1;397(1-2):143-52. Epub 2007 May 3.

Cooperative activation of lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase gene expression
by activator protein-2beta in proximal promoter and upstream stimulatory factor 1
within intron 4 in human brain-derived TE671 cells.

Fujimori K(1), Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 
Furuedai, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

We investigated the activation mechanism of gene expression of lipocalin-type
prostaglandin D synthase (L-PGDS) in human brain-derived TE671 cells. Reporter
analyses of constructs carrying various lengths of the promoter region and intron
1 to 6, or 3'-untranslated region of the human L-PGDS gene demonstrated that one 
atypical E-box (aE-box) at +2569 in intron 4 was critical for transactivation of 
the gene. The aE-box inside the intron 4 functioned as an enhancer element in
both directions and in a cell-type specific manner in TE671 cells. Yeast
one-hybrid screening revealed that upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 bound to
the aE-box. Expression of exogenous USF1 induced the endogenous L-PGDS expression
in TE671 cells, whereas administration of USF1 siRNA suppressed L-PGDS
expression. Binding of USF1 to the aE-box was confirmed by performing
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Furthermore, USF1-mediated transcriptional activation was dependent upon
activator protein (AP)-2beta binding to the AP-2 element at position -98 in the
proximal promoter region of human L-PGDS gene. These results indicate that L-PGDS
gene expression in TE671 cells was activated by USF1 through the aE-box within
intron 4 and cooperatively by AP-2beta in the promoter in a cell-type-specific
manner.

PMID: 17574780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Virus Genes. 2007 Oct;35(2):215-23. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Induction of chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTR requires RBF-2 (USF/TFII-I) and
Ras/MAPK signaling.

Malcolm T(1), Chen J, Chang C, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, LSI, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

The HIV-1 LTR is regulated by multiple signaling pathways responsive to T cell
activation. In this study, we have examined the contribution of the MAPK,
calcineurin-NFAT and TNFalpha-NF-kappaB pathways on induction of chromosomally
integrated HIV-1 LTR reporter genes. We find that induction by T-cell receptor
(CD3) cross-linking and PMA is completely dependent upon a binding site for RBF-2
(USF1/2-TFII-I), known as RBEIII at -120. The MAPK pathway is essential for
induction of the wild type LTR by these treatments, as the MEK inhibitors PD98059
and U0126 block induction by both PMA treatment and CD3 cross-linking.
Stimulation of cells with ionomycin on its own has no effect on the integrated
LTR, indicating that calcineurin-NFAT is incapable of causing induction in the
absence of additional signals, but stimulation with both PMA and ionomycin
produces a synergistic response. In contrast, stimulation of NF-kappaB by
treatment with TNFalpha causes induction of both the wild type and RBEIII mutant 
LTRs, an effect that is independent of MAPK signaling. USF1, USF2 and TFII-I from
unstimulated cells are capable of binding RBEIII in vitro, and furthermore can be
observed on the LTR in vivo by chromatin imunoprecipitation from untreated cells.
DNA binding activity of USF1/2 is marginally stimulated by PMA/ ionomycin
treatment, and all three factors appear to remain associated with the LTR
throughout the course of induction. These results implicate major roles for the
MAPK pathway and RBF-2 (USF1/2-TFII-I) in coordinating events necessary for
transition of latent integrated HIV-1 to active transcription in response to T
cell signaling.

PMID: 17546494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3507-17. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates constitutive expression and hormonal
suppression of the 90K (Mac-2BP) protein.

Grassadonia A(1), Tinari N, Fiorentino B, Nakazato M, Chung HK, Giuliani C,
Napolitano G, Iacobelli S, Howcroft TK, Singer DS, Kohn LD; Consorzio
Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Bioncologia.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Section, Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. grassadonia@unich.it

We previously reported that hormones important for the normal growth and function
of FRTL-5 rat thyroid cells, TSH, or its cAMP signal plus insulin or IGF-I, could
transcriptionally suppress constitutive and gamma-interferon (IFN)-increased
synthesis of the 90K protein (also known as Mac-2BP). Here we cloned the
5'-flanking region of the rat 90K gene and identified a minimal promoter
containing an interferon response element and a consensus E-box or upstream
stimulator factor (USF) binding site, which are highly conserved in both the
human and murine genes. We show that suppression of constitutive and
gamma-IFN-increased 90K gene expression by TSH/cAMP plus insulin/IGF-I depends on
the ability of the hormones to decrease the binding of USF to the E-box, located 
upstream of the interferon response element. This site is required for the
constitutive expression of the 90K gene. Transfection with USF1 and USF2 cDNAs
increases constitutive promoter activity, attenuates the ability of TSH/cAMP plus
insulin/IGF-I to decrease constitutive or gamma-IFN-increased 90K gene expression
but does not abrogate the ability of gamma-IFN itself to increase 90K gene
expression.

PMID: 17446190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochem J. 2007 Jul 15;405(2):359-67.

Transcriptional regulation of the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase
gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta/Foxa2 and upstream stimulatory factors in
insulinoma cells.

Boonsaen T(1), Rojvirat P, Surinya KH, Wallace JC, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

PC (pyruvate carboxylase) plays a crucial role in intermediary metabolism
including glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. In the present 
study, we identified two regions of the 1.2 kb distal promoter, the -803/-795
site and the -408/-403 E-box upstream of the transcription start site, as the
important cis-acting elements for transcriptional activation of the luciferase
reporter gene. Site-directed mutagenesis of either one of these sites in the
context of this 1.2 kb promoter fragment, followed by transient transfections in 
the insulinoma cell line, INS-1, abolished reporter activity by approx. 50%.
However, disruption of either the -803/-795 or the -408/-403 site did not affect 
reporter gene activity in NIH 3T3 cells, suggesting that this promoter fragment
is subjected to cell-specific regulation. The nuclear proteins that bound to
these -803/-795 and -408/-403 sites were identified by gel retardation assays as 
HNF3beta (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta)/Foxa2 (forkhead/winged helix
transcription factor box2) and USFs (upstream stimulatory factors), USF1 and
USF2, respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using antisera against
HNF3beta/Foxa2, USF1 and USF2 demonstrated that endogenous HNF3beta/Foxa2 binds
to the -803/-795 Foxa2 site, and USF1 and USF2 bind to the -408/-403 E-box
respectively in vivo, consistent with the gel retardation assay results. Although
there are weak binding sites located at regions -904 and -572 for PDX1
(pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1), a transcription factor that controls expression
of beta-cell-specific genes, it did not appear to regulate PC expression in INS-1
cells in the context of the 1.2 kb promoter fragment. The results presented here 
show that Foxa2 and USFs regulate the distal promoter of the rat PC gene in a
cell-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC1904523
PMID: 17408383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Endocr J. 2007 Apr;54(2):275-85. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

USF inhibits cell proliferation through delay in G2/M phase in FRTL-5 cells.

Jung HS(1), Kim KS, Chung YJ, Chung HK, Min YK, Lee MS, Lee MK, Kim KW, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Korea.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) has a negative effect on the cell proliferation
in some cell types. However, its effect on thyrocytes is not clear. Therefore, we
investigated the effects of USF on the proliferation and function of thyroid
follicular cells. Complementary DNAs of the USF-1 and USF-2 were synthesized
using RT-PCR from FRTL-5 cells, and each was transfected to FRTL-5 cells and
papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) production and
[methyl-3H] thymidine uptake after thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) treatment
were measured in FRTL-5 cells. In the carcinoma cell lines,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) uptake was assayed to evaluate cell proliferation.
Apoptosis was tested by Hoechst staining and cell cycle analysis was done using a
fluorescence activated cell sorting. Expression of cell cycle regulating genes
was evaluated by Northern and Western blotting. Overexpression of USF-1 and USF-2
significantly suppressed TSH-stimulated [methyl-3H] thymidine uptake (p<0.05),
while it maintained TSH-stimulated cAMP production in FRTL-5 cells.
Overexpression of USF significantly suppressed BrdU uptake in each carcinoma cell
line, NPA and TPC-1 cells (p<0.05). It induced delay of cell cycle at the G2/M
phase, but did not increase apoptosis in FRTL-5 cells. It was accompanied by a
decrease of cyclin B1 and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-1, and an increase of p27
expression. USF-1 and USF-2 suppressed cell proliferation of normal thyrocytes
and thyroid carcinoma cells. However, they retained the ability to produce cAMP
after TSH stimulation. Their inhibitory effect on cell proliferation might be
caused partly by the delay in G2/M phase.

PMID: 17379962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 1;16(9):1058-71. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Comparative genomic and functional analyses reveal a novel cis-acting PTEN
regulatory element as a highly conserved functional E-box motif deleted in Cowden
syndrome.

Pezzolesi MG(1), Zbuk KM, Waite KA, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue,
NE-50, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Germline mutations in PTEN, encoding a phosphatase on 10q23, cause Cowden
syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). Approximately, 10% of
CS-related PTEN mutations occur in the PTEN promoter and 11% of BRRS-related
mutations include large deletions, often favoring the gene's 5' end (exon 1,
promoter). In order to better understand the mechanism(s) underlying the
deregulation of PTEN in these syndromes, it is important that functional
cis-regulatory elements be identified. We employed a comparative genomic approach
combined with molecular genetic techniques to identify a highly conserved
sequence upstream of the PTEN promoter, sharing 80% sequence identity among Homo 
sapiens, Mus musculus and Rattus norvegicus. Within this region, we identified a 
canonical E-box sequence (CACGTG) located at position -2181 to -2176,
approximately 800 bp upstream of the PTEN core promoter and more than 1.1 kb
upstream of its minimal promoter region (located at -958 to -821). In vitro
assays suggest that this motif is recognized by members of the basic
region-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper (bHLH-LZ) transcription factor family,
USF1 and USF2, and reporter assays indicate that this novel E-box is involved in 
mediating PTEN transcriptional activation. Four of 30 CS/CS-like patients,
without previously identified PTEN mutations, were found with germline deletions 
of the E-box element. Of the four, three had deletions stretching to exon 1, but 
not 3' of it; importantly, one classic CS patient harbored a germline deletion
localizing to this E-box region, further affirming the role of this element in
PTEN's regulation and deregulation, and its contribution to the pathogenesis of
CS.

PMID: 17341483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 May;321(2):684-9. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Characterization of the Basal promoter element of human organic cation
transporter 2 gene.

Asaka J(1), Terada T, Ogasawara K, Katsura T, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Human organic cation transporter 2 (hOCT2; SLC22A2) is abundantly expressed in
the kidney, and it plays important roles in the renal tubular secretion of
cationic drugs. Although the transport characteristics of hOCT2 have been studied
extensively, there is no information available for the transcriptional regulation
of hOCT2. The present study was undertaken to identify the cis-element and
trans-factor for basal expression of hOCT2. The transcription start site was
located 385 nucleotides above the translation start site by using 5'-rapid
amplification of cDNA ends. An approximately 4-kilobase fragment of the hOCT2
promoter region was isolated and the promoter activities were measured in the
renal epithelial cell line LLC-PK1. A deletion analysis suggested that the region
spanning -91 to -58 base pairs was essential for basal transcriptional activity. 
This region lacked a TATA-box but contained a CCAAT box and an E-box.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that specific DNA/protein complexes 
were present in the E-box but not in the CCAAT box, and supershift assays
revealed that upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1), which belongs to the basic
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper family of transcription factors, bound to the
E-box. Mutation of the E-box resulted in a decrease in hOCT2 promoter activity,
and overexpression of USF-1 enhanced the hOCT2 promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. This article reports the first characterization of the
hOCT2 promoter and shows that USF-1 functions as a basal transcriptional
regulator of the hOCT2 gene via the E-box.

PMID: 17314196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Genet. 2007 Mar;71(3):245-53.

Associations between USF1 gene variants and cardiovascular risk factors in the
Quebec Family Study.

Choquette AC(1), Bouchard L, Houde A, Bouchard C, Pérusse L, Vohl MC.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Research Center, CHUQ, CHUL, Quebec, Canada.

Cardiovascular (CVD) risk factors are under the influence of environmental and
genetic factors. Human upstream transcription factor 1 gene (USF1) encodes for a 
transcription factor, which modulates the expression of genes involved in lipid
and carbohydrate metabolic pathways. The aim of this study was to test the
hypothesis that USF1 gene variants are associated with CVD risk factors in the
Quebec Family Study (QFS). USF1 has been sequenced in 20 QFS subjects with high
plasma apolipoprotein B100 (APOB) levels (>1.14 g/l) and small, dense low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) particles (> or =250.7 Angstroms and < or =255.9 Angstroms), as
well as in five subjects with larger LDL particles. Ten variants were identified 
in non-coding regions of USF1. Two of these polymorphisms (intron 7 c.561-100
G>A, and exon 11 c.*187 C>T) as well as the c.-56 A>G polymorphism, were
genotyped and analyzed in 760 subjects from QFS. Association studies showed that 
women with c.561-100 A/A and c.*187 T/T genotypes had more favorable adiposity
indices (<0.04). In summary, significant associations between relatively common
USF1 genetic variants and CVD risk factors were observed in French Canadians.

PMID: 17309647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 28;26(30):4344-56. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

PTTG and PBF repress the human sodium iodide symporter.

Boelaert K(1), Smith VE, Stratford AL, Kogai T, Tannahill LA, Watkinson JC, Eggo 
MC, Franklyn JA, McCabe CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedical 
Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

The ability of the thyroid to accumulate iodide provides the basis for
radioiodine ablation of differentiated thyroid cancers and their metastases. Most
thyroid tumours exhibit reduced iodide uptake, although the mechanisms accounting
for this remain poorly understood. Pituitary tumour transforming gene (PTTG) is a
proto-oncogene implicated in the pathogenesis of thyroid tumours. We now show
that PTTG and its binding factor PBF repress expression of sodium iodide
symporter (NIS) messenger RNA (mRNA), and inhibit iodide uptake. This process is 
mediated at least in part through fibroblast growth factor-2. In detailed studies
of the NIS promoter in rat FRTL-5 cells, PTTG and PBF demonstrated specific
inhibition of promoter activity via the human upstream enhancer element (hNUE).
Within this approximately 1 kb element, a complex PAX8-upstream stimulating
factor 1 (USF1) response element proved critical both to basal promoter activity 
and to PTTG and PBF repression of NIS. In particular, repression by PTTG was
contingent upon the USF1, but not the PAX8, site. Finally, in human primary
thyroid cells, PTTG and PBF similarly repressed the NIS promoter via hNUE. Taken 
together, our data suggest that the reported overexpression of PTTG and PBF in
differentiated thyroid cancer has profound implications for activity of the NIS
gene, and hence significantly impacts upon the efficacy of radioiodine treatment.

PMID: 17297475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Neuroimmunol. 2007 Mar;184(1-2):188-97. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Regulation of IL-10 expression by upstream stimulating factor (USF-1) in
glioma-associated microglia.

Zhang L(1), Handel MV, Schartner JM, Hagar A, Allen G, Curet M, Badie B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National 
Medical Center, CA 91010, USA.

Understanding the local CNS immune response to neoplasms is essential in the
development of immune-based treatments for malignant brain tumors. Using rodent
glioma models, we have recently found tumor-associated microglia/macrophages
(MG/MP) to be less responsive to known MG/MP activators such as CpG, LPS and
IFN-gamma. To understand the mechanism of MG/MP suppression, nuclear extracts
from rodent intracranial C6 gliomas, C6 glioma-associated MG/MP, normal brain,
and normal MG/MP were obtained and studied using Electrophoretic Mobility Shift
Assay (EMSA). Among the nuclear factors studied (AP-1, IRF, USF-1 and Stat-1)
only USF-1, which is constitutively expressed in most cells, was down-regulated
in tumor-associated MG/MP, but not normal MG/MP. Because tumor-associated MG/MP
had higher expression of IL-10 (but not TNF-alpha or TGF-beta), we evaluated the 
role of USF-1 on IL-10 expression. siRNA mediated inhibition of USF-1 expression 
in primary MG/MP cultures resulted in up-regulation of IL-10 mRNA but not
TNF-alpha or TGF-beta. These findings suggest that USF-1 may play a role in IL-10
regulation in MG/MP in brain tumors.

PMID: 17289164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 9;354(2):517-21. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate the C/EBP alpha gene during differentiation
of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Kim JW(1), Monila H, Pandey A, Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

During adipocyte differentiation, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha) functions as a pleiotropic transcriptional activator of numerous
adipocyte genes. The promoter of the C/EBPalpha gene has an E-box upstream of
C/EBP binding site. Deletion or mutation of the E-box decreases promoter
activity, suggesting that the E-box participates in the regulation of C/EBPalpha 
expression. Protein binding to the E-box during the adipocyte differentiation is 
increased as indicated by EMSA and UV cross-linking. Purification of the E-box
binding proteins from differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes, showed that USF and AP-4 
are associated with the E-box. Supershift analysis showed that USF1 and USF2 bind
to this element as heterodimers, whereas the addition of anti-AP-4 antibody
enhanced the binding complex, suggesting that AP-4 negatively regulates the
promoter activity. The expression of AP-4 is reciprocally regulated with USF-1
during adipocyte differentiation. These findings suggest that USF-1 and 2 play
roles in C/EBPalpha expression, whereas the AP-4 represses it.

PMID: 17239350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 2;260-262:100-8. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Transcriptional regulation of the FSH receptor: new perspectives.

Hermann BP(1), Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

The cell-surface receptor for the gonadotropin follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
is expressed exclusively on Sertoli cells of the testis and granulosa cells of
the ovary. FSH signal transduction through its receptor (Fshr) is critical for
the timing and maintenance of normal gametogenesis in the mammalian gonad. In the
13 years since the gene encoding Fshr was first cloned, the mechanisms
controlling its transcription have been extensively examined, but a clear
understanding of what drives its unique cell-specificity remains elusive. Current
knowledge of basal Fshr transcription highlights the role of an E-box in the
proximal promoter which is bound by the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 (Usf1) and Usf2. Recent studies utilizing
knockout mice and chromatin immunoprecipitation validated the importance of Usf
to Fshr transcription and demonstrated a sexually dimorphic requirement for the
Usf proteins to maintain normal Fshr expression. Studies have also shown that the
promoter region itself is insufficient for appropriate Fshr expression in
transgenic mice, indicating Fshr transcription depends on regulatory elements
that lie outside of the promoter. Identification of such elements has been
propelled by recent availability of genome sequence data, which facilitated
studies using comparative genomics, DNase I hypersensitivity mapping, and
transgenic analysis with large fragments of DNA. This review will focus on the
current understanding of transcriptional regulatory processes that control
expression of rat Fshr, including recent advances from our laboratory.

PMCID: PMC3682414
PMID: 17084019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Lipid Res. 2007 Jan;48(1):193-200. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

The involvement of upstream stimulatory factor 1 in Dutch patients with familial 
combined hyperlipidemia.

van der Vleuten GM(1), Isaacs A, Hijmans A, van Duijn CM, Stalenhoef AF, de Graaf
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Recently, the upstream stimulatory factor 1 gene (USF1) was proposed as a
candidate gene for familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCH). In this study, we
examined the previously identified risk haplotype of USF1 with respect to FCH and
its related phenotypes in 36 Dutch FCH families. The diagnosis of FCH was based
on both the traditional diagnostic criteria and a nomogram. The two
polymorphisms, USF1s1 and USF1s2, were in complete linkage disequilibrium. No
association was found for the individual single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
with FCH defined by the nomogram (USF1s1, P = 0.53; USF1s2, P = 0.53), whereas
suggestive associations were found when using the traditional diagnostic criteria
for FCH (USF1s1, P = 0.08; USF1s2, P = 0.07). USF1 was associated with total
cholesterol (USF1s1, P = 0.05; USF1s2, P = 0.04) and apolipoprotein B (USF1s1, P 
= 0.06; USF1s2, P = 0.04). Small dense LDL showed a suggestive association
(USF1s1, P = 0.10; USF1s2, P = 0.09). The results from the haplotype analyses
supported the results obtained for the individual SNPs. In conclusion, the
previously identified risk haplotype of USF1 showed a suggestive association with
FCH and contributed to the related lipid traits in our Dutch FCH families.

PMID: 17065663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Jan;85(1):55-61. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Upstream transcription factor 1 gene polymorphisms are associated with high
antilipolytic insulin sensitivity and show gene-gene interactions.

Kantartzis K(1), Fritsche A, Machicao F, Stumvoll M, Machann J, Schick F, Häring 
HU, Stefan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Nephrology, Vascular Medicine and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Otfried-Müller-Str. 10, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) regulates the expression of many genes
involved in lipid and glucose metabolism, among them genes regulating lipolysis. 
USF1 specifically regulates the expression of the hormone-sensitive lipase gene
(HSL) in adipocytes and the hepatic lipase gene (LIPC) in the liver, which was
found to be involved in liver fat accumulation. The usf1s1 C > T and usf1s2 G > A
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in USF1 are associated with increased in
vitro catecholamine-induced lipolysis in adipocytes. We investigated first
whether SNPs in USF1 affect the lipolysis-suppressing action of insulin in vivo, 
and second, whether they interact with the -60C > G SNP in HSL on lipolysis and
the -514C > T SNP in LIPC on liver fat. The usf1s1 C > T and usf1s2 G > A SNPs,
together with the SNPs in HSL and LIPC, were determined in 407 Caucasians.
Lipolysis was estimated as a change in free fatty acid (FFA) levels from baseline
to 2 h of a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Fifty-four subjects had data
from a euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp with calculation of antilipolytic
insulin sensitivity. Subjects carrying the minor alleles (T of usf1s1 and A of
usf1s2) had lower 2 h FFA (p = 0.01) and a larger decrease in FFA concentrations 
during the OGTT (p = 0.02). Antilipolytic insulin sensitivity was higher in these
individuals (p = 0.03). No interaction of the usf1s1 C > T and usf1s2 G > A SNPs 
with the -60C > G SNP in HSL on antilipolytic insulin sensitivity was detected.
Liver fat, measured by (1)H magnetic resonance spectroscopy, was elevated only in
subjects who were both homozygous for the major alleles of usf1s1 and usf1s2 and 
carriers of the T allele of the -514C > T SNP in LIPC (p = 0.01). In conclusion, 
subjects carrying the T allele of SNP usf1s1 and the A allele of SNP usf1s2 have 
a higher antilipolytic insulin sensitivity. Moreover, both SNPs may interact with
the -514C > T SNP in LIPC to determine liver fat.

PMID: 17016691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Ann Med. 2006;38(5):337-51.

Unraveling the complex genetics of familial combined hyperlipidemia.

Suviolahti E(1), Lilja HE, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) constitutes a substantial risk factor for
atherosclerosis since it is observed in about 20% of coronary heart disease (CHD)
patients under 60 years. FCHL, characterized by elevated levels of total
cholesterol (TC) and triglycerides (TGs), or both, is also one of the most common
familial hyperlipidemias with a prevalence of 1%-6% in Western populations.
Numerous studies have been performed to identify genes contributing to FCHL. The 
recent linkage and association studies and their replications are beginning to
elucidate the genetic variations underlying the susceptibility to FCHL. Three
chromosomal regions on 1q21-23, 11p and 16q22-24.1 have been replicated in
different study samples, offering targets for gene hunting. In addition, several 
candidate gene studies have replicated the influence of the lipoprotein lipase
(LPL) gene and apolipoprotein A1/C3/A4/A5 (APOA1/C3/A4/A5) gene cluster in FCHL. 
Recently, the linked region on chromosome 1q21 was successfully fine-mapped and
the upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) gene identified as the underlying gene
for FCHL. This finding has now been replicated in independent FCHL samples.
However, the total number of variants, the risk related to each variant and their
relative contributions to the disease susceptibility are not known yet.

PMID: 16938803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2541-8.

Variation within the gene encoding the upstream stimulatory factor 1 does not
influence susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in samples from populations with
replicated evidence of linkage to chromosome 1q.

Zeggini E(1), Damcott CM, Hanson RL, Karim MA, Rayner NW, Groves CJ, Baier LJ,
Hale TC, Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Hunt SE, Knowler WC, Mitchell BD, Ng MC,
O'Connell JR, Pollin TI, Vaxillaire M, Walker M, Wang X, Whittaker P, Xiang K,
Jia W, Chan JC, Froguel P, Deloukas P, Shuldiner AR, Elbein SC, McCarthy MI;
International Type 2 Diabetes 1q Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2006 Nov;55(11):3197. Kunsun, Xiang [corrected to Xiang, Kunsan].

The gene encoding the transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor (USF)1
influences susceptibility to familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) and
triglyceride levels. Phenotypic overlap between FCHL and type 2 diabetes makes
USF1 a compelling positional candidate for the widely replicated type 2 diabetes 
linkage signal on chromosome 1q. We typed 22 variants in the F11R/USF1 region (1 
per 3 kb), including those previously implicated in FCHL-susceptibility (or
proxies thereof) in 3,726 samples preferentially enriched for 1q linkage. We also
examined glucose- and lipid-related continuous traits in an overlapping set of
1,215 subjects of European descent. There was no convincing evidence for
association with type 2 diabetes in any of seven case-control comparisons,
individually or combined. Family-based association analyses in 832 Pima subjects 
were similarly negative. At rs3737787 (the variant most strongly associated with 
FCHL), the combined odds ratio, per copy of the rarer A-allele, was 1.10 (95% CI 
0.97-1.24, P = 0.13). In 124 Utah subjects, rs3737787 was significantly
associated (P = 0.002) with triglyceride levels, but direction of this
association was opposite to previous reports, and there was no corroboration in
three other samples. These data exclude USF1 as a major contributor to type 2
diabetes susceptibility and the basis for the chromosome 1q linkage. They reveal 
only limited evidence for replication of USF1 effects on continuous metabolic
traits.

PMID: 16936202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Oct;26(10):2407-13. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Hepatocyte growth factor regulates E box-dependent plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1 gene expression in HepG2 liver cells.

Imagawa S(1), Fujii S, Dong J, Furumoto T, Kaneko T, Zaman T, Satoh Y, Tsutsui H,
Sobel BE.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kitaku, Sapporo, Japan 060-8638.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the etiologic mechanism of pleiotropic growth
factor, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), as a regulator of hepatic synthesis of
plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1, the physiological inhibitor of
fibrinolysis and a potential inducer of atherothrombosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HGF increased PAI-1 mRNA expression and PAI-1 protein
accumulation in the conditioned media of human liver-derived HepG2 cells, and
increased hepatic PAI-1 mRNA expression in vivo in mice. HGF-inducible PAI-1 mRNA
was attenuated by U0126, a specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) kinase, and genistein, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinase. HGF increased the 
human PAI-1 promoter (-829 to +36 bp) activity, and deletion and mutation
analysis uncovered a functional E box (5'-CACATG-3') at positions -158 to -153
bp. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that this E box binds
upstream stimulatory factors (USFs). HGF phosphorylated USFs through MAPK and
tyrosine kinase pathways. Co-transfection of USF1 expression vector increased
PAI-1 promoter activity. Sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 attenuated
HGF-inducible PAI-1 promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Because USFs are involved in the regulation of carbohydrates and
lipid metabolism, HGF-mediated PAI-1 production may provide a novel link between 
atherothrombosis and metabolic derangements. Targeting HGF signaling pathway may 
modulate the thrombotic risk in high-risk patients.

PMID: 16902162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Blood. 2006 Dec 15;108(13):4237-45. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Cis and trans regulation of hepcidin expression by upstream stimulatory factor.

Bayele HK(1), McArdle H, Srai SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University College London, NW3
2PF, United Kingdom.

Hepcidin is the presumed negative regulator of systemic iron levels; its
expression is induced in iron overload, infection, and inflammation, and by
cytokines, but is suppressed in hypoxia and anemia. Although the gene is
exquisitely sensitive to changes in iron status in vivo, its mRNA is devoid of
prototypical iron-response elements, and it is therefore not obvious how it may
be regulated by iron flux. The multiplicity of effectors of its expression also
suggests that the transcriptional circuitry controlling the gene may be very
complex indeed. In delineating enhancer elements within both the human and mouse 
hepcidin gene promoters, we show here that members of the basic helix-loop-helix 
leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) family of transcriptional regulators control hepcidin
expression. The upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), previously linked to
hepcidin through gene ablation in inbred mice, appears to exert a polar or
cis-acting effect, while USF1 may act in trans to control hepcidin expression. In
mice, we found variation in expression of both hepcidin genes, driven by these
transcription factors. In addition, c-Myc and Max synergize to control the
expression of this hormone, supporting previous findings for the role of this
couple in regulating iron metabolism. Transcriptional activation by both
USF1/USF2 and c-Myc/Max heterodimers occurs through E-boxes within the promoter. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of these elements rendered the promoter unresponsive to
USF1/USF2 or c-Myc/Max. Dominant-negative mutants of USF1 and USF2 reciprocally
attenuated promoter transactivation by both wild-type USF1 and USF2. Promoter
occupancy by the transcription factors was confirmed by DNA-binding and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. Taken together, it would appear that synergy between 
these members of the bHLH-ZIP family of transcriptional regulators may subserve
an important role in iron metabolism as well as other pathways in which hepcidin 
may be involved.

PMID: 16902156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Kidney Int. 2006 Oct;70(7):1332-41. Epub 2006 Aug 9.

Cis and trans regulatory elements in NPHS2 promoter: implications in proteinuria 
and progression of renal diseases.

Di Duca M(1), Oleggini R, Sanna-Cherchi S, Pasquali L, Di Donato A, Parodi S,
Bertelli R, Caridi G, Frasca G, Cerullo G, Amoroso A, Schena FP, Scolari F,
Ghiggeri GM; European IgA Nephropathy Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory on Pathophysiology of Uremia, G Gaslini Children Hospital, Genoa,
Italy.

Podocin (NPHS2) expression in podocytes is associated with variable degrees of
proteinuria and progression to renal failure in different glomerular diseases
that suggests different expression profiles in NPHS2 promoter. Three functional
polymorphisms in NPHS2 promoter (-51T, -116T, and -535 insCTTTTTT(3)) were found 
determining strong downregulation (-73, -59, and -82%, respectively) of the
reporter gene expression when transfected in podocytes. Electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay experiments showed that all wild-type variants (-51G, -116C, and -535
insCTTTTTT(2)) formed specific DNA-protein complexes with podocyte nuclear
extracts that were abolished by the presence of the rare forms (-51T, -116T, and 
-535 insCTTTTTT(3)). In the case of -51G, upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF1)
was identified as the specific trans element in accord to binding inhibition
experiments and USF1 RNAi silencing. Haplotype analysis of 204 normal controls
and 545 patients with renal diseases (308 immunoglobulin (Ig)A nephropathy and
237 focal segmental glomerulosclerosis) evidenced that -116/-51 and -535/P2OL
formed two blocks in strong linkage disequilibrium in both normal and
pathological cohorts. The high NPHS2 promoter profile -116C/-51G haplotype was
more frequent in patients with IgA nephropathy (P-value=0.005) and was associated
with a better clinical outcome in terms of proteinuria and creatinine levels.
Overall our study describes functional variants of NPHS2 promoter and
characterizes trans-acting elements that modulate podocin expression in the
kidney. High producer NPHS2 promoter haplotypes seem protective in patients with 
chronic glomerular diseases.

PMID: 16900088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006 Jul;61(7):660-2.

Genetic association between USF 1 and USF 2 gene polymorphisms and Japanese
Alzheimer's disease.

Shibata N(1), Ohnuma T, Higashi S, Higashi M, Usui C, Ohkubo T, Watanabe T,
Kawashima R, Kitajima A, Ueki A, Nagao M, Arai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine. 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421 Japan. nobuto.shibata@nifty.ne.jp

To investigate the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and 2 genes on the onset of Alzheimer's
disease (AD), a case-control study was performed. The SNPs were genotyped by a
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP)
method in 236 AD patients and 120 age-matched controls of Japanese descent. We
observed no significant association between the three SNPs of the USF 1 gene and 
AD in our Japanese participants. In addition, the SNPs studied did not affect
plasma cholesterol levels in our AD cases. For the USF 2 gene, the two SNPs did
not show significant association with onset of AD. Our study suggests that the
three SNPs of the USF 1 gene and two SNPs of the USF 2 gene presented here are
not associated with onset of AD.

PMID: 16870626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Virol. 2006 Aug;80(15):7339-53.

Promoter activation by the varicella-zoster virus major transactivator IE62 and
the cellular transcription factor USF.

Yang M(1), Peng H, Hay J, Ruyechan WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 138 Farber Hall, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214-3000, USA.

The varicella-zoster virus major transactivator, IE62, can activate expression
from homologous and heterologous promoters. High levels of IE62-mediated
activation appear to involve synergy with cellular transcription factors. The
work presented here focuses on functional interactions of IE62 with the
ubiquitously expressed cellular factor USF. We have found that USF can synergize 
with IE62 to a similar extent on model minimal promoters and the complex native
ORF28/29 regulatory element, neither of which contains a consensus IE62 binding
site. Using Gal4 fusion constructs, we have found that the activation domain of
USF1 is necessary and sufficient for synergistic activation with IE62. We have
mapped the regions of USF and IE62 required for direct physical interaction.
Deletion of the required region within IE62 does not ablate synergistic
activation but does influence its efficiency depending on promoter architecture. 
Both proteins stabilize/increase binding of TATA binding protein/TFIID to
promoter elements. These findings suggest a novel mechanism for the observed
synergistic activation which requires neither site-specific IE62 binding to the
promoter nor a direct physical interaction with USF.

PMCID: PMC1563731
PMID: 16840315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Protein Expr Purif. 2006 Nov;50(1):68-73. Epub 2006 May 20.

Incorporating a TEV cleavage site reduces the solubility of nine recombinant
mouse proteins.

Kurz M(1), Cowieson NP, Robin G, Hume DA, Martin JL, Kobe B, Listwan P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld
4072, Australia.

Failure to express soluble proteins in bacteria is mainly attributed to the
properties of the target protein itself, as well as the choice of the vector, the
purification tag and the linker between the tag and protein, and codon usage. The
expression of proteins with fusion tags to facilitate subsequent purification
steps is a widely used procedure in the production of recombinant proteins.
However, the additional residues can affect the properties of the protein;
therefore, it is often desirable to remove the tag after purification. This is
usually done by engineering a cleavage site between the tag and the encoded
protein that is recognised by a site-specific protease, such as the one from
tobacco etch virus (TEV). In this study, we investigated the effect of four
different tags on the bacterial expression and solubility of nine mouse proteins.
Two of the four engineered constructs contained hexahistidine tags with either a 
long or short linker. The other two constructs contained a TEV cleavage site
engineered into the linker region. Our data show that inclusion of the TEV
recognition site directly downstream of the recombination site of the Invitrogen 
Gateway vector resulted in a loss of solubility of the nine mouse proteins. Our
work suggests that one needs to be very careful when making modifications to
expression vectors and combining different affinity and fusion tags and cleavage 
sites.

PMID: 16798010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Regul Pept. 2006 Sep 11;136(1-3):78-84. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Islet Neogenesis Associated Protein (INGAP) modulates gene expression in cultured
neonatal rat islets.

Barbosa H(1), Bordin S, Stoppiglia L, Silva K, Borelli M, Del Zotto H,
Gagliardino J, Boschero A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Biologia Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, 13083-970, Campinas, SP, Brazil.

The Islet Neogenesis Associated Protein (INGAP) increases pancreatic beta-cell
mass and potentiates glucose-induced insulin secretion. We currently studied the 
effects of a pentadecapeptide having the 104-118 amino acid sequence of INGAP
(INGAP-PP) on insulin secretion and on transcript profile expression in
4-day-cultured normal pancreatic neonatal rat islets. Islets cultured with
INGAP-PP released significantly more insulin in response to 2.8 and 16.7 mM
glucose than those cultured without the peptide. The macroarray analysis showed
that 210 out of 2352 genes spotted in the nylon membranes were up-regulated while
only 4 were down-regulated by INGAP-PP-treatment. The main categories of genes
modified by INGAP-PP included several related with islet metabolism, insulin
secretion mechanism, beta-cell mass and islet neogenesis. RT-PCR confirmed the
macroarray results for ten selected genes involved in growing, maturation,
maintenance of pancreatic islet-cells, and exocytosis, i.e., Hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3beta (HNF3beta), Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), K(+)-channel
proteins (SUR1 and Kir6.2), PHAS-I protein, Insulin 1 gene, Glucagon gene,
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAP3K1), Amylin (IAPP), and SNAP-25. INGAP-PP
also stimulated PDX-1 expression. The expression of three transcripts (HNF3beta, 
SUR1, and SNAP-25) was confirmed by Western blotting for the corresponding
proteins. In conclusion, our results show that INGAP-PP enhances specifically the
secretion of insulin and the transcription of several islet genes, many of them
directly or indirectly involved in the control of islet metabolism, beta-cell
mass and islet neogenesis. These results, together with other previously
reported, strongly indicate an important role of INGAP-PP, and possibly of INGAP,
in the regulation of islet function and development.

PMID: 16764950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. PLoS Genet. 2006 May;2(5):e69. Epub 2006 May 12.

Risk alleles of USF1 gene predict cardiovascular disease of women in two
prospective studies.

Komulainen K(1), Alanne M, Auro K, Kilpikari R, Pajukanta P, Saarela J, Ellonen
P, Salminen K, Kulathinal S, Kuulasmaa K, Silander K, Salomaa V, Perola M,
Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute,
Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) is a ubiquitously expressed transcription 
factor controlling several critical genes in lipid and glucose metabolism. Of
some 40 genes regulated by USF1, several are involved in the molecular
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Although the USF1 gene has been
shown to have a critical role in the etiology of familial combined
hyperlipidemia, which predisposes to early CVD, the gene's potential role as a
risk factor for CVD events at the population level has not been established. Here
we report the results from a prospective genetic-epidemiological study of the
association between the USF1 variants, CVD, and mortality in two large Finnish
cohorts. Haplotype-tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms exposing all common
allelic variants of USF1 were genotyped in a prospective case-cohort design with 
two distinct cohorts followed up during 1992-2001 and 1997-2003. The total number
of follow-up years was 112,435 in 14,140 individuals, of which 2,225 were
selected for genotyping based on the case-cohort study strategy. After adjustment
for conventional risk factors, we observed an association of USF1 with CVD and
mortality among females. In combined analysis of the two cohorts, female carriers
of a USF1 risk haplotype had a 2-fold risk of a CVD event (hazard ratio [HR]
2.02; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.16-3.53; p = 0.01) and an increased risk of 
all-cause mortality (HR 2.52; 95% CI 1.46-4.35; p = 0.0009). A putative
protective haplotype of USF1 was also identified. Our study shows how a gene
identified in exceptional families proves to be important also at the population 
level, implying that allelic variants of USF1 significantly influence the
prospective risk of CVD and even all-cause mortality in females.

PMCID: PMC1458962
PMID: 16699592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2006 Jun;17(3):285-90.

Genetics of familial combined hyperlipidemia.

Naukkarinen J(1), Ehnholm C, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an overview of recent advances that have defined
the first putative genes behind familial combined hyperlipidemia, the most common
genetic dyslipidemia and a major risk factor for early coronary heart disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: The first locus for familial combined hyperlipidemia on 1q21-23 
revealed a gene encoding a transcription factor critical in lipid and glucose
metabolism, USF1. All the associated variants represent noncoding single
nucleotide polymorphisms, one of which affects the binding site of nuclear
proteins with a putative effect on transcript levels of USF1. Transcript analyses
of fat biopsies have exposed risk-allele related changes in the downstream genes.
Another recent clue to the molecular pathogenesis of familial combined
hyperlipidemia is the association of the high triglyceride trait with the APOA5
gene, located on 11q. More familial combined hyperlipidemia genes are expected to
be found, since linkage evidence exists for additional loci on 16q24 and
20q12-q13.1.
SUMMARY: Genetic research of familial combined hyperlipidemia families has
revealed several linked loci guiding to susceptibility genes. The USF1
transcription factor is the major gene underlying the 1q21-23 linkage. Modifying 
genes, especially influencing the high triglyceride trait, include APOC3 and
APOA5, the latter representing a downstream target of USF1 and implying a
USF1-dependent pathway in the molecular pathogenesis of dyslipidemias.

PMID: 16680034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 1;99(2):495-507.

PAI-1 transcriptional regulation during the G0 --> G1 transition in human
epidermal keratinocytes.

Qi L(1), Allen RR, Lu Q, Higgins CE, Garone R, Staiano-Coico L, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) is the major negative regulator of
the plasmin-dependent pericellular proteolytic cascade. PAI-1 gene expression is 
normally growth state regulated but frequently elevated in chronic
fibroproliferative and neoplastic diseases affecting both stromal restructuring
and cellular migratory activities. Kinetic modeling of cell cycle transit in
synchronized human keratinocytes (HaCaT cells) indicated that PAI-1 transcription
occurred early after serum stimulation of quiescent (G0) cells and prior to entry
into a cycling G1 condition. PAI-1 repression (in G0) was associated with
upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF-1) occupancy of two consensus E box motifs
(5'-CACGTG-3') at the PE1 and PE2 domains in the PF1 region (nucleotides -794 to 
-532) of the PAI-1 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
established that the PE1 and PE2 site E boxes were occupied by USF-1 in quiescent
cells and by USF-2 in serum-activated, PAI-1-expressing keratinocytes. This
reciprocal and growth state-dependent residence of USF family members (USF-1 vs. 
USF-2) at PE1/PE2 region chromatin characterized the G0 --> G1 transition period 
and the transcriptional status of the PAI-1 gene. A consensus E box motif was
required for USF/E box interactions, as a CG --> AT substitution at the two
central nucleotides inhibited formation of USF/probe complexes. The 5' flanking
sites (AAT or AGAC) in the PE2 segment were not necessary for USF binding. USF
recognition of the PE1/PE2 region E box sites required phosphorylation with
several potential involved residues, including T153, maping to the USF-specific
region (USR). A T153A substitution in USF-1 did not repress serum-induced PAI-1
expression whereas the T153D mutant was an effective suppressor. As anticipated
from the ChIP results, transfection of wild-type USF-2 failed to inhibit PAI-1
induction. Collectively, these data suggest that USF family members are important
regulators of PAI-1 gene control during serum-stimulated recruitment of quiescent
human epithelial cells into the growth cycle.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16622840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Gene Expr. 2006;13(1):59-66.

Rare functional variants of podocin (NPHS2) promoter in patients with nephrotic
syndrome.

Oleggini R(1), Bertelli R, Di Donato A, Di Duca M, Caridi G, Sanna-Cherchi S,
Scolari F, Murer L, Allegri L, Coppo R, Emma F, Camussi G, Perfumo F, Ghiggeri
GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Nephrology and Health Sciences, University of
Parma, Italy.

Podocin (NPHS2) is a component of the glomerular slit-diaphragm, with major
regulatory functions in renal permeability of proteins. Loss of podocin and
decrease in resynthesis may influence the outcome of proteinuric renal disease
such as segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), and promoter functionality plays a
key role in this process. NPHS2 promoter variants with functional activity may be
a part of the problem of podocin resynthesis. We sequenced NPHS2 promoter region 
from -628 to ATG in a large cohort of 260 nephrotic patients (161 with FSGS) who 
were presenting proteinuria from moderate to severe and were receiving or had
received modular therapies according to their sensitivity to steroids and other
immune modulators. Three sequence variants (-236C>T, -52C>G, -26C>G) were
identified in our study population that gave an allele frequency below 1% (5
patients out of 520 alleles). Functional implications were shown for each
variants that were most evident for -52C>G and -26C>G (-50% of luciferase
expression compared to the wild-type sequence, p < 0.01). Consensus analysis for 
homology of the -52 region with regulatory factors revealed homology for USF1 and
the sum of experiments with gel retardation and with cells silenced for USF1
confirmed that this factor regulates NPHS2 expression at this site. In
conclusion, three functional variants in NPHS2 promoter have been identified in a
large cohort of patients with nephrotic syndrome and FSGS that have a frequency
<1%. One of these (i.e., -52C>G) is associated with a poor clinical outcome and
evolution to end-stage renal failure. USF1 was identified as the transcriptional 
factor regulating NPHS2 at this site. Even if not sufficient to cause FSGS per
se, these variants could represent modifiers for severity and/or progression of
the disease.

PMID: 16572591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2006 Apr;17(2):101-9.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia: upstream transcription factor 1 and beyond.

Lee JC(1), Lusis AJ, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics bDepartment of Medicine/Division of Cardiology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Familial combined hyperlipidemia is a common complex disease
that accounts for up to 20% of premature coronary heart disease. The upstream
transcription factor 1, located on 1q21, was recently shown to be linked and
associated with familial combined hyperlipidemia in Finnish families. Upstream
transcription factor 1 is the first gene identified by positional cloning for
familial combined hyperlipidemia. Replication studies are critical to
investigation of complex diseases because only they can verify the importance of 
the original findings. We review recent studies that examine the genetic
contribution and functional consequence of upstream transcription factor 1
variants to familial combined hyperlipidemia and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Aiming
beyond upstream transcription factor 1, we also evaluate novel strategies that
have made it possible to globally examine the genome and the transcriptome.
RECENT FINDINGS: Three independent studies support the role of upstream
transcription factor 1 in familial combined hyperlipidemia. The results for type 
2 diabetes mellitus and the metabolic syndrome have been less conclusive
highlight novel strategies for gene identification in familial combined
hyperlipidemia.
SUMMARY: Currently, genetic and functional evidence is supportive of a role for
upstream transcription factor 1 in the etiology of familial combined
hyperlipidemia and its component traits, although the mechanism of causality
still remains largely unknown.

PMID: 16531745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10849-55. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Human prolyl-4-hydroxylase alpha(I) transcription is mediated by upstream
stimulatory factors.

Chen L(1), Shen YH, Wang X, Wang J, Gan Y, Chen N, Wang J, LeMaire SA, Coselli
JS, Wang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Adult Cardiothoracic Service, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prolyl-4-hydroxylase alpha(I) (P4Halpha(I)) is the rate-limiting subunit for P4H 
enzyme activity, which is essential for procollagen hydroxylation and secretion. 
In the current study, we have characterized the human P4Halpha(I) promoter for
transcription factors and DNA elements regulating P4Halpha(I) expression. Using a
progressive deletion cloning approach, we have constructed pGL3-P4Halpha(I)
recombinant plasmids. We have identified a positive regulatory region at the
positions of bp -184 to -97 responsible for approximately 80% of the P4Halpha(I) 
promoter efficiency. Three E-boxes were located within this region, and the E-box
at position bp -135 explains most of the regulatory capacity. Upstream
stimulatory factors (USF1/USF2) were shown to bind on the E-box using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Suppression of USF1 and/or USF2 using specific short
interference RNA resulted in a significant reduction in P4Halpha(I) promoter
activity, and overexpressed USF1 or USF2 increased P4Halpha(I) promoter activity 
significantly. Although transforming growth factor beta1 increased the
USF1/USF2-E-box binding and P4Halpha(I) promoter activity, this up-regulatory
effect can be largely prevented by USF1/USF2-specific short interference RNA. On 
the other hand, cigarette smoking extracts, which have been shown to suppress
P4Halpha(I) expression, inhibited the binding between the USF1/USF2 and E-box,
resulting in a reduced P4Halpha(I) promoter activity. Furthermore, the E-box on
the P4Halpha(I) promoter appeared to indiscriminately bind with either USF1 or
USF2, with a similar outcome on the promoter efficiency. In conclusion, our study
shows that USF1/USF2 plays a critical role in basal P4Halpha(I) expression, and
both positive (transforming growth factor beta1) and negative (cigarette smoking 
extract) regulators appear to influence the USF-E-box interaction and affect
P4Halpha(I) expression.

PMCID: PMC2819823
PMID: 16488890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;12(2):608-16.

Transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Liu M(1), Ge Y, Payton SG, Aboukameel A, Buck S, Flatley RM, Haska C, Mohammad R,
Taub JW, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, 110
East Warren Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: The transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier
(hRFC), involved in cellular uptake of methotrexate and reduced folates, was
studied in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The hRFC gene is
regulated by six noncoding exons (A1/A2 and A to E) and multiple promoters. In
ALL, hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B are the major transcript forms.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNAs from 18 ALL lymphoblast specimens and 10 nonobese
diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient ALL xenografts were assayed by real-time
reverse transcription-PCR for hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B transcripts and for
transcripts encoding USF1, GATA1, Sp1, and Ikaros transcription factors. For the 
xenografts, gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays assessed
transcription factor binding to the hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoters. CpG
methylation density within a 334-bp region, including the core hRFC-B promoter,
was established by bisulfite sequencing. hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoter
polymorphisms were assayed by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: For the 28 ALLs, hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B transcripts spanned a 546-fold
range. By chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays, binding was
confirmed for USF1 and GATA1 for hRFC-A1/A2, and for Sp1, USF1, and Ikaros for
hRFC-B. hRFC transcript levels correlated with those for GATA1 and USF1 for
hRFC-A1/A2 and with Sp1 and USF1 transcripts for hRFC-B. CpG methylation in ALL
did not correlate with hRFC-B transcripts. In 40 ALL and 17 non-ALL specimens, 2 
cosegregating high-frequency polymorphisms (T-1309/C-1217 and C-1309/T-1217;
allelic frequencies of 36% and 64%, respectively) were detected in the A1/A2
promoter; none were detected in promoter B. The hRFC-A1/A2 polymorphisms only
slightly affected promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a complex regulation of hRFC in ALL involving the
hRFC-A1/A2 and hRFC-B promoters and noncoding exons. Although Sp1, USF1, and
GATA1 levels are critical determinants of hRFC transcription in ALL, neither DNA 
methylation nor promoter polymorphisms contribute to differences in hRFC
expression.

PMID: 16428507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Jan;22(1):62-7.

[USF as a key regulatory element of gene expression].

[Article in French]

Corre S(1), Galibert MD.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6061, Laboratoire de génétique et développement, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Rennes 1, France.

Upstream stimulating factors, USF-1 and -2, are members of the evolutionary
conserved basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Leucine Zipper transcription factor family. The 
ubiquitously expressed USF-1 and -2 proteins of respectively 43 kDa and 44 kDa
interact with high affinity to cognate E-box regulatory elements (CANNTG) which
are particularly represented over the genome. The USF transcription factors are
key regulatory elements of the transcriptional machinery mediating recruitment of
chromatin remodelling enzymes, interacting with co-activators and members of the 
pre-initiation complex (PIC). Furthermore, transcriptionnal activity and
DNA-binding of the USF proteins can be modulated by multiple ways including
phosphorylation by distinct kinases (p38, protein kinase A and C, cdk1 and
PI3Kinase), homo or heterodimerization formation and DNA modification of the
E-box binding motif (methylation, SNP). Taken together, these parameters render
very complex the understanding of the USF-dependent gene expression regulation.
USF transcription factors have thus been involved as key regulators of a wide
number of gene regulation network including stress and immune response, cell
cycle and proliferation. This review will thus focus on general aspect of the USF
transcription factors and their implications in some regulatory networks.

PMID: 16386222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2006 Feb 1;446(1):91-100. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 transactivates the human gene promoter of the
cardiac isoform of acetyl-CoA carboxylase.

Makaula S(1), Adam T, Essop MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hatter Heart Research Institute, University of Cape Town Faculty of Health
Sciences, Observatory 7925, South Africa.

E-box cis-elements act as binding sites for upstream stimulatory factors (USFs), 
putative glucose-responsive transcriptional modulators. Since four E-boxes were
identified on the human ACCbeta promoter, we hypothesized that USF1 induces
ACCbeta expression in a glucose-dependent manner. Here, murine cardiac ACCbeta
expression was significantly increased in response to high carbohydrate
re-feeding after fasting. However, transfection studies showed no difference in
ACCbeta promoter activity in neonatal cardiomyocytes and CV-1 fibroblasts after
low (5.5mM) and high (25 mM) glucose exposure. USF1 overexpression significantly 
increased ACCbeta promoter activity in both cell lines under low glucose
conditions. With high glucose exposure, USF1 further induced ACCbeta promoter
activity only in CV-1 fibroblasts. USF1-induced ACCbeta promoter responsiveness
was markedly attenuated when co-transfecting cardiomyocytes with a -93/+65 or
-38/+65 promoter deletion construct (lacking E-boxes 1-3). Thus, USF1
transactivates the human ACCbeta promoter in the heart, likely through an E-box
cis-element located close to the transcription start site.

PMID: 16376850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi. 2005 Nov;60(4):426-41.

[Hyperlipidemia: complex pathophysiology caused by multiple genetic and
environmental factors--in considering the approaches to preventive medicine].

[Article in Japanese]

Nobukuni Y(1), Higashikawa F, Miyagawa K, Eboshida A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan. nobukuni@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

In Japan, over the last 40 years, the change in lifestyle, particularly the
westernization of the diet, has led to increased frequency of "lifestyle-related 
disorders" such as, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, and atherosclerosis.
Consequently, the morbidity and mortality due to coronary heart disease have
increased, and the prevention of this disorder is now one of the major concerns
when considering the quality of life of individuals and the public health policy.
Hyperlipidemia, particularly hypercholesterolemia, is one of the major risk
factors of atherosclerosis. Therefore, the clarification of the mechanisms of the
development of hyperlipidemia is important in the consideration of the prevention
and management of atherosclerotic disorders. Genetic and epidemiological studies 
have provided compelling evidence that genetic factors, environmental influences 
and the interaction between them all contribute to the development of this
complex disorder. Various unexpected mechanisms of the development of
hyperlipidemia have been elucidated by analyzing some hereditary disorders.
Furthermore, the cloning of the genes involved in the maintenance of cholesterol 
and/or lipid homeostasis has made it possible to investigate the molecular
mechanisms of the development of hyperlipidemia in detail. Elucidation of the
genetic and environmental factors and detailed understanding of the molecular
pathophysiology of hyperlipidemia are essential in the pursuit of evidence-based 
preventive medicine and health policy.

PMID: 16370352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):209-14. Epub 2005 Oct 26.

Involvement of upstream stimulatory factor in regulation of the mouse Prnd gene
coding for Doppel protein.

Sepelakova J(1), Takacova M, Pastorekova S, Kopacek J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Dúbravská cesta 9, Bratislava 845 05, Slovakia.

Promoter of the Prnd gene coding for the Prion-like protein Doppel contains two
critical cis-regulatory elements, NF-Y consensus motif and canonical E-box. Here,
we studied a role of the upstream stimulatory factor (USF) in the E-box-mediated 
activation of Prnd transcription. Co-expression of USF-1 with the luciferase
reporter gene driven by the -185/+27 Prnd promoter fragment resulted in several
fold increase of the luciferase activity. Conversely, mutations within the E-box 
led to a significantly reduced Prnd promoter activation. USF-1 binding was
supported by the gel shift assay, supershift with USF-1 antibody and UV
cross-linking. The activation capacity of the related USF-2, c-Myc and HIF-2alpha
proteins was lower compared to USF-1 suggesting that USF-1 is the major
E-box-binding transcription factor regulating the Prnd promoter.

PMID: 16297464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Apr 1;97(5):1017-24.

Binding and functional characteristics of two E-box motifs within the S100A6
(calcyclin) gene promoter.

Lesniak W(1), Kuznicki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.
w.lesniak@nencki.gov.pl

S100A6 (calcyclin) is a small calcium-binding protein of the S100 family often
associated with cancer and metastasis. We have previously shown that the E-box
sequence at position -283/-278 of the S100A6 gene promoter interacts with USF
transcription factor and contributes to promoter transcriptional activity. We now
present evidence that a second E-box motif at position -593/-588 of the promoter 
also binds USF and that the USF1/USF2 heterodimer is the prevailing dimeric form 
of the transcription factor bound. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay 
(ChIP), we show that USF is bound in vivo to the E-box regulatory element(s).
Depletion of the endogenous USF pool by means of a decoy oligonucleotide evokes a
severe inhibition of S100A6 gene promoter activity. Furthermore, we show that
S100A6 gene promoter activity can be stimulated by palmitate and that mutation of
the -283/-278 E-box sequence completely blocks this stimulation.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16288473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Nov 10;1731(2):115-24. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Transcriptional regulation of the human reduced folate carrier A1/A2 promoter:
Identification of critical roles for the USF and GATA families of transcription
factors.

Payton SG(1), Liu M, Ge Y, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, and Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The human reduced folate carrier (hRFC) gene has a complex regulation involving 6
alternatively spliced non-coding exons and promoters (A1/A2, A, B, C, D, and E). 
The hRFC-A1/A2 promoter is unique in that it transcribes a novel transcript with 
an in-frame AUG in non-coding exon A1/A2 that encodes a modified hRFC protein
with altered transport function. In this report, we characterize the hRFC-A1/A2
promoter in HepG2 human hepatoma cells. By transfecting HepG2 cells with 5' and
3' deletion constructs, a transcriptionally important 270 bp region was
identified. Gel shift assays identified transcription factor binding to three
E-box elements and one GATA site within this region. These elements were verified
by transfections of mutant constructs into HepG2 cells. Cotransfections in
Drosophila Mel-2 cells confirmed promoter activation by USF1 and GATA1. A
physical association between USF1 and GATA1 was demonstrated by their
co-immunoprecipitation. By real time PCR analysis of transfected HepG2 cells,
USF1 and GATA1 increased endogenous hRFC-A1/A2 transcripts. Altogether, our
results demonstrate a transcriptionally important region in the hRFC-A1/A2
promoter including E-box and GATA elements, and a transactivation by USF1 and
GATA1 proteins. Our results further establish the complexity of hRFC regulation, 
as a means of ensuring adequate folate cofactor transport for cell proliferation.

PMID: 16225938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 15;14(22):3435-47. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Binding sites for metabolic disease related transcription factors inferred at
base pair resolution by chromatin immunoprecipitation and genomic microarrays.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Wallerman O, Koch C, Ameur A, Enroth S, Clelland G, Wester K,
Wilcox S, Dovey OM, Ellis PD, Wraight VL, James K, Andrews R, Langford C, Dhami
P, Carter N, Vetrie D, Pontén F, Komorowski J, Dunham I, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Sweden.

We present a detailed in vivo characterization of hepatocyte transcriptional
regulation in HepG2 cells, using chromatin immunoprecipitation and detection on
PCR fragment-based genomic tiling path arrays covering the encyclopedia of DNA
element (ENCODE) regions. Our data suggest that HNF-4alpha and HNF-3beta, which
were commonly bound to distal regulatory elements, may cooperate in the
regulation of a large fraction of the liver transcriptome and that both
HNF-4alpha and USF1 may promote H3 acetylation to many of their targets.
Importantly, bioinformatic analysis of the sequences bound by each transcription 
factor (TF) shows an over-representation of motifs highly similar to the in vitro
established consensus sequences. On the basis of these data, we have inferred
tentative binding sites at base pair resolution. Some of these sites have been
previously found by in vitro analysis and some were verified in vitro in this
study. Our data suggests that a similar approach could be used for the in vivo
characterization of all predicted/uncharacterized TF and that the analysis could 
be scaled to the whole genome.

PMID: 16221759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8824-33.

O2 enhancement of human trophoblast differentiation and hCYP19 (aromatase) gene
expression are mediated by proteasomal degradation of USF1 and USF2.

Jiang B(1), Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, 75390, USA.

When cultured in 20% O(2), human cytotrophoblasts fuse to form the
syncytiotrophoblast with marked induction of hCYP19 (aromatase) gene expression. 
When cultured in 2% O(2), cytotrophoblast fusion and induced hCYP19 expression
are prevented. These effects of hypoxia are mediated by increased expression of
mammalian achaete/scute homologue-2 (Mash-2), which increases levels of upstream 
stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1/2) and their binding as heterodimers to E-boxes
surrounding the hCYP19 promoter. In studies to define mechanisms for O(2)
regulation of syncytiotrophoblast differentiation, we found that hypoxia and
overexpression of Mash-2 markedly increased cyclin B1 levels in cultured
trophoblasts and the proportion of cells at the G(2)/M transition. Unlike USF
proteins, USF1/2 mRNA levels are unaffected by O(2) tension. To determine whether
increased O(2) might enhance proteasomal degradation of USF1/2, human
trophoblasts were cultured in 2% or 20% O(2) with or without proteasome
inhibitors. In cells cultured in 20% O(2), proteasome inhibitors increased USF1/2
protein levels and blocked spontaneous induction of hCYP19 expression, cell
fusion, and differentiation. Like hypoxia, inhibitory effects of proteasome
inhibitors on hCYP19 expression were mediated by increased binding of USF1/2 to
the E-boxes. In human trophoblast cells cultured in 20% O(2), increased
polyubiquitylation of USF1/2 proteins was observed. Thus, early in gestation when
the placenta is relatively hypoxic, increased USF1/2 may block trophoblast
differentiation and hCYP19 gene expression. In the second trimester, increased
O(2) tension promotes proteasomal degradation of USF1/2, resulting in
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of hCYP19 expression.

PMCID: PMC1265767
PMID: 16199862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Neuropeptides. 2005 Oct;39(5):475-83. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

A proximal E-box modulates NGF effects on rat PPT-A promoter activity in cultured
dorsal root ganglia neurones.

Gerrard L(1), Howard M, Paterson T, Thippeswamy T, Quinn JP, Haddley K.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, Roslin, Midlothian EH25 9PS, UK.

Erratum in
    Neuropeptides. 2006 Jun;40(3):231.

The rat preprotachykinin A (rtPPTA) promoter fragment spanning -865+92, relative 
to the major transcriptional start, has previously been demonstrated to be nerve 
growth factor (NGF) responsive in primary cultures of rat dorsal root ganglion
(DRG) neurones [Harrison, P.T., Dalziel, R.G., Ditchfield, N.A., Quinn, J.P.,
1999. Neuronal-specific and nerve growth factor-inducible expression directed by 
the preprotachykinin-A promoter delivered by an adeno-associated virus vector.
Neuroscience 94, 997-1003]. In this communication, we demonstrate that an E box
element at -60, in part, regulates the activity of this rtPPT-A promoter fragment
in DRG neurones in response to NGF. Differential regulation of the promoter is
observed in the presence or absence of NGF when the E Box site is present. Under 
basal conditions binding of proteins to this -60 element may antagonise promoter 
activity. Hence, in the absence of NGF, mutation of the -60 E box increased
reporter gene expression. Further, comparison of levels of reporter gene
expression supported by both WT and mutated promoter indicate that in the
presence of NGF the -60 E box element also plays a role as an activator domain.
This represents a novel mechanism for NGF regulation of rtPPT-A. Similarly, an
important role for this signalling pathway was observed in neonate rat DRG
neuronal cultures, which require NGF for their survival, namely mutation of the
-60 element resulted in higher levels of reporter gene expression.

PMID: 16198417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Oct 15;39(8):1030-40.

Identification of an E-box motif as a transcriptional repressor element in the
proximal promoter region of the GCLC gene in rat lung epithelial L2 cells.

Cheng LL(1), Li B, Luo JD, Tu HB, Liu QC, Ran P.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, People's Republic of China.

Glutathione (GSH) is a critical antioxidant for protecting the airway epithelium 
from oxidant injury and its levels are mainly controlled by glutamate-cysteine
ligase (GCL), which is the rate-limiting enzyme in GSH synthesis. A full
understanding of the gene regulation mechanism of this important enzyme may
disclose the role it plays in respiratory diseases. GCL is made up of two
differentially regulated subunits, a catalytic or heavy subunit (GCLC) and a
modifier or light subunit (GCLM). Many studies in this field led to the findings 
of important positive regulatory regions of the GCLC promoter. For a detailed
analysis of this gene regulation in the respiratory system, we cloned a 1.76-kb
5'-flanking region of the rat GCLC gene, inserted into a luciferase reporter
vector. Exonuclease III was used to cut the 5'-flanking region of the rat GCLC
gene unidirectionally into deletion mutants of different lengths. Sequential
deletion analysis revealed that regions from -403 to -111 and from -705 to -613
are involved in positive regulation and the region from -745 to -705 is involved 
in negative regulation of the GCL gene in rat lung epithelial L2 cells. Specific 
proteins binding to these regions were confirmed by electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) and antibody supershift assays. An E-box motif was 
found in the negative regulatory region -745 to -705. Site-directed mutagenesis
proved that the functional element in this negative regulatory region was a
putative E-box element. EMSA and supershift assays showed that USF1 and USF2 can 
specifically bind to the E-box element. Overexpression of USFs in L2 cells led to
a decreased activity of the GCLC promoter. Western blotting demonstrated that the
expression of GCLC protein was decreased in the retroviral USFs-expressing cells 
than in nontransfected (no DNA added) cells, suggesting that USF binding to the
E-box at -729/-724 serves to trans-repress GCLC gene expression. These findings
indicate that the E-box is an important transcriptional suppressor element in the
GCLC promoter in rat lung epithelial L2 cells. Inhibition of interaction between 
the E-box and the USF may provide an effective means of ameliorating oxidant
injury of the lung.

PMID: 16198230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Diabetes. 2005 Oct;54(10):3040-2.

Common polymorphisms in the USF1 gene are not associated with type 2 diabetes in 
French Caucasians.

Gibson F(1), Hercberg S, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.
fernando.gibson@imperial.ac.uk

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) is a ubiquitously expressed transcription 
factor of the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper family that has been shown to
regulate the expression of a raft of key genes involved in glucose and lipid
metabolism. The USF1 gene is located at chromosome 1q22-q23, within the most
consistently replicated type 2 diabetes susceptibility locus in the human genome.
In this study, we have examined the contribution of eight common USF1 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to type 2 diabetes susceptibility in the French
Caucasian population. None of the USF1 SNPs genotyped, including two SNPs
previously associated with familial combined hyperlipidemia (rs2073658 and
rs3737787), showed evidence of association with type 2 diabetes. In addition,
USF1 SNPs were not associated with plasma levels of glucose, triglycerides, total
cholesterol, or apolipoproteins A1 or B in normoglycemic subjects. A total of
four common USF1 haplotypes were identified, accounting for >99% of chromosomes. 
There was no significant difference in the USF1 haplotype distribution of the
case and control subjects. In conclusion, we report here that we were unable to
find any evidence to support the hypothesis that genetic variation in the USF1
gene makes a significant contribution to type 2 diabetes susceptibility in the
French Caucasian population.

PMID: 16186412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Pigment Cell Res. 2005 Oct;18(5):337-48.

Upstream stimulating factors: highly versatile stress-responsive transcription
factors.

Corre S(1), Galibert MD.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6061 Laboratoire de Génétique et Développement, Faculté de Médecine, 
Université de Rennes-1, Rennes Cedex, France.

Upstream stimulating factors (USF), USF-1 and USF-2, are members of the
eucaryotic evolutionary conserved basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Leucine Zipper
transcription factor family. They interact with high affinity to cognate E-box
regulatory elements (CANNTG), which are largely represented across the whole
genome in eucaryotes. The ubiquitously expressed USF-transcription factors
participate in distinct transcriptional processes, mediating recruitment of
chromatin remodelling enzymes and interacting with co-activators and members of
the transcription pre-initiation complex. Results obtained from both cell lines
and knock-out mice indicates that USF factors are key regulators of a wide number
of gene regulation networks, including the stress and immune responses, cell
cycle and proliferation, lipid and glucid metabolism, and in melanocytes USF-1
has been implicated as a key UV-activated regulator of genes associated with
pigmentation. This review will focus on general characteristics of the
USF-transcription factors and their place in some regulatory networks.

PMID: 16162174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Diabetologia. 2005 Oct;48(10):2018-24. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

The linkage and association of the gene encoding upstream stimulatory factor 1
with type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome in the Chinese population.

Ng MC(1), Miyake K, So WY, Poon EW, Lam VK, Li JK, Cox NJ, Bell GI, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. maggieng@uchicago.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)
regulates the expression of genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism and
has been associated with familial combined hyperlipidaemia. USF1 is located on
chromosome 1q22-23, a region with evidence for linkage to type 2 diabetes and
various traits of the metabolic syndrome in Chinese and other populations. The
aim of this study was to investigate the linkage and association of USF1 with
type 2 diabetes and the metabolic syndrome in Chinese individuals.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We genotyped three haplotype-tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3737787, rs2516841 and rs2516839) at USF1 in three
samples of the Hong Kong Chinese population, including members of 179 families
from the Hong Kong Family Diabetes Study, 1,383 hospital cases with type 2
diabetes and/or the metabolic syndrome and 454 normal control subjects.
RESULTS: We found significant association of individual polymorphisms and
haplotypes with type 2 diabetes and/or metabolic syndrome-related traits in the
family samples using either family-based or unrelated normal control subjects.
However, these variants could not explain much of the evidence for linkage in
this region. Moreover, they were not associated with type 2 diabetes and/or the
metabolic syndrome in the hospital cases.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The results are consistent with the hypothesis that
variation at USF1 contributes to the risk of type 2 diabetes and the metabolic
syndrome in families with strong evidence for linkage in the chromosome 1q
region. However, they provide little support for USF1 as the susceptibility locus
that generates the observed evidence for linkage at 1q21-25 for type 2 diabetes
and/or the metabolic syndrome, and USF1 does not appear to have a major
contribution to these phenotypes in the general Chinese population.

PMID: 16132950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Sep 1;14(17):2595-605. Epub 2005 Aug 2.

USF1 and dyslipidemias: converging evidence for a functional intronic variant.

Naukkarinen J(1), Gentile M, Soro-Paavonen A, Saarela J, Koistinen HA, Pajukanta 
P, Taskinen MR, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Finland.

Upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1), the first gene associated with familial
combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL), regulates numerous genes of glucose and lipid
metabolism. Phenotypic overlap between FCHL, type 2 diabetes and the metabolic
syndrome makes this gene an intriguing candidate in the disease process of these 
traits as well. As no disease-associated mutations in the coding region of USF1
have been identified, we addressed the functional role of intronic single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which define the FCHL-risk alleles of USF1, and
identified that a 20 bp DNA sequence, containing the critical intronic SNP, binds
nuclear protein(s), representing a likely transcriptional regulatory element.
This functional role is further supported by the differential expression of
USF1-regulated genes in fat biopsy between individuals carrying different allelic
variants of USF1. Importantly, apolipoprotein E (APOE) is the most downregulated 
gene in the risk individuals, linking the potential risk alleles of USF1 with the
impaired APOE-dependent catabolism of atherogenic lipoprotein particles.

PMID: 16076849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Clin Pract Suppl. 2004 Oct;(143):3-8.

Searching for genes in diabetes and the metabolic syndrome.

Hitman GA(1), Sudagani J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Institute of Cell and Molecular
Science, Barts and the London Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
London, UK. G.A.Hitman@qmul.ac.uk

Evidence for a genetic basis for type 2 diabetes and the metabolic syndrome has
been derived from studies of families, twins and populations with genetic
admixture. Identification of genes associated with disease pathogenesis is now
underway using techniques such as genome scanning by positional cloning and the
candidate gene approach. Genome scanning in several different ethnic groups has
identified chromosome regions harbouring type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes
such as the novel gene, calpain 10 (CAPN10). The hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) gene partly explains the linkage peak on chromosome 20, while the
upstream transcription factor (USF1) is associated with familial combined
hyperlipidaemia (FCHL) and maps close to the type 2 diabetes associated 1q peak. 
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) was identified as a 
candidate gene based on its biology. A Pro12Ala variant of this gene has been
associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Many genes accounting for
monogenic forms of diabetes have been identified--such as maturity onset diabetes
of the young (MODY); glucokinase (GCK) and HNF1alpha mutations being the most
common causes of MODY. GCK variants result in 'mild' diabetes or impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT) and relatively few cardiovascular complications, while
HNF1alpha-associated MODY is more typical of type 2 diabetes, frequently being
treated with sulphonylureas or insulin and resulting in microvascular
complications. Testing for single gene disorders associated with type 2 diabetes 
and obesity may determine cause, prognosis and appropriate treatment; however,
for the more common polygenic diseases this is not the case. In type 2 diabetes, 
molecular genetics has the potential to enhance understanding of disease
pathogenesis, and help formulate preventative and treatment strategies.

PMID: 16035391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Nov;44(3):183-92.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) as a transcriptional suppressor of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) in oral cancer cells.

Chang JT(1), Yang HT, Wang TC, Cheng AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

Telomerase activity is suppressed in normal human somatic tissues but is
activated in cancer cells and immortal cell lines. The reverse transcriptase (RT)
subunit human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is the key regulator of
telomerase activity. The hTERT promoter contains E-box elements and may allow
upstream stimulatory factor (USF), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) leucine zipper
family proteins, to bind and regulate the expression. In this study, we
investigated whether and how USF effect on hTERT. Through luciferase reporter
assays, we found that both USF1 and USF2 possess a comparable effect on the
inhibition of hTERT expression. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and immunoblotting (IB) 
analysis reveal that the suppression of hTERT by USF was not through the
interaction of USF with c-myc or mad, nor disturbed the cellular protein levels
of those. In gel mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assays, 
we found that the USF suppression is through direct binding at the E-box site of 
hTERT promoter and rendering the effect actively. Analysis on clinical normal and
tumor tissues reveal that the expression of USF1 and USF2 was lower in the tumor 
tissues, correlated with hTERT expression and telomerase activity. Taking
together, our results demonstrate that USF is a negative transcriptional
repressor for hTERT in oral cancer cells. It is possible that USF lose the
inhibitory effect on hTERT expression leading to telomerase reactivation and oral
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 16010690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Sep;90(9):5356-60. Epub 2005 Jun 28.

Upstream transcription factor-1 gene polymorphism is associated with increased
adipocyte lipolysis.

Hoffstedt J(1), Rydén M, Wahrenberg H, van Harmelen V, Arner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, SE-141 86
Stockholm, Sweden. johan.hoffstedt@medhs.ki.se

OBJECTIVE: Variations in lipid metabolism between individuals could be due to
genetic factors. A transmission of a haplotype of the upstream transcription
factor-1 (USF-1) gene containing the minor alleles at the usf1s1 and usfs2 loci
is described. We investigated whether these polymorphisms are associated with
adipocyte lipolysis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A total of 196 healthy obese women were investigated for in 
vitro lipolysis regulation in sc fat cells, which was set in relation to the
usf1s1 C-->T and usf1s2 G-->A polymorphisms in the usf1 gene. The two
polymorphisms were in complete linkage disequilibrium. The usf1s1/2 T/A allele
was associated with increases in the maximum lipolytic action of noradrenaline (P
= 0.005), dobutamine (P = 0.008), terbutaline (P = 0.008), CGP12177 (P = 0.015), 
and forskolin (P = 0.006). In contrast, no significant genotype effect on
lipolytic sensitivity (i.e. half-maximum effective concentration) for any of the 
drugs was demonstrated. Analysis of adipose tissue mRNA expression in 78 women
from genes regulating lipolysis at the postadrenoceptor level showed an increased
level of protein kinase A subunit R1alpha in the T/A genotype (P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphism in the usf1 gene is associated with increased lipolytic
effect of catecholamines in fat cells, which is localized at the postadrenoceptor
level, possibly, at least, involving protein kinase A.

PMID: 15985485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diabetes. 2005 Jul;54(7):1976-84.

Role of upstream stimulatory factors in regulation of renal transforming growth
factor-beta1.

Zhu Y(1), Casado M, Vaulont S, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Dorrance Hamilton Research
Laboratories, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

We previously identified an E-box to be implicated in high-glucose-induced
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) gene stimulation in murine mesangial
cells. In the present study, we evaluated the role of upstream stimulatory
factors (USFs) in mediating glucose-induced stimulation of TGF-beta1. Mesangial
cells cultured in glucose concentrations exceeding 2.7 mmol/l D-glucose exhibited
increased levels of USF1 and USF2 protein by Western analysis and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA). An E-box element from the murine TGF-beta1 promoter 
revealed USF1 and USF2 binding by EMSA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
revealed in vivo binding of USF1 to a glucose-responsive region of the TGF-beta1 
promoter. Transient cotransfection studies of 293 cells with USF1 led to a
twofold increase in TGF-beta1 promoter activity and a 46% increase in secreted
TGF-beta1 protein levels. Wild-type and USF2 knockout mice exhibited a 2.5-fold
stimulation of renal TGF-beta1 expression upon fasting and refeeding with a
carbohydrate-rich diet, whereas USF1 knockout mice exhibited only a minimal
increase of renal TGF-beta1 upon refeeding. USF1 mRNA levels were increased in
mouse kidneys with carbohydrate refeeding, and USF1 protein was increased in
diabetic rat kidneys compared with controls. We conclude that USF1 is stimulated 
by modest increases in glucose concentration in murine mesangial cells, bind to
the murine TGF-beta1 promoter, contribute to carbohydrate-induced renal TGF-beta1
expression, and may play a role in diabetes-related gene regulation in the
kidney.

PMID: 15983197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Sep;25(9):1985-91. Epub 2005 Jun 23.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia in Mexicans: association with upstream
transcription factor 1 and linkage on chromosome 16q24.1.

Huertas-Vazquez A(1), Aguilar-Salinas C, Lusis AJ, Cantor RM, Canizales-Quinteros
S, Lee JC, Mariana-Nuñez L, Riba-Ramirez RM, Jokiaho A, Tusie-Luna T, Pajukanta
P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular y Medicina Genómica del Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
UNAM, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición, Salvador Zubirán,
Mexico City, Mexico.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the largely unknown genetic component of the common
lipid disorder, familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) in Mexicans, we analyzed 
the upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) gene that was recently associated with
FCHL and high triglycerides (TG) in Finns. We also analyzed the Mexican FCHL
families for 26 microsatellite markers residing in the seven chromosomal regions 
on 2p25.1, 9p23, 10q11.23, 11q13, 16q24.1, 19q13, and 21q21, previously linked to
FCHL in whites.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We genotyped 314 individuals in 24 Mexican families for 13
SNPs spanning an 88-kb region, including USF1. The FCHL and TG traits showed
significant evidence for association with 3 SNPs, hCV1459766, rs3737787, and
rs2073658, and haplotype analyses further supported these findings (probability
values of 0.05 to 0.0009 for SNPs and their haplotypes). Of these SNPs,
hCV1459766 is located in the F11 receptor (F11R) gene, located next to USF1,
making it difficult to exclude. Importantly, the association was restricted to a 
considerably smaller region than in the Finns (14 kb versus 46 kb), possibly
because of a different underlying linkage disequilibrium structure. In addition, 
1 of the 7 regions, 16q24.1, showed suggestive evidence for linkage (a lod score 
of 2.6) for total cholesterol in Mexicans.
CONCLUSIONS: This study, the first to extensively investigate the genetic
component of the common FCHL disorder in Mexicans, provides independent evidence 
for the role of USF1 in FCHL in an outbred population and links the 16q24.1
region to an FCHL-component trait in Mexicans.

PMID: 15976322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;117(5):444-51. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 associated with familial combined hyperlipidemia,
LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides.

Coon H(1), Xin Y, Hopkins PN, Cawthon RM, Hasstedt SJ, Hunt SC.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodevelopmental Genetics Project, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. hilary@bach.med.utah.edu

Positive evidence has been reported for linkage and association between the
upstream stimulatory factor 1 gene (USF1) and familial combined hyperlipidemia
(FCHL). We genotyped the two most positive single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
(usf1s1: rs3737787 and usf1s2: rs2073658) from previous studies in a large family
sample. This sample included 2,195 subjects in 87 Utah pedigrees ascertained for 
early death due to coronary heart disease (CHD), early strokes, or early onset
hypertension. There were a total of 262 relative pairs in these families with
FCHL. In the full family sample, FCHL was associated with usf1s1 (P = 0.02).
Triglyceride and LDL cholesterol defined qualitatively or quantitatively were
also associated with usf1s1 (P = 0.02-0.05). Results were strengthened for
qualitative and quantitative triglyceride and LDL cholesterol when data from
males only was analyzed, revealing associations for usf1s1 (P = 0.001-0.02),
usf1s2 (P = 0.02-0.05) and the haplotype of these two SNPs (P = 0.01-0.04). The
strongest results were in the subset of subjects from families ascertained for
premature stroke or hypertension, rather than those ascertained for premature
CHD. This study replicates the involvement of USF1 in FCHL and related lipid
traits in a family sample not ascertained for FCHL.

PMID: 15959806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Mar 2;85(8):560-3.

[Experimental study of E-box, a transcriptional suppressor element in gamma-GCS
gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng LL(1), Li B, Tu HB, Liu QC, Ran PX.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou 510182, China.

OBJECTIVE: To validate that the E-box element in the -745-705 region of rat
gamma-GCS catalytic subunit gene (GCLC gene), already found to be a negative
regulatory region, is an important transcriptional suppressor element.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and antibody supershift
assay were used to confirm the specific binding of USF, a transcription factor
that binds the regulatory sequence -745 - 705, and E-box element. Rat alveolar
epidermal cells of the line CCL-149 were cultured and then divided into 4 groups:
group 1 to be transfected with GCLC-Luc, group 2 to be co-transfected with
pGCLC-Luc and pCMV-USF1, group 3 to be co-transfected with pGCLC-Luc and
pCMV-USF2, and group 4 to be co-transfected with pGCLC-Luc and blank vector pCMV.
Recombinant retrovirus vector PLXSN-USF1 and recombinant retrovirus vector
PLXSN-USF2 were constructed. Another CCL-149 cells were divided into 4 groups:
group A to be infected with recombinant USF1 virus, group B to be infected with
recombinant USF2 virus, group C to be infected with blank vector, and group D not
to be infected with any plasmid. Western blotting was used to detect the
concentrations of GCLC protein.
RESULTS: EMSA showed that only the probes with complete E-box element could be
bound by the USFs. Supershift assay showed that the transcription factor binding 
the probe was USF. The luciferase activity of the CCL-149 cells co-transfected
with pCMV-USF1/USF2 and GCLC-Luc were decreased by 66.4% and 63.2% respectively
in comparison with those transfected with GCLC-Luc only (both P < 0.05) and
decreased by 54.5% and 61.1% respectively in comparison with those of the cells
of the blank vector group (both P < 0.05). Western blotting showed that the
expression of GCLC protein of the CCL-149 cells transfected with PLXSN-USF1 and
PLXSN-USF2 were decreased in comparison with that of the control cells.
CONCLUSION: The interaction between E-box and USF suppresses the expression of
GCLC gene. E-box is an important transcriptional suppressor element of gamma-GCS 
gene.

PMID: 15949339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):28885-93. Epub 2005 May 31.

Role of upstream stimulatory factor phosphorylation in the regulation of the
prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 promoter in granulosa cells.

Sayasith K(1), Lussier JG, Sirois J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale and the Département de Biomédecine
Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.

To investigate the role of USF phosphorylation in the regulation of the PGHS-2
promoter in granulosa cells, promoter activity assays were performed in primary
cultures of bovine granulosa cells transfected with the chimeric PGHS-2
promoter/luciferase (LUC) construct -149/-2PGHS-2.LUC. Transfections were done in
the absence or presence of forskolin; the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H-89; 
or an expression vector encoding USF1, USF2, the catalytic subunit of PKA (cPKA),
or a PKA inhibitor protein (PKI). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were
performed to study USF/DNA interactions using granulosa cell nuclear extracts and
a 32P-labeled proximal PGHS-2 promoter fragment containing the E-box element. The
results show that forskolin stimulation and cPKA overexpression caused a marked
and significant increase in USF-dependent DNA binding and PGHS-2 promoter
activities (p < 0.05). In contrast, both activities were decreased by H-89
treatment or PKI overexpression. Reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed that
these treatments had similar effects on endogenous PGHS-2 mRNA levels in
granulosa cells. Cotransfection studies with a USF2 mutant lacking N-terminal
activation domains (U2Delta1-220) repressed forskolin-, cPKA-, and USF-dependent 
PGHS-2 promoter activities. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that
U2Delta1-220 was able to compete with full-length USF proteins and to saturate
the E-box element. Immunoprecipitation/Western blot analyses revealed an increase
in the levels of phosphorylated USF1 and USF2 after forskolin treatment, whereas 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that binding of USF proteins to the
endogenous PGHS-2 promoter was stimulated by forskolin. Site-directed mutagenesis
of a consensus PKA phosphorylation site within USF proteins abolished their
transactivating capacity. Collectively, these results characterize the role of
USF phosphorylation in PGHS-2 expression and identify the
phosphorylation-dependent increase in USF binding to the E-box as a putative
molecular basis for the increase in PGHS-2 promoter transactivation in granulosa 
cells.

PMID: 15927963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 May 15;1744(1):29-37. Epub 2004 Nov 26.

Calcyclin (S100A6) expression is stimulated by agents evoking oxidative stress
via the antioxidant response element.

Lesniak W(1), Szczepanska A, Kuznicki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.
w.lesniak@nencki.gov.pl

Calcyclin (S100A6) is a cell-specific, calcium binding protein of the S100 family
whose expression is augmented in many types of cancer. By means of luciferase
activity assays, RT-PCR and Northern blot hybridization, we established that
transcription of S100A6 gene is increased by agents known to evoke oxidative
stress. Mutation of the antioxidant response element (ARE) located at position
-290/-281 of the calcyclin gene promoter, and overlapping the E-box sequence
recognized by the upstream stimulatory factor (USF), led to inhibition of
calcyclin gene promoter activity stimulated by cadmium ions. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) with the -302/-260 calcyclin gene promoter fragment 
revealed, apart from USF binding, the presence of another protein complex (N)
shown by competitive EMSA to be bound to ARE. DNA affinity chromatography
followed by Western blot showed the binding of Nrf2 transcription factor to the
immobilized calcyclin gene promoter fragment and concomitant appearance of
complex N in EMSA of the eluted fractions. The results indicate that agents
evoking oxidative stress activate calcyclin gene via the ARE sequence in its
promoter.

PMID: 15878395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biomed Sci. 2005;12(1):65-77.

Down-regulation of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor in non-small cell lung
carcinoma: correlation with dysregulated expression of the transcription factors 
USF and AP2.

Khattar NH(1), Lele SM, Kaetzel CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) mediates transport of IgA and IgM
antibodies across mucosal and glandular epithelia. Several studies have utilized 
immunohistochemistry to demonstrate that PIGR expression varies in different
types of lung carcinoma, and is down-regulated during tumor progression. We have 
previously shown in cultured tumor cell-lines that basal transcription of the
PIGR gene is regulated by the transcription factors USF1, USF2 and AP2. To
examine the mechanism by which PIGR expression is down-regulated in lung
carcinoma, RNA was microdissected from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung
carcinomas (14 adenocarcinomas and 8 squamous cell carcinomas). Levels of PIGR,
USF1, USF2 and AP2-alpha mRNA were quantified by real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and normalized to mRNA for the
housekeeping gene GAPDH. PIGR mRNA levels were decreased in adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas relative to adjacent non-tumor tissue, and were
inversely correlated with stage of differentiation. USF1 and USF2 mRNA levels
were reduced in adenocarcinomas relative to non-tumor tissue, while AP2-alpha
levels were elevated. Multivariate regression analysis demonstrated that reduced 
USF2 mRNA and increased AP2-alpha mRNA levels were predictive of down-regulated
PIGR mRNA expression in the majority of adenocarcinomas and in moderately
differentiated squamous cell carcinomas.

PMID: 15864740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Pathol. 2005 Jun;206(2):151-9.

Roles for USF-2 in lung cancer proliferation and bronchial carcinogenesis.

Ocejo-Garcia M(1), Baokbah TA, Ashurst HL, Cowlishaw D, Soomro I, Coulson JM,
Woll PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Department of Clinical Oncology, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK.

The upstream stimulatory factors USF-1 and USF-2 dimerize to regulate
transcription through E-box motifs in target genes. Although widely expressed,
they can mediate tissue-specific transcription and we previously reported that
USF-2 can enhance transcription of arginine vasopressin, a neuropeptide growth
factor in small cell lung cancer. Here we determine the expression and role of
USF-2 in lung cancer subtypes and examine USF-2 distribution in the bronchial
epithelium. For a panel of 12 cell lines and 10 frozen human tumour samples,
immunoblotting demonstrated that USF-2 expression was more frequent and abundant 
in small cell lung cancer than in non-small cell lung cancer. An
immunohistochemical study of 108 formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded human
samples was undertaken to localize USF-2 expression and included 44 small cell
and 32 non-small cell lung cancers, and 32 samples with bronchial dysplasia.
USF-2 was restricted to ciliated cells in normal bronchial epithelium, but was
more strongly expressed in dysplastic epithelium (72%) and certain lung cancer
types, including small cell lung cancer (71%), squamous cell carcinoma (69%) and 
a large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, but was less common in adenocarcinoma
(11%). In a small series, expression was assessed adjacent to positively staining
tumours; in phenotypically normal bronchial tissues, USF-2 was more highly
expressed at 1 cm than at 5 cm from the tumour. Transient USF-2 overexpression in
non-small cell lung cancer cell lines significantly stimulated in vitro cell
proliferation; this response was most apparent for NCI-H460 (p < 0.005), reducing
the mean cell doubling time from 19 to 16 h. Dominant-negative USF-2 mutants had 
no significant effect on cell growth. Taken together, these data suggest that
USF-2 represents a relatively early molecular marker for the development of
bronchial dysplasia and non-adenocarcinoma lung cancer. USF may also play a role 
in bronchial carcinogenesis, perhaps through promoting cell proliferation,
although the genes through which this is regulated remain to be determined.

Copyright 2005 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 15856526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. IUBMB Life. 2004 Oct;56(10):595-600.

Insulin regulation of fatty acid synthase gene transcription: roles of USF and
SREBP-1c.

Griffin MJ(1), Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences and Toxicology, University of
California-Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The transcriptional regulation of lipogenesis is a highly coordinated process
occurring in concert with transcriptional as well as post-transcriptional
regulation of enzymes involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Fatty acid
synthase (FAS) plays a central role in de novo lipogenesis by converting
acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA into the final end product, palmitate, which can
subsequently be esterified into triacylglycerols and then stored in adipose
tissue. Ultimately, this helps to prevent buildup of excess glucose in other
types of cells and tissues, the effects of which can be readily observed in the
pathophysiology of disease states such as Type-11 diabetes and obesity. Thus,
elucidating the transcriptional mechanisms of lipogenic enzyme genes is important
for understanding the normal regulation of lipogenesis and ultimately the
dysregulation that may occur in certain metabolic disease. In this review, we
discuss advances in our understanding of the regulation of lipogenesis at the
genetic level, with a special emphasis on the common cis- and trans-acting
factors involved in regulation of FAS. Two transcription factors, Upstream
Stimulatory Factor (USF) and Sterol Regulatory Element Binding Protein-lc
(SREBP-lc), seem to play a dominant and possibly cooperative role in regulating
FAS transcription.

PMID: 15814457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4396-406.

TFII-I regulates induction of chromosomally integrated human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 long terminal repeat in cooperation with USF.

Chen J(1), Malcolm T, Estable MC, Roeder RG, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication is coupled to T-cell
activation through its dependence on host cell transcription factors. Despite the
enormous sequence variability of these factors, several cis elements for host
factors are highly conserved within the 5' long terminal repeats (LTRs) of
viruses from AIDS patients; among these is the RBEIII upstream element for the
Ras response element binding factor 2 (RBF-2). Here we show that RBF-2 is
comprised of a USF1/USF2 heterodimer and TFII-I, which bind cooperatively to
RBEIII. Recombinant USF1/USF2 binds to the RBEIII core sequence 160-fold less
efficiently than it binds to an E box element, but the interaction with RBEIII is
stimulated by TFII-I. Chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTRs bearing an RBEIII
mutation have slightly elevated basal transcription in unstimulated Jurkat cells 
but are unresponsive to cross-linking of the T-cell receptor or stimulation with 
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. Induction is inhibited by dominant
interfering USF and TFII-I but not by the dominant negative I-kappaB protein.
USF1, USF2, and TFII-I bind to the integrated wild-type LTR in unstimulated cells
and become phosphorylated during the induction of transcription upon stimulation 
with PMA. These results demonstrate that USF1/USF2 and TFII-I interact
cooperatively at the upstream RBEIII element and are necessary for the induction 
of latent HIV-1 in response to T-cell activation signals.

PMCID: PMC1061576
PMID: 15767439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18425-33. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF-1/USF-2) regulate human cGMP-dependent protein 
kinase I gene expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Sellak H(1), Choi C, Browner N, Lincoln TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of South Alabama, College of Medicine,
Mobile, Alabama 36688, USA.

Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase I plays a pivotal role in regulating smooth
muscle cell relaxation, growth, and differentiation. Expression of the enzyme
varies greatly in smooth muscle and in other tissues and cell types, yet little
is known regarding the mechanisms regulating cGMP-dependent protein kinase gene
expression. The present work was undertaken to characterize the mechanisms
controlling kinase gene expression in vascular smooth muscle cells. A 2-kb human 
cGMP-dependent protein kinase I 5'-noncoding promoter sequence was characterized 
by serial deletion, and functional studies demonstrated that a 591-bp 5'-promoter
construct possessed the highest activity compared with all other constructs
generated from the larger promoter. Analysis of the sequence between -472 and
-591 bp from the transcriptional start site revealed the existence of two E-like 
boxes known to bind upstream stimulatory factors. Electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays and functional studies using luciferase reporter gene assays identified
upstream stimulatory factors as the transcription factors bound to the E-boxes in
the 591-bp promoter. Site-directed mutagenesis of the E-boxes abolished the
binding of upstream stimulatory factor proteins and decreased the activity of the
cGMP-dependent protein kinase I 591-bp promoter, thus confirming the involvement 
of these transcription factors in mediating gene expression. Cotransfection
experiments demonstrated that overexpression of upstream stimulatory factors 1
and 2 increased cGMP-dependent protein kinase I promoter activity. Collectively, 
these data suggest that the human proximal cGMP-dependent protein kinase I
promoter is regulated by tandem E-boxes that bind upstream stimulatory factors.

PMID: 15741164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):677-9.

Role of USF1 in the differential expression of the human deoxycytidine kinase
gene in acute myeloid leukemia.

Ge Y, Jensen TL, Tatman DA, Stout ML, Buck SA, Ravindranath Y, Matherly LH, Taub 
JW.

PMID: 15729384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):G1118-26. Epub 2005 Feb 
3.

Role of USF1 and USF2 as potential repressor proteins for human intestinal
monocarboxylate transporter 1 promoter.

Hadjiagapiou C(1), Borthakur A, Dahdal RY, Gill RK, Malakooti J, Ramaswamy K,
Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Illinois at Chicago, Medical Research Service (600/151 Jesse Brown VA
Medical Center, 820 South Damen Ave., Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Nov;289(5):G977; author reply
G977-9.

Butyrate, a short-chain fatty acid, is the major energy fuel for the colonocytes.
We have previously reported that monocarboxylate transporter isoform 1 (MCT1)
mediates uptake of butyrate by human colonic Caco-2 cells. To better understand
the mechanisms of MCT1 expression and regulation in the human intestine, we
examined the activity and regulation of MCT1 promoter in Caco-2 cells. The
transcription initiation site in the MCT1 promoter was identified as a guanine
nucleotide 281 bp upstream from the translation initiation site and is surrounded
by a guanine-cytosine-rich area. The promoter was found to be highly active when 
transfected into Caco-2 cells, and its activity decreased with deletions at its
5'-end. Gel mobility shift experiments showed binding of the transcription
factors upstream stimulatory factor (USF)1 and 2 to the site -114 to -119 of the 
MCT1 promoter. With the use of site-directed mutagenesis and promoter activity in
Caco-2 cells, the USF proteins appeared to have a repressor role on the MCT1
promoter, which was further confirmed by cotransfecting expression vectors
encoding USF1 and 2 in Caco-2 cells and determining endogenous MCT1 expression in
USF2 overexpressed cells. The two potential SP1 binding sites found in the same
region of the promoter were found not to be involved in its regulation.

PMID: 15691871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1537-48.

Insulin-mediated down-regulation of apolipoprotein A5 gene expression through the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway: role of upstream stimulatory factor.

Nowak M(1), Helleboid-Chapman A, Jakel H, Martin G, Duran-Sandoval D, Staels B,
Rubin EM, Pennacchio LA, Taskinen MR, Fruchart-Najib J, Fruchart JC.

Author information: 
(1)Parc Eurasanté-Université de Lille 2, 885 Ave. Eugène Avinée, 59120 Loos,
France.

The apolipoprotein A5 gene (APOA5) has been repeatedly implicated in lowering
plasma triglyceride levels. Since several studies have demonstrated that
hyperinsulinemia is associated with hypertriglyceridemia, we sought to determine 
whether APOA5 is regulated by insulin. Here, we show that cell lines and mice
treated with insulin down-regulate APOA5 expression in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, we found that insulin decreases human APOA5 promoter activity, and
subsequent deletion and mutation analyses uncovered a functional E box in the
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that this APOA5 E box binds upstream stimulatory factors (USFs).
Moreover, in transfection studies, USF1 stimulates APOA5 promoter activity, and
the treatment with insulin reduced the binding of USF1/USF2 to the APOA5
promoter. The inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
abolished insulin's effect on APOA5 gene expression, while the inhibition of the 
P70 S6 kinase pathway with rapamycin reversed its effect and increased APOA5 gene
expression. Using an oligonucleotide precipitation assay for USF from nuclear
extracts, we demonstrate that phosphorylated USF1 fails to bind to the APOA5
promoter. Taken together, these data indicate that insulin-mediated APOA5 gene
transrepression could involve a phosphorylation of USFs through the PI3K and P70 
S6 kinase pathways that modulate their binding to the APOA5 E box and results in 
APOA5 down-regulation. The effect of exogenous hyperinsulinemia in men showed a
decrease in the plasma ApoAV level. These results suggest a potential
contribution of the APOA5 gene in hypertriglyceridemia associated with
hyperinsulinemia.

PMCID: PMC548024
PMID: 15684402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:287-97. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Functional characterization of the human SOX3 promoter: identification of
transcription factors implicated in basal promoter activity.

Kovacevic Grujicic N(1), Mojsin M, Krstic A, Stevanovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Vojvode Stepe 444a,
P.O. BOX 23, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.

SRY-related HMG-box genes (Sox genes) constitute a large family of
developmentally regulated genes involved in the decision of cell fates during
development and implicated in the control of diverse developmental processes.
Sox3, an X-linked member of the family, is expressed in the central nervous
system (CNS) from the earliest stages of development. It is considered to be one 
of the earliest neural markers in vertebrates playing the role in specifying
neuronal fate. The aim of this study has been to determine and characterize the
promoter of the human SOX3 gene and to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying 
the regulation of its expression. In this study, we have isolated and performed
the first characterization of the human SOX3 promoter. We have identified the
transcription start point (tsp) and carried out the structural and functional
analysis of the regulatory region responsible for SOX3 expression in NT2/D1 cell 
line. Using promoter-reporter constructs, we have determined the minimal SOX3
promoter region that confers the basal promoter activity, as well as two
regulatory elements which have positive effects on the promoter activity. We have
investigated in detail the functional properties of three conserved motifs within
the core promoter sequence that bind transcription factors specificity protein 1 
(Sp1), upstream stimulatory factor (USF) and nuclear factor Y (NF-Y). By
mutational analysis, we have shown that all three sites are of functional
relevance for constitutive SOX3 expression in NT2/D1 cells. We have also shown
that, besides the TATA motif, at least one other essential regulatory element is 
required for the basal transcription of the human SOX3. Taken together, data
presented in this paper suggest that transcription factors such as Sp1, USF and
NF-Y could function as key regulators for the basal activation of the human SOX3 
gene.

PMID: 15656994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2004 Jul;19(1):9-17.

Human follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSH-R) promoter/enhancer activity is
inhibited by transcriptional factors, from the upstream stimulating factors
family, via E-box and newly identified initiator element (Inr) in FSH-R
non-expressing cells.

Putowski LT(1), Schillings WJ, Lee CM, Reddy EP, Jakowicki JA.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Gynecology, University School of Medicine, Lublin,
Poland.

To localize the regulatory elements in the human follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor (FSH-R) promoter/enhancer and to determine the role of upstream
stimulatingfactors (USFs) in these elements, we transiently transfected
constructs of FSH-R promoter/enhancer in pGL3 luciferase reporter plasmids into
Chinese hamster ovary cells and the activities were determined by measuring
luciferase luminescence of the cell lysates. The 5'-flanking regions of the human
FSH-R gene from nt -1485 to -1 with respect to the gene translation start site
were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subcloned in pGL3. Deletion
mutants were created using PCR or restriction enzyme digestion. Mutation in the
E-box sequence from nt -124 to -119 (E-box 3), in the construct from -224 to nt
-1 or in the Inr element, which encompasses the transcriptional start site at nt 
-99, resulted in a substantial reduction in the human FSH-R promoter/enhancer
activity. Overexpression of upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) suppresses the
activity of the human FSH-R promoter/enhancer via Inr and E-box elements.
Upstream stimulating factor-2 (USF2) decreases FSH-R promoter/enhancer activity
by acting on E-box 3. The results indicate that E-box 3 and the Inr element are
important elements of the human FSH-R promoter/ enhancer. USF family members
inhibit FSH-R gene activity by acting via these elements. USF1 and USF2 suppress 
human FSH-R promoter/enhancer activity by acting on E-box 3. USF1 also decreases 
activity by interacting with the Inr element.

PMID: 15625767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4462-8. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Repression of the human sex hormone-binding globulin gene in Sertoli cells by
upstream stimulatory transcription factors.

Selva DM(1), Hogeveen KN, Hammond GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of British Columbia and the
B. C. Research Institute for Children's and Women's Health, Vancouver, British
Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Expression of the sex hormone-binding globulin gene (SHBG) in the liver produces 
SHBG, which transports sex steroids in the blood. In rodents, the SHBG gene is
also expressed in Sertoli cells giving rise to the testicular androgen-binding
protein, which is secreted into the seminiferous tubule where it presumably
controls testosterone action. Evidence that the SHBG gene functions in this way
in the human testis is lacking, and mice containing a human SHBG transgene
(shbg4) under the control of its own promoter sequence are characterized by SHBG 
gene expression in the liver but not in the testis. A potential cis-element,
defined as footprint 4 (FP4) within the human SHBG promoter, is absent in SHBG
promoters of mammals that produce the testicular androgen-binding protein, and we
have produced mice harboring a shbg4 transgene in which FP4 was deleted to
evaluate its functional significance. Remarkably, these mice express the modified
human SHBG transgene in the testis as well as the liver. Human SHBG transcripts
were found within their Sertoli cells, primary cultures of which secrete human
SHBG, and this was increased by treatment with follicle-stimulating hormone,
retinoic acid, and estradiol but not testosterone. We have also found that the
upstream stimulatory factors (USF-1 and USF-2) bind FP4 in vitro by
electromobility shift assay of Sertoli cell nuclear extracts and in vivo by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and conclude that USF transcription factors
repress human SHBG transcription in Sertoli cells through an interaction with FP4
within its proximal promoter.

PMID: 15574421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 28;280(4):2708-13. Epub 2004 Nov 22.

UTP induces osteopontin expression through a coordinate action of NFkappaB,
activator protein-1, and upstream stimulatory factor in arterial smooth muscle
cells.

Renault MA(1), Jalvy S, Potier M, Belloc I, Genot E, Dekker LV, Desgranges C,
Gadeau AP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U441 Athérosclérose, Bordeaux 33600, France.

Osteopontin (OPN) is an important chemokinetic agent for several cell types. Our 
earlier studies have shown that its expression is essential for uridine
triphosphate (UTP)-mediated migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. We
demonstrated previously that the activation of an AP-1 binding site located 76 bp
upstream of the transcription start in the rat OPN promoter is involved in the
induction of OPN expression. In this work, using a luciferase promoter deletion
assay, we identified a new region of the rat OPN promoter (-1837 to -1757) that
is responsive to UTP. This region contains an NFkappaB site located at -1800 and 
an Ebox located at -1768. Supershift electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays identified NFkappaB and USF-1/USF-2 as the
DNA binding proteins induced by UTP, respectively, for these two sites. Using
dominant negative mutants of IkappaB kinase and USF transcription factors, we
confirmed that NFkappaB and USF-1/USF-2 are involved in the UTP-mediated
expression of OPN. Using a pharmacological approach, we demonstrated that USF
proteins are regulated by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2
pathway, just as the earlier discovered AP-1 complex, whereas NFkappaB is
up-regulated through PKCdelta signals. Finally, our work suggests that the
UTP-stimulated OPN expression involves a coordinate regulation of
PKCdelta-NFkappaB, ERK1/2-USF, and ERK1/2/NAD(P)H oxidase AP-1 signaling
pathways.

PMID: 15557322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jan 1;302(1):1-10.

Decreased tumorigenicity of c-Myc-transformed fibroblasts expressing active USF2.

Choe C(1), Chen N, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF is a small family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-zip)
transcription factors with DNA binding specificities similar to that of the c-Myc
oncoprotein. Evidence for a role of USF in growth control includes inhibition of 
c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation in vitro and loss of USF transcriptional 
activity in many cancer cell lines. However, a direct effect of USF on the
tumorigenicity of an established cell line has never been demonstrated. Here,
cell lines derived from rat embryo fibroblasts transformed by c-Ha-Ras and either
c-Myc or E1A were used as model system to investigate the tumor suppression
ability of USF. Overexpression of USF2 stimulated transcription and inhibited
colony formation in c-Myc-transformed, but not E1A-transformed, fibroblasts.
Stable clones expressing high USF2 levels were constructed from c-Myc-transformed
fibroblasts. In two of these clones, overexpressed USF2 did not activate
transcription, and there was no significant change in the transformed phenotype. 
In contrast, a clone that expressed transcriptionally active USF2 exhibited
altered morphology and a strongly decreased ability to proliferate in semisolid
medium. The ability of these cells to form tumors in nude mice was also decreased
by a factor of more than 30 as compared to the parental cell line or cells
overexpressing transcriptionally inactive USF2. Cotransfection assays with USF-
or Myc-specific dominant-negative mutants indicated that active USF2 inhibited
cellular transformation by preventing transcriptional repression by c-Myc.

PMID: 15541720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell. 2004 Nov 5;16(3):453-63.

Recruitment of histone modifications by USF proteins at a vertebrate barrier
element.

West AG(1), Huang S, Gaszner M, Litt MD, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2004 Nov 19;16(4):500-2.

The chicken beta-globin 5'HS4 insulator element acts as a barrier to the
encroachment of chromosomal silencing. Endogenous 5'HS4 sequences are highly
enriched with histone acetylation and H3K4 methylation regardless of neighboring 
gene expression. We report here that 5'HS4 elements recruit these histone
modifications when protecting a reporter transgene from chromosomal silencing.
Deletion studies identified a single protein binding site within 5'HS4, footprint
IV, that is necessary for the recruitment of histone modifications and for
barrier activity. We have determined that USF proteins bind to footprint IV. USF1
is present in complexes with histone modifying enzymes in cell extracts, and
these enzymes specifically interact with the endogenous 5'HS4 element. Knockdown 
of USF1 expression leads to a loss of histone modification recruitment and
subsequent encroachment of H3K9 methylation. We propose that barrier activity
requires the constitutive recruitment of H3K4 methylation and histone acetylation
at multiple residues to counteract the propagation of condensed chromatin
structures.

PMID: 15525517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biochem J. 2005 Mar 1;386(Pt 2):297-303.

The roles of Sp1, Sp3, USF1/USF2 and NRF-1 in the regulation and
three-dimensional structure of the Fragile X mental retardation gene promoter.

Kumari D(1), Gabrielian A, Wheeler D, Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0830, USA.

Expansion of a CGG.CCG-repeat tract in the 5'-untranslated region of the FMR1
(Fragile X mental retardation 1) gene causes its aberrant transcription. This
produces symptoms ranging from premature ovarian failure and Fragile X associated
tremor and ataxia syndrome to FMR syndrome, depending on the size of the
expansion. The promoter from normal alleles shows four protein-binding regions in
vivo. We had previously shown that in mouse brain extracts two of these sites are
bound by USF1/USF2 (upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2) heterodimers and NRF-1 
(nuclear respiratory factor-1). We also showed that these sites are involved in
the positive regulation of FMR1 transcription in neuronally derived cells. In the
present study, we show that Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and Sp3 are also strong
positive regulators of FMR1 promoter activity. We also show that, like Sp1 and
E-box-binding proteins such as USF1 and USF2, NRF-1 causes DNA bending, in this
case producing a bend of 57 degrees towards the major groove. The combined effect
of the four protein-induced bends on promoter geometry is the formation of a
highly compact arch-like structure in which the 5' end of the promoter is brought
in close proximity to the 3' end. We had previously shown that while point
mutations in the GC-boxes decrease promoter activity, deletion of either one of
them leads to an increase in promoter activity. We can reconcile these
observations with the positive effect of Sp1 and Sp3 if protein-induced bending
acts, at least in part, to bring together distally spaced factors important for
transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC1134794
PMID: 15479157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Gene Expr. 2004;12(1):1-11.

A promoter polymorphism in the central MHC gene, IKBL, influences the binding of 
transcription factors USF1 and E47 on disease-associated haplotypes.

Boodhoo A(1), Wong AM, Williamson D, Voon D, Lee S, Allcock RJ, Price P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Mauritius, Reduit, Mauritius, Western Australia.

The human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) contains genes that affect
susceptibility to numerous immunopathological diseases. We propose that genes in 
the central MHC between TNFA and HLA-B explain associations between the 8.1
haplotype (HLA-A1, B8, DR3) and disease. IKBL encodes a protein resembling
members of the IkappaB protein family that regulate bioavailability of NFkappaB. 
We have identified two polymorphisms in the 500 bp upstream of the transcription 
start site of IKBL that distinguish the 8.1 haplotype from the resistant 7.1
haplotype (HLA-A3, B7, DR15). A single nucleotide polymorphism at -62 disrupts a 
putative E-box binding sequence. To investigate binding of transcription factors 
in vitro, we exposed 32P-labeled DNA fragments carrying both alleles to nuclear
extracts, showing allele-specific binding of nuclear proteins from Jurkat cells
but not from other lineages. Supershift studies using Jurkat nuclear extract
showed that the E-box protein, E47, and ubiquitously expressed transcription
factor USF1 bind to the E-box element of the 7.1 haplotype. Transient
transfections of luciferase reporter constructs carrying promoter alleles of IKBL
into Jurkat cells showed an effect of IKBL-62 alleles. In contrast, alleles at
-421 did not affect transcription factor binding or transcription. IKBL was
expressed at low levels in Jurkat cells but not in blood mononuclear cells, and
expression declined following mitogenic stimulation. The restriction of IKBL
expression to Jurkat cells is consistent with evidence that E47 is expressed in
thymocytes and suggests IKBL may affect autoimmunity through an effect on T-cell 
selection.

PMID: 15473256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):887-98. Epub 2004 Oct 5.

Pea3 transcription factor cooperates with USF-1 in regulation of the murine bax
transcription without binding to an Ets-binding site.

Firlej V(1), Bocquet B, Desbiens X, de Launoit Y, Chotteau-Lelièvre A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement UPRES-EA1033, Université des Sciences
et Technologies de Lille, 59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

The Pea3 transcription factor (which belongs to the PEA3 group) from the Ets
family has been shown to be involved in mammary embryogenesis and oncogenesis.
However, except for proteinases, only few of its target genes have been reported.
In the present report, we identified bax as a Pea3 up-regulated gene. We provide 
evidence of this regulation by using Pea3 overexpression and Pea3 silencing in a 
mammary cell line. Both Pea3 and Erm, another member of the PEA3 group, are able 
to transactivate bax promoter fragments. Although the minimal Pea3-regulated bax 
promoter does not contain an Ets-binding site, two functional upstream
stimulatory factor-regulated E boxes are present. We further demonstrate the
ability of Pea3 and USF-1 to cooperate for the transactivation of the bax
promoter, mutation of the E boxes dramatically reducing the Pea3 transactivation 
potential. Although Pea3 did not directly bind to the minimal bax promoter, we
provide evidence that USF-1 could form a ternary complex with Pea3 and DNA. Taken
together, our results suggest that Pea3 may regulate bax transcription via the
interaction with USF-1 but without binding to DNA.

PMID: 15466854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):49948-55. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

Regulation of the cell-specific calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide
enhancer by USF and the Foxa2 forkhead protein.

Viney TJ(1), Schmidt TW, Gierasch W, Sattar AW, Yaggie RE, Kuburas A, Quinn JP,
Coulson JM, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA.

An 18-bp enhancer controls cell-specific expression of the calcitonin/calcitonin 
gene-related peptide gene. The enhancer is bound by a heterodimer of the bHLH-Zip
protein USF-1 and -2 and a cell-specific factor from thyroid C cell lines. In
this report we have identified the cell-specific factor as the forkhead protein
Foxa2 (previously HNF-3beta). Binding of Foxa2 to the 18-bp enhancer was
demonstrated using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The cell-specific
DNA-protein complex was selectively competed by a series of Foxa2 DNA binding
sites, and the addition of Foxa2 antiserum supershifted the complex. Likewise, a 
complex similar to that seen with extracts from thyroid C cell lines was
generated using an extract from heterologous cells expressing recombinant Foxa2. 
Interestingly, overexpression of Foxa2 activated the 18-bp enhancer in
heterologous cells but only in the presence of the adjacent helix-loop-helix
motif. Likewise, coexpression of USF proteins with Foxa2 yielded greater
activation than by Foxa2 alone. Unexpectedly, Foxa2 overexpression repressed
activity in the CA77 thyroid C cell line, suggesting that Foxa2 may interact with
additional cofactors. The stimulatory role of Foxa2 at the calcitonin/calcitonin 
gene-related peptide gene enhancer was confirmed by short interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of Foxa2. As seen with Foxa2 overexpression, the effect of
Foxa2 knockdown also required the adjacent helix-loop-helix motif. These results 
provide the first evidence for combinatorial control of gene expression by
bHLH-Zip and forkhead proteins.

PMID: 15385550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004;554:229-51.

Genetic manipulation of mammary gland development and lactation.

Hadsell DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. dhadsell@bcm.tmc.edu

The mammalian genome is believed to contain some 30,000 to 40,000 different
genes. Of these an estimated 42% have no known function. Genetically engineered
mouse models (GEMM) have been a powerful tool available for determining gene
function in vivo. In the mammary gland, a variety of genetic engineering
approaches have been applied successfully to understanding the importance of
specific gene products to mammary gland development and lactation. Our own
laboratory has applied genetically engineered mice to facilitate understanding of
the regulation of mammary gland development and lactation by insulin-like growth 
factors (IGF) and by the transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor
(USF-2). Our studies on transgenic mice that overexpress IGF-I have demonstrated 
the importance of IGF-dependent signaling pathways to maintenance of mammary
epithelial cells during the declining phase of lactation. Our analysis of early
developmental processes in mammary tissue from mice that carry a targeted
mutation in the IGF-I receptor gene suggests that IGF-dependent stimulation of
cell cycle progression is more important to early mammary gland development than 
potential antiapoptotic effects. Lastly, our studies on mice that carry a
targeted mutation of the Usf2 gene have demonstrated that this gene is necessary 
for normal lactation and have highlighted the importance of this gene to the
maintenance of protein synthesis. These studies, as well as studies of others,
have highlighted both the strengths and limitations inherent in the use of GEMM. 
Limitations serve as the driving force behind development of new experimental
strategies and genetic engineering schemes that will allow for a full
understanding of gene function within the mammary gland.

PMID: 15384580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 3;279(49):51226-33. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

UV-induced expression of key component of the tanning process, the POMC and MC1R 
genes, is dependent on the p-38-activated upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF-1).

Corre S(1), Primot A, Sviderskaya E, Bennett DC, Vaulont S, Goding CR, Galibert
MD.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6061 Laboratoire de Génétique et Développement, Faculté de Médecine, 
Université de Rennes-1, 2 Avenue du Pr. Léon Bernard, 35043 Rennes, France.

Protection against UV-mediated DNA damage and the onset of oncogenesis is
afforded by the tanning response in which UV irradiation triggers melanocytes to 
increase production of melanin that is then transferred to keratinocytes. A key
component of the tanning process is the UV-mediated induction of the
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) and MC1R genes encoding the
alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and its receptor, respectively, which play a
crucial role in pigmentation by regulating the intracellular levels of cAMP. How 
these genes are regulated in response to UV irradiation is not known. Here we
have shown that UV-induced activation of the POMC and MC1R promoters is mediated 
by p38 stress-activated kinase signaling to the transcription factor, upstream
stimulating factor-1 (USF-1). Importantly, melanocytes derived from USF-1 -/-
mice exhibit a defective UV response and fail to activate POMC and MC1R
expression in response to UV irradiation. The results define USF-1 as a critical 
UV-responsive activator of genes implicated in protection from solar radiation.

PMID: 15358786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Trends Mol Med. 2004 Aug;10(8):362-5.

USF1 implicated in the aetiology of familial combined hyperlipidaemia and the
metabolic syndrome.

Shoulders CC(1), Naoumova RP.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12
0NN, UK. carol.shoulders@csc.mrc.ac.uk

The upstream stimulatory factor (USF) proteins are ubiquitously expressed and, as
such, represent unusual candidates for involvement in disorders of carbohydrate
and lipid metabolism. Nonetheless, a recent study has reported an association
between specific alleles of USF1 and familial combined hyperlipidaemia, a common 
disorder that substantially increases the risk of premature atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease. USF1 might, therefore, also contribute to the metabolic
syndrome. The use of chromatin immunoprecipitation methodologies combined with
promoter microarray assays will help to define the transcriptional networks that 
underlie whole-body glucose and lipid homeostasis.

PMID: 15310455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 15;384(Pt 1):101-10.

Synergistic role of specificity proteins and upstream stimulatory factor 1 in
transactivation of the mouse carboxylesterase 2/microsomal acylcarnitine
hydrolase gene promoter.

Furihata T(1), Hosokawa M, Satoh T, Chiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Mouse carboxylesterase 2 (mCES2), a microsomal acylcarnitine hydrolase, is
thought to play some important roles in fatty acid (ester) metabolism, and it is 
therefore thought that the level of transcription of the mCES2 gene is under
tight control. Examination of the tissue expression profiles revealed that mCES2 
is expressed in the liver, kidney, small intestine, brain, thymus, lung, adipose 
tissue and testis. When the mCES2 promoter was cloned and characterized, it was
revealed that Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and Sp3 could bind to a GC box, that
USF (upstream stimulatory factor) 1 could bind to an E (enhancer) box, and that
Sp1 could bind to an NFkappaB (nuclear factor kappaB) element in the mCES2
promoter. Co-transfection assays showed that all of these transcription factors
contributed synergistically to transactivation of the mCES2 promoter. Taken
together, our results indicate that Sp1, Sp3 and USF1 are indispensable factors
for transactivation of the mCES2 gene promoter. To our knowledge, this is the
first study in which transcription factors that interact with a CES2 family gene 
have been identified. The results of the present study have provided some clues
for understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating mCES2 gene expression, and 
should be useful for studies aimed at elucidation of physiological functions of
mCES2.

PMCID: PMC1134093
PMID: 15283701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Gene. 2004 Aug 4;337:199-206.

Isolation of a novel USF2 isoform: repressor of cathepsin B expression.

Yan S(1), Sloane BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
syan@med.wayne.edu

We previously demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2
regulate transcription of cathepsin B. Here, we have cloned a novel transcript
variant of USF2 from a human DU145 prostate cancer cell line by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This new transcript variant,
designated USF2c, results from alternative splicing of the primary USF2
transcript using a cryptic splicing acceptor site within exon 6. As a
consequence, USF2c is missing exons 4, 5, and part of exon 6. USF2c can be
transcribed and translated to a protein of approximately 29 kDa in vitro, and the
resulting USF2c protein can bind as a homodimer to the E-box of the cathepsin B
promoter. USF2c is expressed in two other prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP,
PC3), and U87 human glioblastoma cells as are USF2a and USF2b, two previously
identified isoforms of USF2. Cotransfection experiments in DU145 and U87 cells
demonstrate that USF2c can down-regulate expression of cathepsin B. These results
suggest that USF2c regulates expression of cathepsin B by binding to the E box
element in the cathepsin B promoter as a repressor.

PMID: 15276216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):209-18.

Upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2, bind to the human haem oxygenase-1
proximal promoter in vivo and regulate its transcription.

Hock TD(1), Nick HS, Agarwal A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The human HO-1 (haem oxygenase-1) gene encodes a microsomal enzyme responsible
for the breakdown of haem, and is also cytoprotective in response to various
cellular insults. HO-1 transcription is induced by a vast array of compounds
including, but certainly not limited to, haem and heavy metals such as cadmium.
In the present study, we show that upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2,
ubiquitous proteins belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper family
of transcription factors, constitutively bind to the class B E-box located in the
proximal promoter of the human HO-1 gene and are responsible for the enhancement 
of HO-1 gene transcription in human renal proximal tubular epithelial cells.
Dimethylsulphate in vivo footprinting studies have identified three protected
guanine residues in the E-box of the HO-1 proximal promoter. One of these guanine
contact points is essential for USF binding, and when mutated mimics a deletion
mutation of the entire E-box palindrome sequence encompassing all three guanine
contact points. Binding of USF1 and USF2 to the HO-1 E-box was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel-shift assays. Furthermore, we show that
overexpression of USF1 or USF2 enhances the basal expression of HO-1 and that
expression of a USF dominant negative form reduces its expression. These results 
demonstrate for the first time that USF proteins bind to the human HO-1 promoter 
in vivo and are required for high-level expression of HO-1 by haem and cadmium in
human renal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1134061
PMID: 15242350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Neurosci. 2004 Jul 7;24(27):6115-26.

cAMP response element-binding protein, activating transcription factor-4, and
upstream stimulatory factor differentially control hippocampal GABABR1a and
GABABR1b subunit gene expression through alternative promoters.

Steiger JL(1), Bandyopadhyay S, Farb DH, Russek SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Pharmacology, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Expression of metabotropic GABA(B) receptors is essential for slow inhibitory
synaptic transmission in the CNS, and disruption of GABA(B) receptor-mediated
responses has been associated with several disorders, including neuropathic pain 
and epilepsy. The location of GABA(B) receptors in neurons determines their
specific role in synaptic transmission, and it is believed that sorting of
subunit isoforms, GABA(B)R1a and GABA(B)R1b, to presynaptic or postsynaptic
membranes helps to determine this role. GABA(B)R1a and GABA(B)R1b are thought to 
arise by alternative splicing of heteronuclear RNA. We now demonstrate that
alternative promoters, rather than alternative splicing, produce GABA(B)R1a and
GABA(B)R1b isoforms. Our data further show that subunit gene expression in
hippocampal neurons is mediated by the cAMP response element-binding protein
(CREB) by binding to unique cAMP response elements in the alternative promoter
regions. Double-stranded oligonucleotide decoys selectively alter levels of
endogenous GABA(B)R1a and GABA(B)R1b in primary hippocampal neurons, and CREB
knock-out mice show changes in levels of GABA(B)R1a and GABA(B)R1b transcripts,
consistent with decoy competition experiments. These results demonstrate a
critical role of CREB in transcriptional mechanisms that control GABA(B)R1
subunit levels in vivo. In addition, the CREB-related factor activating
transcription factor-4 (ATF4) has been shown to interact directly with GABA(B)R1 
in neurons, and we show that ATF4 differentially regulates GABA(B)R1a and
GABA(B)R1b promoter activity. These results, together with our finding that the
depolarization-sensitive upstream stimulatory factor (USF) binds to a composite
CREB/ATF4/USF regulatory element only in the absence of CREB binding, indicate
that selective control of alternative GABA(B)R1 promoters by CREB, ATF4, and USF 
may dynamically regulate expression of their gene products in the nervous system.

PMID: 15240803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):249-57.

Roles of USF, Ikaros and Sp proteins in the transcriptional regulation of the
human reduced folate carrier B promoter.

Liu M(1), Whetstine JR, Payton SG, Ge Y, Flatley RM, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, 110 E. Warren Ave., Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The hRFC (human reduced folate carrier) is ubiquitously but differentially
expressed in human tissues and its levels are regulated by up to seven non-coding
regions (A1, A2, A, B, C, D and E) and at least four promoters. For the hRFC-B
basal promoter, regulation involves binding of Sp (specificity protein)
transcription factors to a critical GC-box. By transiently transfecting HT1080
cells with 5'- and 3'-deletion constructs spanning 1057 bp of upstream sequence, 
a transcriptionally important region was localized to 158 bp flanking the
transcriptional start sites. By gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays, USF (upstream stimulatory factor), Sp1 and Ikaros-related proteins were
bound to consensus elements (one E-box, two GC-box and three Ikaros) within this 
region. The functional importance of these elements was confirmed by transient
tranfections of HT1080 cells with hRFC-B reporter constructs in which they were
mutated, and by co-transfections of Drosophila Mel-2 cells with wild-type hRFC-B 
promoter and expression constructs for USF1, USF2a, Sp1 and Ikaros 2 and 8. Both 
USF1 and Sp1 proteins transactivated the hRFC-B promoter. Sp1 combined with USF1 
resulted in a synergistic transactivation. Identical results were obtained with
USF2a. Ikaros 2 was a repressor of hRFC-B promoter activity whose effects were
partly reversed by the dominant-negative Ikaros 8. In HT1080 cells, transfection 
with Ikaros 2 decreased endogenous hRFC-B transcripts, whereas USF1 and Sp1
increased transcript levels. Ikaros 2 also decreased reporter gene activity and
levels of acetylated chromatin associated with the endogenous promoter.
Collectively, these results identify transcriptionally important regions in the
hRFC-B promoter that include multiple GC-box, Ikaros and E-box elements. Our
results also suggest that co-operative interactions between transcription factors
Sp1 and USF are essential for high-level hRFC-B transactivation and imply that
these effects are modulated by the family of Ikaros proteins and by histone
acetylation.

PMCID: PMC1134065
PMID: 15214842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 12;23(36):6125-35.

Evidence for a cancer-specific switch at the CDK4 promoter with loss of control
by both USF and c-Myc.

Pawar SA(1), Szentirmay MN, Hermeking H, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF and c-Myc are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors with similar
DNA-binding specificities, but antagonistic effects on cellular transformation.
In order to determine how these opposite functions correlate with the
transcriptional activities of the two factors on particular downstream targets,
we investigated the roles of USF and c-Myc in expression of CDK4, a known direct 
target of c-Myc. Overexpression of either c-Myc or USF2, but not USF1, stimulated
the expression of CDK4 promoter-driven reporter genes in the non-tumorigenic
mammary epithelial MCF-10A cells. Dominant-negative mutants specific to either
Myc or USF family proteins inhibited reporter gene activity as well as endogenous
CDK4 expression, demonstrating involvement of both USF and Myc in CDK4
transcriptional control. In contrast, in two different breast cancer cell lines
where USF is transcriptionally inactive and c-Myc is overexpressed, CDK4 promoter
activity was no longer responsive to either transcription factor. Accordingly,
chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed significantly lower levels of both USF and
c-Myc bound to the endogenous CDK4 promoter in breast cancer cells than in
MCF-10A cells, with a concomitant decrease in associated histone H3 acetylation. 
These results suggest that a major switch in the transcriptional control of CDK4 
occurs during breast carcinogenesis, with likely alteration of cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 15208653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Blood. 2004 Oct 1;104(7):2027-34. Epub 2004 Jun 8.

Upstream stimulatory factors stimulate transcription through E-box motifs in the 
PF4 gene in megakaryocytes.

Okada Y(1), Matsuura E, Tozuka Z, Nagai R, Watanabe A, Matsumoto K, Yasui K,
Jackman RW, Nakano T, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.

Platelet factor 4 (PF4) is expressed during megakaryocytic differentiation. We
previously demonstrated that the homeodomain proteins (myeloid ecotropic
integration site 1 [MEIS1], Pbx-regulating protein 1 [PREP1], and pre-B-cell
leukemia transcription factors [PBXs]) bind to the novel regulatory element
tandem repeat of MEIS1 binding element [TME] and transactivate the rat PF4
promoter. In the present study, we investigated and identified other TME binding 
proteins in megakaryocytic HEL cells using mass spectrometry. Among identified
proteins, we focused on upstream stimulatory factor (USF1) and USF2 and
investigated their effects on the PF4 promoter. USF1 and 2 bound to the E-box
motif in the TME and strongly transactivated the PF4 promoter. Furthermore,
physiologic bindings of USF1 and 2 to the TME in rat megakaryocytes were
demonstrated by the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Interestingly,
the E-box motif in the TME was conserved in TME-like sequences of both the human 
and mouse PF4 promoters. USF1 and 2 also bound to the human TME-like sequence and
transactivated the human PF4 promoter. Expressions of USF1 and 2 were detected by
reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the human
megakaryocytes derived from CD34+ cells. Thus, these studies demonstrate that the
novel TME binding transcription factors, USF1 and 2, transactivate rat and human 
PF4 promoters and may play an important role in megakaryocytic gene expression.

PMID: 15187018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34311-22. Epub 2004 Jun 7.

Glucose up-regulates thrombospondin 1 gene transcription and transforming growth 
factor-beta activity through antagonism of cGMP-dependent protein kinase
repression via upstream stimulatory factor 2.

Wang S(1), Skorczewski J, Feng X, Mei L, Murphy-Ullrich JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, The
Cell Adhesion and Matrix Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, USA.

Thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) transcription is stimulated by glucose, resulting in
increased TGF-beta activation and matrix protein synthesis. We previously showed 
that inducible expression of the catalytic domain of cGMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKG) inhibits glucose-regulated TSP1 transcription and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta activity in stably transfected rat mesangial cells
(RMCs(tr/cd)). However, the molecular mechanisms by which PKG represses
glucose-regulated TSP1 transcription are unknown. Using a luciferase-promoter
deletion assay, we now identify a single region of the human TSP1 promoter (-1172
to -878, relative to the transcription start site) that is responsive to glucose.
Further characterization of this region identified an 18-bp sequence that
specifically binds nuclear proteins from mesangial cells. Moreover, binding is
significantly enhanced by high glucose treatment and is reduced by increased PKG 
activity. Gel mobility shift and supershift assays show that the nuclear proteins
binding to the 18-bp sequence are USF1 and -2. USF1 and USF2 bound to the
endogenous TSP1 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Glucose
stimulates nuclear USF2 protein accumulation through protein kinase C, p38 MAPK, 
and extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathways. Increased PKG activity
down-regulates USF2 protein levels and its DNA binding activity under high
glucose conditions, resulting in inhibition of glucose-induced TSP1 transcription
and TGF-beta activity. Overexpression of USF2 reversed the inhibitory effect of
PKG on glucose-induced TSP1 gene transcription and TGF-beta activity. Taken
together these data present the first evidence that USF2 mediates glucose-induced
TSP1 expression and TSP1-dependent TGF-beta bioactivity in mesangial cells,
suggesting that USF2 is an important transcriptional regulator of diabetic
complications.

PMID: 15184388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Aug 1;13(15):1611-21. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Occupancy and synergistic activation of the FMR1 promoter by Nrf-1 and Sp1 in
vivo.

Smith KT(1), Coffee B, Reines D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular
Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Fragile X syndrome is due to mutation of the FMR1 gene. The most common mutation 
is an expansion of a CGG repeat in the 5' UTR that triggers dense DNA methylation
and formation of a heterochromatin-like structure which lead to transcriptional
silencing. In vitro experiments have identified several transcription factors,
including Sp1, Nrf-1 and USF1/2, as potential regulators of normal FMR1 promoter 
activity. Using CpG methylation-deficient Drosophila cells, we demonstrate in
vivo that Nrf-1 and Sp1 are strong, synergistic activators of an unmethylated
human FMR1-driven reporter, while USF1/2 and Max repress this activation. In
addition, analyses of transcription factor activity upon DNA methylation of the
reporter show that Sp1 activity was largely intact when the promoter was densely 
methylated, but Nrf-1 transactivation was very sensitive to dense methylation.
Notably, Nrf-1 transactivation was relatively insensitive to methylation of
cytosines only at its binding site. FMR1 reporter activity is also reduced in
HeLa cells after expression of a short interfering RNA directed against
endogenous Nrf-1. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate directly
that Sp1 and Nrf-1 occupy the human FMR1 promoter in vivo and these interactions 
are disrupted in fragile X patient cells. In addition, we discover that Max
resides at the FMR1 promoter and show that USF1/2 but not c-Myc are present at
endogenous FMR1. These findings provide the first direct in vivo evidence
identifying the specific transcription factors that regulate FMR1.

PMID: 15175277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Aug 1;13(15):1587-97. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Variation in USF1 shows haplotype effects, gene : gene and gene : environment
associations with glucose and lipid parameters in the European Atherosclerosis
Research Study II.

Putt W(1), Palmen J, Nicaud V, Tregouet DA, Tahri-Daizadeh N, Flavell DM,
Humphries SE, Talmud PJ; EARSII group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, Royal Free and
University College Medical School, London, UK.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF 1), is a transcription factor controlling
expression of several genes involved in lipid and glucose homeostasis and
co-localizes with familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) and type 2 diabetes on 
chromosome 1q22-23. We sequenced USF1 in 24 UK FCHL probands, but found no rare
or common cSNPs. Three common intronic single nucleotide ploymorphisms (SNP),
306A>G, 475C>T and 1748C>T, were identified and their association was examined
with fasting and postprandial lipids and after an oral glucose tolerance test
(OGTT) in the European Atherosclerosis Research Study II offspring study. There
were no significant differences in allelic frequencies of the SNPs between cases 
and controls. Individually none of the SNPs showed significant associations with 
any parameter. In haplotype analysis, compared with other haplotypes, 475C/1748T 
showed significantly higher and 475T/1748T showed lower peak glucose (P=0.004 and
0.07, respectively) during the OGTT. There was significant case-control
heterogeneity in the interaction of genotype with body mass index, on fasting low
density lipoprotein with 306A>G and 1748C>T, and on borderline significance with 
fasting glucose with 475C>T (P=0.002, 0.0007 and 0.015, respectively).
Furthermore, 475C>T showed interaction with both HSL-60C>G (case-control
heterogeneity P=0.0002) on AUC TG and APOC3 -482C>T on plasma apoE levels
(P=0.0012). Thus, in these healthy young men, variation in USF1 was the
influencing feature of both glucose and lipid homeostasis showing case-control
heterogeneity.

PMID: 15175273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Biol Chem. 2004 Mar-Apr;385(3-4):239-47.

Modulation of glucokinase expression by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and upstream
stimulatory factor 2 in primary rat hepatocytes.

Roth U(1), Jungermann K, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 
Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Glucokinase (GK) is the key enzyme of glucose utilization in liver and is
localized in the less aerobic perivenous area. Until now, the O2-responsive
elements in the liver-specific GK promoter are unknown, and therefore the aim of 
this study was to identify the O2-responsive element in this promoter. We found
that the GK promoter sequence -87/-80 matched the binding site for hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF). In primary rat 
hepatocytes we could show that venous pO2 enhanced HIF-1alpha and USF-2a levels, 
both of which activated GK expression. Furthermore, transfection experiments
revealed that the GK sequence -87/-80 mediated the HIF-1alpha- or USF-2-dependent
activation of the GK promoter. The binding of HIF-1 and USF to the GK-HRE was
corroborated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). However, the maximal
response to HIF-1alpha or USF was only achieved when constructs with the -87/-80 
sequence in context with a 3'-36 bp native GK promoter sequence containing a
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) binding site were used. HIF-1alpha and HNF-4 
additively activated the GK promoter, while USF-2 and HNF-4 together did not show
this additive activation. Thus, HIF-1 and USF may play differential roles in the 
modulation of GK expression in response to O2.

PMID: 15134337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004 May;85(2):111-20.

Regulation of the estrogen receptor alpha minimal promoter by Sp1, USF-1 and
ERalpha.

deGraffenried LA(1), Hopp TA, Valente AJ, Clark RA, Fuqua SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, USA.

The exact molecular mechanisms regulating estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)
expression in breast tumors are unclear, but studies suggest that they are partly
at the level of transcription. We have focused on the transcription factors that 
regulate the ERalpha minimal promoter, which we have previously shown to reside
within the first 245 bp of the 5'-flanking region of the gene. Within this region
are several elements essential for full ERalpha promoter transcriptional
activity, including a GC box and an imperfect E box. In earlier studies we
demonstrated an essential function for the Sp1 family of transcription factors in
the regulation of ERalpha expression. We have now identified both USF-1 and
ERalpha itself as components of a multi-protein complex of transcription factors 
that interacts at the ERalpha minimal promoter and is essential for its full
transcriptional activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that
Sp1 and USF-1, but not ERalpha, bind directly to the ERalpha minimal promoter. We
showed by GST pull-down assays that ERalpha is able to interact in vitro with
USF-1, suggesting, in addition to a possible interaction between ERalpha and Sp1,
a mechanism whereby ERalpha is able to interact with the protein complex.
Combined exogenous expression of the components of the complex in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells resulted in a synergistic effect on transactivation of the ERalpha
minimal promoter, suggesting that the importance of the protein complex is in the
interactions among the components. Based upon these findings, we propose a
possible model for transcription from the ERalpha minimal promoter.

PMID: 15111769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):322-3.

USF1 on trial.

Shoulders CC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):371-6.

PMID: 15054483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):371-6. Epub 2004 Feb 29.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia is associated with upstream transcription factor
1 (USF1).

Pajukanta P(1), Lilja HE, Sinsheimer JS, Cantor RM, Lusis AJ, Gentile M, Duan XJ,
Soro-Paavonen A, Naukkarinen J, Saarela J, Laakso M, Ehnholm C, Taskinen MR,
Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095-7088, USA.
ppajukanta@mednet.ucla.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Apr;36(4):322-3.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL), characterized by elevated levels of
serum total cholesterol, triglycerides or both, is observed in about 20% of
individuals with premature coronary heart disease. We previously identified a
locus linked to FCHL on 1q21-q23 in Finnish families with the disease. This
region has also been linked to FCHL in families from other populations as well as
to type 2 diabetes mellitus. These clinical entities have several overlapping
phenotypic features, raising the possibility that the same gene may underlie the 
obtained linkage results. Here, we show that the human gene encoding thioredoxin 
interacting protein (TXNIP) on 1q, which underlies combined hyperlipidemia in
mice, is not associated with FCHL. We show that FCHL is linked and associated
with the gene encoding upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) in 60 extended
families with FCHL, including 721 genotyped individuals (P = 0.00002), especially
in males with high triglycerides (P = 0.0000009). Expression profiles in fat
biopsy samples from individuals with FCHL seemed to differ depending on their
carrier status for the associated USF1 haplotype. USF1 encodes a transcription
factor known to regulate several genes of glucose and lipid metabolism.

PMID: 14991056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;32(1):155-63.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 promoter activity in adipocytes is not
influenced by the 4 G/5 G promoter polymorphism and is regulated by a USF-1/2
binding site immediately preceding the polymorphic region.

Zietz B(1), Drobnik W, Herfarth H, Buechler C, Schölmerich J, Schäffler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) levels were found to be associated with
obesity indicating that adipocytes influence PAI-1 plasma levels. In addition,
the 4 G/5 G promoter polymorphism of the PAI-1 gene may modulate PAI-1
transcription. We investigated the transcriptional regulation of the human PAI-1 
gene in adipocytes and analyzed the genetic contribution of the 4 G/5 G
polymorphism. The PAI-1 promoter was analyzed using electrophoretic mobility
shift assays (EMSAs) and luciferase reporter gene assays. A putative binding site
for the upstream stimulatory factor-1/2 (USF-1/2) at the polymorphic region of
the PAI-1 promoter was identified. The binding of USF-1/2 was studied using
nuclear extracts prepared from adipocytes and was similar in all the promoter
variants as analyzed by EMSA. A 257 bp PAI-1 promoter fragment including the 4
G/5 G site was transcriptionally active in adipocytes and was not influenced by
the polymorphism. The present data indicate for the first time that USF-1/2 is
transcriptionally active in differentiated adipocytes. However, USF-1/2 binding
activity and PAI-1 transcription are not influenced by the 4 G/5 G-allele. These 
data possibly explain the observation that PAI-1 secretion from adipose tissue is
not influenced by the PAI-1 promoter polymorphism.

PMID: 14765999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):15908-15. Epub 2004 Feb 2.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) proteins induce human TGF-beta1 gene activation
via the glucose-response element-1013/-1002 in mesangial cells: up-regulation of 
USF activity by the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway.

Weigert C(1), Brodbeck K, Sawadogo M, Häring HU, Schleicher ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and
Pathobiochemistry, University of Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The hyperglycemia-enhanced flux through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP)
has been implicated in the up-regulated gene expression of transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in mesangial cells, thus leading to mesangial matrix
expansion and diabetic glomerulosclerosis. Since the -1013 to -1002 region of the
TGF-beta1 promoter shows high homology to glucose-response elements (GlRE)
formerly described in genes involved in glucose metabolism, we studied the
function of the GlRE in the high glucose-induced TGF-beta1 gene activation in
mesangial cells. We found that high glucose concentrations enhanced the nuclear
amount of upstream stimulatory factors (USF) and their binding to this sequence. 
Fusion of the GlRE to the thymidine kinase promoter resulted in glucose
responsiveness of this promoter construct. Overexpression of either USF-1 or
USF-2 increased TGF-beta1 promoter activity 2-fold, which was prevented by
mutation or deletion of the GlRE. The high glucose-induced activation of the GlRE
is mediated by the HBP; increased flux through the HBP induced by high glucose
concentrations, by glutamine, or by overexpression of the rate-limiting enzyme
glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase (GFAT) particularly activated
USF-2 expression. GFAT-overexpressing cells showed higher USF binding activity to
the GlRE and enhanced promoter activation via the GlRE. Increasing O-GlcNAc
modification of proteins by streptozotocin, thereby mimicking HBP activation,
also resulted in increased mRNA and nuclear protein levels of USF-2, leading to
enhanced DNA binding activity to the GlRE. USF proteins themselves were not found
to be O-GlcNAc-modified. Thus, we have provided evidence for a new molecular
mechanism linking high glucose-enhanced HBP activity with increased nuclear USF
protein levels and DNA binding activity and with up-regulated TGF-beta1 promoter 
activity.

PMID: 14757763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Feb;65(2):326-34.

Identification of a novel polymorphic enhancer of the human CYP3A4 gene.

Matsumura K(1), Saito T, Takahashi Y, Ozeki T, Kiyotani K, Fujieda M, Yamazaki H,
Kunitoh H, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.

CYP3A4, the most abundant form of cytochrome P450 in the human adult liver, shows
wide interindividual variation in its activity. This variability is thought to be
caused largely by transcriptional and genetic factors, yet the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. The purpose of this study was to clarify the
mechanisms controlling the CYP3A4 gene transcription and to search for genetic
polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking region of the CYP3A4 gene. Transient
transfection of human hepatoma HepG2 cells and of normal human hepatocytes with a
series of CYP3A4 promoter-luciferase reporter plasmids revealed that a region
from -11.4 to -10.5 kilobases, designated the constitutive liver enhancer module 
of CYP3A4 (CLEM4), was important for the constitutive activation of the CYP3A4
gene. Gel shift assay using nuclear extracts prepared from HepG2 cells showed
that HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, USF1, and AP-1 interacted with CLEM4. Furthermore,
the introduction of mutations into their binding sites demonstrated that
essentially all sites were required for the maximal enhancer activity. Screening 
for genetic polymorphisms within CLEM4 in genomic DNA from French persons, we
identified the novel variant, TGT insertion between -11,129 and -11,128
(-11,129_-11,128insTGT), whose allele frequency was 3.1%. The
-11,129_-11,128insTGT resulted in the disruption of USF1 binding and a 36%
reduction of the enhancer activity. These results suggest that CLEM4 is a
constitutive enhancer of the CYP3A4 gene in the liver and that
-11,129_-11,128insTGT may at least partly contribute to the interindividual
variability of CYP3A4 expression.

PMID: 14742674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 Feb 1;422(1):81-90.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-2 gene: hepatic expression, 
genomic structure, and promoter analysis.

Hirano S(1), Yamada K, Kawata H, Shou Z, Mizutani T, Shigematsu Y, Mayumi M,
Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Fukui Medical University, 910-1193 Fukui, Japan.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-2 (SHARP-2) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor. The hepatic expression of SHARP-2 mRNA was
investigated under various conditions. The level was decreased in the
regenerating rat liver and malignant hepatoma cells. In contrast, the expression 
of SHARP-2 mRNA was induced in rat livers by feeding a high-carbohydrate diet. To
analyze the molecular mechanism involved in the regulation of the rat SHARP-2
gene expression, the gene was cloned. It was approximately 6-kb in length and
consists of five exons and four introns. To investigate the transcriptional
regulatory region of this gene, SHARP-2/firefly luciferase reporter plasmids were
transfected into hepatoma cells. A functional analysis of 5(')-deletion
constructs revealed that two E box sequences between -160 and -144 are mainly
responsible for promoter activity. Although upstream stimulatory factors (USFs)
bound to the element in vitro, USF2 failed to stimulate promoter activity from
the element using the co-transfection experiment. Therefore, other E box-binding 
transcription factors differing from USF proteins or USF-associated proteins are 
necessary for transcriptional stimulation of the rat SHARP-2 gene.

PMID: 14725860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Neurochem. 2003 Dec;87(6):1485-98.

Transcriptional regulation of human excitatory amino acid transporter 1 (EAAT1): 
cloning of the EAAT1 promoter and characterization of its basal and inducible
activity in human astrocytes.

Kim SY(1), Choi SY, Chao W, Volsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Division, St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center and Columbia
University, New York, USA.

Excitatory amino acid transporter 1 (EAAT1) is one of the two glial glutamate
transporters that clear the extracellular glutamate generated during neuronal
signal transmission. Here, we cloned and characterized a 2.1-kb promoter region
of human EAAT1 and investigated its function in the transcriptional regulation of
the EAAT1 gene in human primary astrocytes. The full-length promoter region
lacked TATA and CCAAT boxes and an initiator element, it contained several
potential transcription factor-binding sites and it exhibited promoter activity
in primary astrocytes and in several types of transformed cells. Consecutive
5'-deletion analysis of the EAAT1 promoter indicated the presence of negative and
positive regulatory regions and a putative core promoter between -57 bp and +20
bp relative to the transcription start site (TSS). The core promoter contained a 
single GC-box in position -52/-39 and one E-box near the TSS and the GC-box site 
that was responsible for 90% of the basal promoter activity as determined by
mutational analysis. Electrophoretic mobility shift, supershift and competition
assays demonstrated binding of stimulating proteins (Sp) 1 and 3 to the GC-box
and upstream stimulating factor (USF) 1 to the E-box. Treatment of primary human 
astrocytes with cellular modulators 8-bromo cyclic AMP and epidermal growth
factor increased EAAT1 promoter activity in transient transfection assays and
increased cellular EAAT1 mRNA expression and glutamate uptake by astrocytes.
Conversely, tumor necrosis factor-alpha reduced both EAAT promoter activity and
cellular EAAT1 mRNA expression. These results enable studies of transcriptional
regulation of EAAT1 gene at the promoter level.

PMID: 14713304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biol Chem. 2003 Oct-Nov;384(10-11):1421-7.

Transcription of cathepsin B in glioma cells: regulation by an E-box adjacent to 
the transcription initiation site.

Yan S(1), Jane DT, Dufresne MJ, Sloane BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, 540 E. Canfield Ave.,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

We have previously isolated the human cathepsin B promoter and shown that Sp1 and
Ets factors are involved in the regulation of cathepsin B expression. Using
mutagenesis, transient transfection and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs), we further identified regulatory factors that mediate cathepsin B
transcription in U87 human glioblastoma cells. An E-box element (CACGTG) adjacent
to the transcription initiation site (at nucleotides -7 to -2) was found to be
indispensable for cathepsin B promoter activity. Mutation of this E-box element
in both pSCB2, a promoter construct with high promoter activity, and pSCB6, a
construct with basal promoter activity, led to a 90% decrease in promoter
activity in U87 cells. EMSAs demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF-1) and upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF-2) bound to the E-box as a
heterodimer. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that both USF-1 and
USF-2 were associated with the cathepsin B promoter. The roles of USF-1 and USF-2
in the regulation of cathepsin B expression were demonstrated by (i)
co-transfection experiments showing that USF-1 or USF-2 increased promoter
activity by 2.5-fold individually and by 3.4-fold together; (ii) co-transfection 
of pSCB6 with pUSF-2deltaN (a dominant negative USF-2 expression plasmid)
resulting in an 80% decrease in promoter activity; and (iii) mutation of the
E-box element (from 5'-CACGTG to 5'-CGCGTT in the pSCB6 basal promoter construct)
abolishing transactivation of cathepsin B by USF-1 and USF-2. These results
collectively indicate that an E-box at nucleotides -7 to -2 of the cathepsin B
promoter is critical to the expression of cathepsin B and that binding of USF-1
and USF-2 to this E-box can regulate cathepsin B promoter activity.

PMID: 14669984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2003 Apr;12(2):120-2.

[In situ hybridization analysis of USF1 mRNA expression in odontoblasts].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu LA(1), Wen LY, Yang FS, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, College of Stomatology, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect and verify USF1 mRNA expression in odontoblasts.
METHODS: T-USF1 clone prepared previously was used as template and the desired
USF1 cDNA segment was amplified by PCR with specific primers. The segment was
labeled with digoxin as a probe and in situ hybridization was performed on the
mounting of odontoblasts.
RESULTS: Evidently positive staining was shown in the cytoplasm of odontoblasts.
CONCLUSION: We verified the expression of USF1 mRNA in odontoblasts for the first
time and provided evidence for further research.

PMID: 14661517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5520-7. Epub 2003 Dec 2.

A permissive role for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in the Stat5-mediated
expression of cyclin D2 by the interleukin-2 receptor.

Moon JJ(1), Rubio ED, Martino A, Krumm A, Nelson BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor promotes T cell proliferation in part by
inducing the expression of D-type cyclins, which enable cells to progress from
the G1 to S phase of the cell cycle. We previously showed that the IL-2 receptor 
induces expression of cyclin D2 by activating the transcription factor Stat5,
which binds directly and immediately to a site upstream of the cyclin D2
promoter. We show here that subsequent transcription of the cyclin D2 gene occurs
by a delayed, cycloheximide-sensitive mechanism, which implies the involvement of
additional regulatory mechanisms. The transcription factor c-Myc is induced by
Stat5 and is reported to bind to two E box motifs in the cyclin D2 promoter.
However, in IL-2-stimulated T cells, c-Myc does not appear to be involved in
cyclin D2 induction, since we found that these two E boxes are preferentially
bound by USF-1 and USF-2 and, moreover, are dispensable for cyclin D2 promoter
activity. Instead, we found that Stat5 activates the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3 kinase) pathway by a delayed, cycloheximide-sensitive mechanism and
that PI3 kinase activity is essential for the induction of cyclin D2 by Stat5.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that PI3 kinase is required
for the optimal binding of RNA polymerase II to the promoters of cyclin D2 as
well as other genes. Our results reveal a novel link between PI3 kinase and RNA
polymerase II promoter binding activity and demonstrate discrete, coordinated
roles for the PI3 kinase and Stat5 pathways in cyclin D2 transcription.

PMID: 14660677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6327-36. Epub 2003 Dec 5.

Molecular characterization and role of bovine upstream stimulatory factor 1 and 2
in the regulation of the prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 promoter in granulosa
cells.

Sayasith K(1), Bouchard N, Sawadogo M, Lussier JG, Sirois J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale and the Département de Biomédecine
Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, CP 5000,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.

The transcriptional activation of the prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 (PGHS-2) gene 
in granulosa cells is required for ovulation. To directly study the ability of
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2 to trans-activate the bovine PGHS-2
promoter in granulosa cells, USF1 or USF2 expression vectors were cotransfected
with the PGHS-2/luciferase (LUC) chimeric construct, -149/-2PGHS-2.LUC. Results
revealed that overexpression of USF1 or USF2 caused a marked and significant
increase in basal and forskolin-inducible promoter activities (p<0.05), and these
effects were dependent on the presence of a consensus E-box cis-element within
the promoter fragment. Co-transfections with different N- and C-terminal
truncated USF mutants led to significant reductions in promoter activation, as
compared with full-length constructs (p<0.05), thus allowing identification of
putative bovine USF functional domains. Overexpression of a USF2 truncated mutant
lacking the first 220 residues (U2Delta1-220) acted as a dominant negative mutant
and blocked endogenous and USF-stimulated PGHS-2 promoter activation.
Interestingly, transfections with U2Delta1-220 blocked the forskolin-dependent
induction of PGHS-2 mRNA in granulosa cells, whereas transfections with
full-length USF2 increased PGHS-2 transcript levels. Immunoblot analyses
confirmed overexpression of full-length and truncated USF proteins, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and supershift EMSAs established
that the observed effects were dependent on specific interactions between USF
proteins and the consensus E-box cis-element. Stimulation of cells with forskolin
increased, whereas treatment of extracts with phosphatase decreased USF binding
activities to the E-box. Thus, this study presents for the first time direct
evidence for a role of USF proteins in the regulation of the PGHS-2 promoter in
preovulatory granulosa cells.

PMID: 14660559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jan;40(10):695-708.

Upstream stimulatory factor but not c-Myc enhances transcription of the human
polymeric immunoglobulin receptor gene.

Bruno ME(1), West RB, Schneeman TA, Bresnick EH, Kaetzel CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Secretory antibodies protect mucosal surfaces from ingested, inhaled and sexually
transmitted pathogens. The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) transports
antibodies across mucosal epithelia into external secretions. We and others have 
identified a region of the human polymeric immunoglobulin receptor gene (locus
PIGR) that is sufficient for basal transcriptional activity. An E-Box motif,
which binds transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
(bHLH/zip) family, was identified as a major regulatory element in the PIGR gene 
promoter. Transient transfection of PIGR promoter reporter plasmids in intestinal
epithelial cell (IEC) lines suggested that the transcription factors upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) and c-Myc may exert opposing effects on PIGR promoter
activity. Mutations within and flanking the E-Box that favored USF binding
enhanced promoter activity, while mutations that favored c-Myc binding reduced
promoter activity. Ectopic expression of USF1 or USF2 enhanced PIGR promoter
activity, while exogenous c-Myc did not. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) demonstrated that USF1 and USF2 bound to the E-Box motif as homo- and
heterodimers. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated that USF proteins
bind the PIGR promoter in vivo, which is enriched in acetylated histones. E-Box
motifs are commonly observed in promoters of genes that are highly expressed in
the human colon. Genes that are down-regulated in colorectal cancer, including
PIGR, frequently have non-canonical E-Boxes, while genes that are up-regulated in
colorectal cancer generally have canonical E-Boxes. The results of our
experiments may shed light on the mechanisms of dysregulated expression of pIgR
in inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer, diseases associated with
aberrant expression of c-Myc.

PMID: 14644095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Dec 1;31(23):6710-21.

Dynamics of the metal-dependent transcription factor complex in vivo at the mouse
metallothionein-I promoter.

Daniels PJ(1), Andrews GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mail Stop 3030, University
of Kansas Medical Center, 39th and Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160-7421,
USA.

The in vivo association of transcription factors with the metallothionein-I
promoter was examined using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. The
results demonstrated that c-fos is rapidly recruited along with the metal
response element-binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) to this promoter in
response to zinc or cadmium, and that this recruitment is reversed in the
visceral yolk sac by a zinc-deficient diet in vivo, and in cultured cells after
lowering the zinc concentration in the medium or during prolonged zinc exposure. 
In contrast, the interactions of c-jun, USF-1, USF-2 and Sp1 with this promoter
are metal-independent. Studies of knockout cells revealed that the recruitment of
c-fos to the MT-I promoter requires MTF-1, but that c-fos is not essential for
recruitment of MTF-1 and metal-induction of MT-I gene expression. Studies of Hepa
cells stably-transfected with reporter genes driven by the MT-I promoter
suggested two in vivo binding sites for USF-1 and -2. In contrast, Sp1 was
apparently associated with a single binding site (upstream of -153 bp). In
addition, maximal recruitment of c-fos by metals required sequences and/or other 
proteins that interact upstream of -153 bp. In summary, these studies extend our 
understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the transcription factor complex 
that forms at the MT-I promoter in vivo in response to metals.

PMCID: PMC290280
PMID: 14627804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Gen Virol. 2003 Nov;84(Pt 11):2957-67.

Transcription factor USF, expressed during the entire phase of varicella-zoster
virus infection, interacts physically with the major viral transactivator IE62
and plays a significant role in virus replication.

Rahaus M(1), Desloges N, Yang M, Ruyechan WT, Wolff MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, University of Witten/Herdecke,
Stockumer Str. 10, D-58448 Witten, Germany.

The expression of the genes of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is regulated by
self-encoded viral as well as cellular transcription factors. A potential
candidate with an ability to influence the transcription of VZV genes is USF
(upstream stimulatory factor), which recognizes the consensus E-box motif.
Quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblot assays indicate stable expression of both USF1
and USF2 throughout infection. It was also found that USF binds to a variety of
E-boxes (consensus and closely related motifs) within the promoters of ORF 8/9
(two elements), ORF 22 and ORF 67. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments and His-tag
protein affinity pull-down assays indicate that a direct physical interaction
occurs between USF and the major virus transactivator IE62. To study the general 
effects of USF in the replication of VZV, a cell line expressing a
dominant-negative form of USF (A-USF), which inhibits binding of USF to its
recognition sites, was created. A significant decrease in virus replication was
detected when this cell line was infected with cell-free virus, indicating that
USF is an important cellular factor that regulates the transcription of VZV
genes.

PMID: 14573800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cell Microbiol. 2003 Nov;5(11):821-34.

Helicobacter pylori stimulates host cyclooxygenase-2 gene transcription: critical
importance of MEK/ERK-dependent activation of USF1/-2 and CREB transcription
factors.

Jüttner S(1), Cramer T, Wessler S, Walduck A, Gao F, Schmitz F, Wunder C, Weber
M, Fischer SM, Schmidt WE, Wiedenmann B, Meyer TF, Naumann M, Höcker M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik mit Schwerpunkt Hepatologie und Gastroenterologie,
Charité- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Augustenburger
Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) represents the inducible key enzyme of arachidonic acid 
metabolism and contributes to the pathogenesis of gastroduodenal ulcers and
gastric cancer. Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with elevated gastric
COX-2 levels, but the mechanisms underlying H. pylori-dependent cox-2 gene
expression are unclear. H. pylori stimulated cox-2 mRNA and protein abundance in 
gastric epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo, and functional analysis of the
cox-2 gene promoter mapped its H. pylori-responsive region to a proximal CRE/Ebox
element at -56 to -48. Moreover, USF1/-2 and CREB transcription factors binding
to this site were identified to transmit H. pylori-dependent cox-2 transcription.
Activation of MEK/ERK1/-2 signalling by bacterial virulence factors located
outside the H. pylori cag pathogenicity island (cagPAI) was found to mediate
bacterial effects on the cox-2 promoter. Our study provides a detailed
description of the molecular pathways underlying H. pylori-dependent cox-2 gene
expression in gastric epithelial cells, and may thus contribute to a better
understanding of mechanisms underlying H. pylori pathogenicity.

PMID: 14531897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):49901-10. Epub 2003 Sep 26.

Physical and functional interactions between USF and Sp1 proteins regulate human 
deoxycytidine kinase promoter activity.

Ge Y(1), Jensen TL, Matherly LH, Taub JW.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Deoxycytidine kinase (EC 2.7.1.74, dCK) is central to drug activity of anticancer
and antiviral agents such as cytosine arabinoside (araC) and gemcitabine. HepG2
hepatocellular carcinoma cells were used to study the transcriptional regulation 
of dCK. 5'-Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis of the dCK upstream region
(positions -464 to -27) confirmed the importance of two GC-boxes (positions -317 
to -309 and -213 to -206) and two E-boxes (positions -302 to -297 and -278 to
-273). In vitro electromobility shift assays with HepG2 nuclear extracts and in
vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assays with HepG2 chromatin extracts confirmed
the presence of bound Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/2. Co-transfections in HepG2 cells showed 
that USF1 and USF2a stimulated and Sp1 repressed promoter activity from a
dCK-luciferase reporter gene construct. In Sp- and USF-null Drosophila Mel-2
cells, both Sp1 and USF1 stimulated dCK promoter activity in a dose-dependent
manner, however, both Sp3 and USF2a were effectively inert. Combined Sp1 and USF1
showed additive transactivation at lower concentrations of Sp1. Sp1 was
inhibitory at higher levels. Stimulation by combined USF1/USF2a with Sp1 was
similar to that for USF1 alone with Sp1, whereas transactivation by Sp1 and USF2a
without USF1 was synergistic. Physical interactions between USF and Sp proteins
were confirmed by immunoprecipitations with Sp- and USF-specific antibodies.
Domain mapping of USF1 and USF2a localized the functional interactions between
USF and Sp proteins to the DNA binding domain of USF. Identifying the physical
and functional interactions between Sp and USF proteins may lead to a better
understanding of the basis for differential expression of the dCK gene in tumor
cells and may foster strategies for up-regulating dCK gene expression and
improving chemotherapy with araC and gemcitabine.

PMID: 14514691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 11;22(39):8042-7.

Regulation of telomerase reverse transcriptase gene activity by upstream
stimulatory factor.

Goueli BS(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Upregulation of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) transcription
accounts for the immortalization of greater than 85% of all human tumor cells.
However, the mechanism whereby hTERT expression is activated remains unresolved. 
Specifically, recent data challenging the role of Myc/Max in E-box-dependent
activation of hTERT expression suggests that other E-box-binding proteins
regulate hTERT transcription. Indeed, we now demonstrate that two such proteins, 
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and 2, readily associate with two E-boxes in 
the hTERT promoter in vitro and in vivo primarily as heterodimers, whereas
Myc/Max does not. The avid binding of USF1/2 heterodimers to these E-boxes occurs
in both hTERT-positive and -negative cells. In contrast, USF1/2 activates the
hTERT promoter exclusively in hTERT-positive cells in a manner that is enhanced
by the coactivator p300 and attenuated upon inhibiting p38-MAP kinase, a known
modulator of USF activity. Collectively, our data indicate that USF binding to
the hTERT promoter may be transcriptionally neutral, or even repressive, in
nonimmortalized hTERT-negative somatic cells, but stimulatory in hTERT-positive
cells where USF1/2 contributes to the acquisition and maintenance of immortality.

PMID: 12970752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(18):9852-61.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 activates TERT gene transcription through
induction of c-Myc and release of USF-mediated repression.

McMurray HR(1), McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, 601
Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16), a DNA tumor virus, has a causal role in
cervical cancer, and the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 contribute to oncogenesis
in multiple ways. E6 increases telomerase activity in keratinocytes through
increased transcription of the telomerase catalytic subunit gene (TERT), but the 
factors involved in this have been elusive. We have found that mutation of the
proximal E box in the TERT promoter has an activating effect in luciferase
assays. This suggested that a repressive complex might be present at this site.
HPV-16 E6 activated the TERT promoter predominantly through the proximal E box,
and thus, might be acting on this repressive complex. This site is specific for
the Myc/Mad/Max transcription factors as well as USF1 and USF2. Addition of
exogenous USF1 or USF2 repressed activation of the TERT promoter by E6, dependent
on the proximal E box. Using siRNA against USF1 or USF2 allowed for greater
activation of the TERT promoter by E6. Conversely, loss of c-Myc function,
through a dominant-negative Myc molecule, reduced activation by E6. Chromatin
immunoprecipitations showed that in the presence of E6, there was a reduction in 
binding of USF1 and USF2 at the TERT promoter proximal E box, and a concomitant
increase in c-Myc bound to this site. This shows that a repressive complex
containing USF1 and USF2 is present in normal cells with little or no telomerase 
activity. In E6 keratinocytes, this repressive complex is replaced by c-Myc,
which corresponds to higher levels of TERT transcription and consequently,
telomerase activity.

PMCID: PMC224601
PMID: 12941894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43135-45. Epub 2003 Aug 15.

Cha, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved in the regulation of 
upstream stimulatory factor activity.

Rodríguez CI(1), Gironès N, Fresno M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid,
Cantoblanco, Madrid 28049, Spain.

We report here the characterization of Cha, a transcription factor of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family. The basic region of Cha shares DNA-interacting
amino acids with members of class C bHLH transcription factors. In addition, the 
HLH region of Cha presents a Myc-type dimerization domain signature required for 
heterodimer formation between members of this class. Cha protein and mRNA were
ubiquitously expressed in many human tissues. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that Cha and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-1 formed a complex
that specifically bound to E-box DNA elements. Moreover, pull-down and
co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed an interaction between Cha and USF-1.
Cha did not bind to E-box DNA elements and required USF-1 for protein-DNA complex
formation. Moreover, Cha inhibited USF-1-stimulated transcription of CD2 (a
USF-1-dependent gene) and E-box promoter reporter plasmids. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that Cha occupied the CD2 promoter in resting, 
but not in mitogen-stimulated, T cells. Finally, Cha mRNA and protein expression 
were high in resting T cells and absent in mitogen-activated T cells and
inversely correlated with CD2 expression. Contrarily, overexpression of Cha in T 
cells significantly reduced CD2 expression. In summary, our results indicated
that Cha is a new bHLH transcription factor that negatively regulates
USF-dependent transcription.

PMID: 12923186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6117-28.

USF1 and USF2 mediate inhibition of human trophoblast differentiation and CYP19
gene expression by Mash-2 and hypoxia.

Jiang B(1), Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.

In the human placental syncytiotrophoblast, C(19) steroids are converted to
estrogens by aromatase P450, product of the CYP19 gene. When human
cytotrophoblasts, which lack the capacity to express aromatase, are cultured in
20% O(2), they spontaneously fuse to form a multinuclear syncytiotrophoblast and 
CYP19 expression is markedly induced. On the other hand, when cytotrophoblasts
are cultured in 2% O(2), syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of
CYP19 expression are prevented. We previously observed that expression of the
transcription factor Mash-2 (mammalian achaete/scute homologue 2), which is
elevated in human cytotrophoblasts and maintained at elevated levels by hypoxia, 
declines with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Overexpression of Mash-2
prevents syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of CYP19 expression.
In the present study, we observed that unexpectedly immunoreactive Mash-2 protein
was localized predominantly to the cytoplasm of human cytotrophoblasts. Elevated 
cytoplasmic levels of Mash-2 were maintained when trophoblasts were cultured in
2% O(2) and declined to undetectable levels upon culture in 20% O(2). Previously,
we found that Mash-2 inhibited CYP19 promoter activity through sequences within a
350-bp region upstream and within placenta-specific exon I.1 containing three E
boxes (E1 at -325 bp, 5'-CACTTG-3'; E2 at -58 bp, 5'-CACATG-3'; and E3 at +26 bp,
5'-CACGTG-3'). In this study, we found that trophoblast nuclear protein binding
to these E boxes declined with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation in 20% O(2)
and was induced by hypoxia; however, Mash-2 did not appear to bind to any of
these E boxes. On the other hand, the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
transcription factors upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2) did
bind to E2 and E3 but not E1. Nuclear levels of USF1 and USF2 and DNA-binding
activity declined with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and were maintained at
elevated levels by hypoxia and overexpression of Mash-2, whereas USF1 mRNA levels
were unaffected. Finally, USF1 overexpression in cultured human trophoblasts
markedly inhibited endogenous CYP19 expression, differentiation of cultured human
trophoblast cells, and CYP19 promoter activity. These findings suggest that
increased protein levels and DNA binding of USF1 and USF2 mediate the inhibitory 
effects of hypoxia and of Mash-2 on CYP19 gene expression in human placenta.

PMCID: PMC180905
PMID: 12917334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;17(11):2251-67. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

Diminished milk synthesis in upstream stimulatory factor 2 null mice is
associated with decreased circulating oxytocin and decreased mammary gland
expression of eukaryotic initiation factors 4E and 4G.

Hadsell DL(1), Bonnette S, George J, Torres D, Klimentidis Y, Gao S, Haney PM,
Summy-Long J, Soloff MS, Parlow AF, Sirito M, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service
Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA. dhadsell@bcm.tmc.edu.

Erratum in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2975. Klementidis, Yann [corrected to
Klimentidis, Yann].

Previous studies have suggested that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) regulate
genes involved with cell cycle progression. Because of the relationship of USFs
to an important oncogene in breast cancer, c-myc, we chose to determine the
importance of USF to normal mammary gland development in the mouse. Expression of
USF in the mammary gland throughout development demonstrated only modest changes.
Mutation of the Usf2 gene was associated with reduced fertility in females, but
had no effect on prepartum mammary gland development. However, lactation
performance in Usf2-/- females was only half of that observed in Usf2+/+ females,
and both lactose and nitrogen were decreased in milk from Usf2-/- dams. This
decrease was associated with diminished mammary tissue wet weight and luminal
area by d 9 of lactation and with a decreased protein-DNA ratio. This decrease
was associated with reduced abundance of the eukaryotic initiation factors eIF4E 
and eIF4G. Blood oxytocin concentrations on d 9 postpartum were also lower in
Usf2-/- mice than Usf2+/+ mice. In contrast, the mutation had no effect on blood 
prolactin concentrations, mammary cell proliferation or apoptosis, mammary tissue
oxytocin receptors, or milk protein gene expression. The mutation had only modest
effects on maternal behavior. These data support the idea that USF is important
to physiological processes necessary for the establishment and maintenance of
normal lactation and suggest that USF-2 may impact lactation through both
systemic and mammary cell-specific mechanisms.

PMID: 12907752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37231-40. Epub 2003 Jul 11.

The IGF2 receptor is a USF2-specific target in nontumorigenic mammary epithelial 
cells but not in breast cancer cells.

Szentirmay MN(1), Yang HX, Pawar SA, Vinson C, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The antiproliferative activities of the USF proteins and the frequent loss of USF
function in cancer cells suggest a role for these ubiquitous transcription
factors in tumor suppression. However, the cellular targets that mediate the
effects of USF on cellular proliferation and transformation remain
uncharacterized. IGF2R, with multiple functions in both normal growth and cancer,
was investigated here as a possible USF target in both nontumorigenic and
tumorigenic breast cell lines. The 5'-flanking sequences of the human IGF2R gene 
contain multiple, highly conserved E boxes almost identical to the consensus USF 
DNA-binding sequence. These E boxes were found to be essential for IGF2R promoter
activity in the nontumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line MCF-10A. USF1 and
USF2 bound the IGF2R promoter in vitro, and both USF1 and USF2, but not c-Myc,
were present within the IGF2R promoter-associated chromatin in vivo.
Overexpressed USF2, but not USF1, transactivated the IGF2R promoter, and IGF2R
mRNA was markedly decreased by expression of a USF-specific dominant negative
mutant, identifying IGF2R as a USF2 target. IGF2R promoter-driven expression was 
USF-independent in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines, suggesting
that a defect in USF function may contribute to down-regulation of IGF2R
expression in cancer cells.

PMID: 12857727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Blood. 2003 Nov 1;102(9):3172-8. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Thrombopoietin stimulates Hoxb4 expression: an explanation for the favorable
effects of TPO on hematopoietic stem cells.

Kirito K(1), Fox N, Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
California, San Diego, 92103, USA.

Thrombopoietin (TPO), the primary regulator of platelet production, also plays an
important role in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) biology. In previous studies we
demonstrated that the self-renewal and expansion of HSCs is 10 to 20 times less
robust in tpo-/- mice than in controls. To explore the molecular basis of this
effect, we postulated that Hoxb4 might mediate at least part of the TPO effect on
these cells. We first analyzed the effects of TPO on Hoxb4 expression in
primitive hematopoietic cell lines; TPO increased expression of the gene 2- to
3-fold in EML and UT-7/TPO cells. We also compared Hoxb4 levels in a candidate
HSC population derived from tpo-/- and control mice; Hoxb4 expression was 2- to
5-fold lower in null HSCs. Of the numerous signal transduction molecules induced 
by TPO, we found that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) was responsible
for the TPO-induced Hoxb4 elevation. We also demonstrated that upstream
stimulating factor 1 (USF-1), a transcription factor previously shown to regulate
Hoxb4 expression, is also induced by TPO in a p38-dependent manner. Together,
these data provide a molecular pathway by which a growth factor can modulate a
transcription factor and thereby help direct a critical developmental process.

PMID: 12855555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Aug;12(2):161-7.

Cloning and characterization of a novel splicing isoform of USF1.

Saito T(1), Oishi T, Yanai K, Shimamoto Y, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance (TARA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.
akif@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp

The ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor USFs encoded by two
distinct genes (USF1 and USF2) recognize a core motif, CACGTG, termed E box and
regulate the expression of a variety of genes. USF1 and USF2 proteins form homo- 
and heterodimers to bind the target core motif DNA. Here, we report the molecular
cloning and functional characterization of a novel alternative splicing variant
of human USF1 (hUSF1), termed USF1/BD. Compared with USF1 wild-type (wt), USF1/BD
lacks the N-terminal transactivation domain. Cloning and characterization of the 
hUSF1 genomic region revealed that USF1/BD is generated by excising the sequence 
corresponding to a part of exon 4. In transiently transfected cells, USF1/BD was 
localized in the nucleus and repressed the promoter activity of the human
angiotensinogen gene. In vitro translated USF1/BD possessed DNA binding activity 
as a homodimer and a heterodimer with USF1 (wt). These results suggest that
USF1/BD plays a role as a modulator of USF1 to control the expression of target
genes.

PMID: 12851711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Blood. 2003 Oct 1;102(7):2420-7. Epub 2003 Jun 5.

NF-Y cooperates with USF1/2 to induce the hematopoietic expression of HOXB4.

Zhu J(1), Giannola DM, Zhang Y, Rivera AJ, Emerson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The transcription factor homeobox B4 (HOXB4) is preferentially expressed in
immature hematopoietic cells and implicated in the transition from primitive
hematopoiesis to definitive hematopoiesis as well as in immature hematopoietic
cell proliferation and differentiation. We previously identified Hox response
element 1 (HxRE-1) and HxRE-2/E-box as 2 critical DNA-binding sites of the HOXB4 
promoter active in hematopoietic cells and demonstrated that upstream stimulating
factor 1 and 2 (USF1/2) activate HOXB4 transcription through their binding to the
E-box site. Here we report that the trimeric regulatory complex nuclear factor Y 
(NF-Y) is the factor that recognizes HxRE-1 and activates the HOXB4 promoter in
hematopoietic cells. We further show that NF-Y interacts biochemically with
USF1/2 on the HOXB4 promoter, and that the formation of this NF-Y/USF1/2 complex 
is required for the full activity of the HOXB4 promoter. Most important, NF-Ya
subunit protein levels are found to be lower in c-Kit-Gr-1+ granulocytic bone
marrow (BM) cells than in c-Kit+ immature BM cells, in parallel with a reduction 
of NF-Y occupancy on the HOXB4 promoter as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay. These results suggest that NF-Y is a developmentally regulated
inducer of the HOXB4 gene in hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 12791656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cancer Res. 2003 Jun 1;63(11):2898-904.

A novel single nucleotide polymorphism within the 5' tandem repeat polymorphism
of the thymidylate synthase gene abolishes USF-1 binding and alters
transcriptional activity.

Mandola MV(1), Stoehlmacher J, Muller-Weeks S, Cesarone G, Yu MC, Lenz HJ, Ladner
RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey, School of Osteopathic Medicine, Stratford, New Jersey 08084, USA.

Thymidylate synthase (TS) gene expression is modulated by a polymorphism in the
5' regulatory region of the gene. The polymorphism consists mainly of either two 
repeats (2R) or three repeats (3R) of a 28-bp sequence, yielding greater TS gene 
expression and protein levels with a 3R genotype. Two USF family E-box consensus 
elements are found within the tandem repeats of the 3R genotype, and one is found
within the 2R genotype. These elements bind USF proteins in vitro by
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and in vivo by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. We show that the additional USF consensus element
within the 3R construct confers greater transcriptional activity relative to the 
2R construct. Mutagenesis of the USF sites shows that the transcriptional
regulation of TS is dependent, in part, on USF proteins binding within the tandem
repeats. In addition, we identified a novel G-->C single nucleotide polymorphism 
in the second repeat of 3R alleles within the USF consensus element that alters
the ability of USF proteins to bind and thus alters the transcriptional
activation of TS gene constructs bearing this genotype. Through RFLP analysis, we
determined the respective frequencies of the C allele (3RC) among all 3R alleles 
in non-Hispanic whites, Hispanic whites, African Americans, and Singapore Chinese
to be 56%, 47%, 28%, and 37%, respectively. Based on our findings, this novel
single nucleotide polymorphism should be considered when the 5' tandem repeat
polymorphism is being used as a predictor of clinical outcome to TS inhibitors.

PMID: 12782596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3377-91.

Distinct transcriptional pathways regulate basal and activated major
histocompatibility complex class I expression.

Howcroft TK(1), Raval A, Weissman JD, Gegonne A, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute/NIH, Building 10,
Room 4B-17, 10 Center Drive, MSC 1360, Bethesda, MD 20892-1360, USA.
howcroftk@exchange.nih.gov

Transcription of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I genes is
regulated by both tissue-specific (basal) and hormone/cytokine (activated)
mechanisms. Although promoter-proximal regulatory elements have been
characterized extensively, the role of the core promoter in mediating regulation 
has been largely undefined. We report here that the class I core promoter
consists of distinct elements that are differentially utilized in basal and
activated transcription pathways. These pathways recruit distinct transcription
factor complexes to the core promoter elements and target distinct transcription 
initiation sites. Class I transcription initiates at four major sites within the 
core promoter and is clustered in two distinct regions: "upstream" (-14 and -18) 
and "downstream" (+12 and +1). Basal transcription initiates predominantly from
the upstream start site region and is completely dependent upon the general
transcription factor TAF1 (TAF(II)250). Activated transcription initiates
predominantly from the downstream region and is TAF1 (TAF(II)250) independent.
USF1 augments transcription initiating through the upstream start sites and is
dependent on TAF1 (TAF(II)250), a finding consistent with its role in regulating 
basal class I transcription. In contrast, transcription activated by the
interferon mediator CIITA is independent of TAF1 (TAF(II)250) and focuses
initiation on the downstream start sites. Thus, basal and activated
transcriptions of an MHC class I gene target distinct core promoter domains,
nucleate distinct transcription initiation complexes and initiate at distinct
sites within the promoter. We propose that transcription initiation at the core
promoter is a dynamic process in which the mechanisms of core promoter function
differ depending on the cellular environment.

PMCID: PMC154244
PMID: 12724398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Apr 15;1626(1-3):1-9.

HOXB7 expression is regulated by the transcription factors NF-Y, YY1, Sp1 and
USF-1.

Meccia E(1), Bottero L, Felicetti F, Peschle C, Colombo MP, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale
Regina Elena, 299- 00161, Rome, Italy.

Products of HOX genes are transcription factors responsible for developmental
regulation and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Besides their well-established
function played during embryonic development, we had previously demonstrated the 
direct role of HOXB7 in tumor progression through transactivation of several
genes involved in the proliferative and angiogenic processes. This role is at
first exerted through the deregulated, constitutive expression of this gene. To
define the factors possibly responsible for such activation, we studied the
molecular regulation of HOXB7 in embryonic and neoplastic cells. In a 1.9-kb 5'
promoter region, we identified and functionally tested, at least in vitro,
different regulatory sequences showing a direct binding by the NF-Y, YY1, Sp1/Sp3
and upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) transcription factors. Cell
transfection and site-specific mutagenesis demonstrated Sp1/Sp3, NF-Y, YY1 and
USF-1 binding to be functional and fundamental in driving HOXB7 expression.
Disruption of the corresponding sites reduces gene expression of 65%, 78% and
55%, respectively. Because HOXB7 seems to play an important role in tumor
proliferation and progression, the analysis of its regulatory sequences might
represent an important step for gene targeting according to a new therapeutic
strategy.

PMID: 12697323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Neurosci. 2003 Apr 1;23(7):2572-81.

Upstream stimulatory factors are mediators of Ca2+-responsive transcription in
neurons.

Chen WG(1), West AE, Tao X, Corfas G, Szentirmay MN, Sawadogo M, Vinson C,
Greenberg ME.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

To identify molecular mechanisms that control activity-dependent gene expression 
in the CNS, we have characterized the factors that mediate activity-dependent
transcription of BDNF promoter III. We report the identification of a
Ca(2+)-responsive E-box element, CaRE2, within BDNF promoter III that binds
upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1/2) and show that USFs are required for
the activation of CaRE2-dependent transcription from BDNF promoter III. We find
that the transcriptional activity of the USFs is regulated by Ca(2+)-activated
signaling pathways in neurons and that the USFs bind to the promoters of a number
of neuronal activity-regulated genes in vivo. These results suggest a new
function for the USFs in the regulation of activity-dependent transcription in
neurons.

PMID: 12684442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):20603-11. Epub 2003 Mar 27.

Involvement of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 in RANKL-induced
transcription of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase gene during osteoclast
differentiation.

Liu Y(1), Shi Z, Silveira A, Liu J, Sawadogo M, Yang H, Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama 35294,
USA. xfeng@path.uab.edu

Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) plays an important role in bone
resorption. TRAP expression in osteoclasts is regulated by receptor activator of 
NF-kappaB (RANKL), a potent activator of osteoclast differentiation. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying the RANKL-induced TRAP expression remains unknown.
Here we show that two regions in the mouse TRAP promoter (one at -1858 to -1239
and the other at -1239 to -1039, relative to the translation start site) are
implicated in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription in RAW264.7 cells. A detailed
characterization of the region at -1239 to -1039 identifies a 12-bp sequence,
AGCCACGTGGTG, that specifically binds nuclear proteins from RAW264.7 cells and
primary bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). Moreover, the binding is significantly enhanced in EMSA with nuclear
extracts from RANKL-treated RAW264.7 cells and BMMs, suggesting that the 12-bp
sequence may be involved in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription. Various assays
reveal that nuclear proteins binding to the 12-bp sequence are upstream
stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2. Importantly, mutation of the USF-binding site 
partially blocks RANKL-induced TRAP transcription in RAW264.7 cells, confirming
that USF1 and USF2 are functionally involved in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription.
In summary, our data show that USF1 and USF2 play a functional role in
RANKL-dependent TRAP expression during osteoclast differentiation.

PMID: 12663664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Apr 1;65(7):1087-96.

Interaction of upstream stimulatory factor proteins with an E-box located within 
the human CYP1A2 5'-flanking gene contributes to basal transcriptional gene
activation.

Pickwell GV(1), Shih H, Quattrochi LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Medical Toxicology, B146, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A2 is abundantly expressed in the liver of all vertebrate
species. In most, its expression is restricted to the liver. Sequence analysis of
the human CYP1A2 5'-flanking region from +3 to -3201 identified six E-box motifs 
within the 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) enhancer element (-1987 to -3201). The E-box
motif is recognized by members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors. Gel mobility shift and antibody supershift assays were
used to examine each of the six upstream E-box motifs for their ability to bind
nuclear proteins and to compete with the ubiquitously expressed bHLH protein,
upstream stimulatory factor (USF), for binding. We found that USF-1 and USF-2
proteins bind to the upstream E-box motifs EB2, EB3, and EB4. Transient
transfection assays in HepG2 cells were performed with different segments of the 
human CYP1A2 5'-flanking region linked to a luciferase reporter gene.
Site-directed mutagenesis of one of the E-box motifs, EB2, resulted in a 60%
reduction in basal reporter gene activity. Mutations in EB3 and EB4 had no
effect. We found that transfection of expression vectors containing USF-1 or
USF-2 cDNAs activated CYP1A2 reporter gene activity, while a dominant-negative
USF-2 expression vector blocked such activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays confirmed that the interaction of USF proteins with the CYP1A2 EB2 site
occurs in vivo. These data support the role of USF as a constitutive
transcriptional activator of human CYP1A2.

PMID: 12663044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Med Virol. 2003;70 Suppl 1:S90-4.

Cellular factors and IE62 activation of VZV promoters.

Ruyechan WT(1), Peng H, Yang M, Hay J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, 138 Farber Hall, University at Buffalo, Buffalo,
NY 14214, USA. ruyechan@buffalo.edu

The varicella zoster virus IE62 protein transactivates promoters representing all
three kinetic classes of viral genes. This is accomplished in conjunction with
the general transcription machinery of the cell and specific cellular
transcription factors that act at sites located within viral promoters. The
incidence of a subset of specific recognition sites was examined for the
ubiquitous cellular factors Sp1 and USF within the VZV genome. Evidence is also
presented for a direct physical interaction between Sp1 and IE62.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12627495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17263-8. Epub 2003 Feb 28.

Upstream stimulatory factor represses the induction of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-Ibeta expression by PGC-1.

Moore ML(1), Park EA, McMillin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, UT-Houston Health Science Center, The Texas Medical
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1beta (CPT-1beta) is
coordinated with contractile gene expression through cardiac-enriched
transcription factors, GATA4 and SRF. Metabolic modulation of CPT-1beta promoter 
activity has been described with the stimulation of gene expression by oleate
that is mediated through the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
pathway. The coactivator, peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator (PGC-1), enhances gene expression through interactions with nuclear
hormone receptors and the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family. PGC-1 and
MEF2A synergistically activate CPT-1beta promoter activity. This stimulation is
enhanced by mutation of the E-box sequences that flank the MEF2A binding site.
These elements bind the upstream stimulatory factors (USF1 and USF2), which
activate transcription in CV-1 fibroblasts. However, overexpression of the USF
proteins in myocytes depresses CPT-1beta activity and significantly reduces MEF2A
and PGC-1 synergy. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate that PGC-1 and USF2
proteins can physically interact. Our studies demonstrate that PGC-1 stimulates
CPT-1beta gene expression through MEF2A. USF proteins have a novel role in
repressing the expression of the CPT-1beta gene and modulating the induction by
the coactivator, PGC-1.

PMID: 12611894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Gene. 2003 Feb 27;305(2):205-15.

The Xenopus B2 factor involved in TFIIIA gene regulation is closely related to
Sp1 and interacts in a complex with USF.

Penberthy WT(1), Griffin D, Hall RK, Taylor WL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1606, USA. wtpenber@ucla.edu

In the Xenopus laevis oocyte there is a million fold more transcription factor
IIIA (TFIIIA) and its corresponding mRNA than in a somatic cell. These high
levels of TFIIIA gene expression are achieved primarily by transcriptional
regulation. The TATA box along with three positive cis-elements in the control
region of the TFIIIA gene located at positions -269 to -264 (E1), -235 to -220
(E2), and -669 to -636 (E3) are required for this high level of expression in
oocytes. The proteins that bind E1 and E3 of the TFIIIA gene have been identified
as Xenopus USF (Xl-USF) and B3 (homolog of Vg1 RBP/VERA). In this study the B2
protein was found to bind E2 in a zinc-dependent fashion and anti-human Sp1 (but 
not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4) supershifted the B2:element 2 complex. The E2 binding
protein was purified by DNA affinity chromatography. Based on supershift
analysis, molecular weight estimation experiments, and purified human Sp1 DNA
binding affinity tests the data strongly support the idea that the B2 protein is 
the Xenopus ortholog of Sp1, but not Sp2, Sp3, nor Sp4. Xl-USF binds to element 1
of the TFIIIA gene which is immediately adjacent to element 2.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments using crude whole oocyte extracts revealed that
Xenopus Sp1 and USF or closely related factors are present together in a
high-affinity complex. This structure contributes positively to the initiation of
TFIIIA gene transcription in Xenopus oocytes.

PMID: 12609741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 15;31(4):1292-301.

Characterization of the human beta-globin downstream promoter region.

Leach KM(1), Vieira KF, Kang SH, Aslanian A, Teichmann M, Roeder RG, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mammalian Genetics, Powell Gene Therapy Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
1600 SW Archer Road, PO 100245, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The human beta-globin gene is abundantly expressed specifically in adult
erythroid cells. Stage-specific transcription is regulated principally by
promoter proximal cis-regulatory elements. The basal promoter contains a
non-canonical TATA-like motif as well as an initiator element. These two elements
have been shown to interact with the TFII-D complex. Here we show that in
addition to the TATA and initiator elements, conserved E-box motifs are located
in the beta-globin downstream promoter. One of the E-box motifs overlaps the
initiator and this composite element interacts with USF1 and TFII-I in vitro.
Another E-box, located 60 bp 3' to the transcription initiation site, interacts
with USF1 and USF2. Mutations of either the initiator or the downstream E-box
impair transcription of the beta-globin gene in vitro. Mutations of a putative
NF-E2-binding site in the downstream promoter region do not affect transcription 
in vitro. USF1, USF2, TFII-I and p45 can be crosslinked to a beta-globin promoter
fragment in MEL cells in vivo, whereas only TFII-I and USF2 crosslink to the
beta-globin gene in K562 cells. The summary data demonstrate that in addition to 
the well-characterized interactions of the TFII-D complex with the basal
promoter, E-box motifs contribute to the efficient formation of transcription
complexes on the adult beta-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC150227
PMID: 12582249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Jun;284(6):L1027-36. Epub 2003 Feb 7.

Transcription factor USF2 is developmentally regulated in fetal lung and acts
together with USF1 to induce SP-A gene expression.

Gao E(1), Wang Y, Alcorn JL, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.
cmende@biochem.swmed.edu

Expression of the pulmonary surfactant protein A (SP-A) gene is lung specific,
developmentally regulated, and enhanced by hormones and factors that increase
cAMP. We previously identified two E-box-like enhancers termed distal binding
element (DBE) and proximal binding element (PBE) in the 5'-flanking region of the
rabbit (r) SP-A gene that are essential for cAMP induction of rSP-A promoter
activity (Gao E, Alcorn JL, and Mendelson CR. J Biol Chem 268: 19697-19709,
1993). We also found that DBE and PBE serve as binding sites for the basic
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factor, upstream stimulatory
factor-1 (USF1) (Gao E, Wang Y, Alcorn JL, and Mendelson CR. J Biol Chem 272:
23398-23406, 1997). In the present study, PBE was used to screen a rabbit fetal
lung cDNA expression library; a cDNA insert encoding the structurally related
rabbit upstream stimulatory factor-2 (rUSF2) was isolated. The levels of rUSF2
mRNA reach peak levels in fetal rabbit lung at 28 days of gestation, in concert
with the time of maximal induction of SP-A gene transcription. In yeast
two-hybrid analysis, rUSF2 was found to preferentially form heterodimers,
compared with homodimers, with rUSF1. Binding complexes of nuclear proteins
isolated from fetal rabbit lung type II cells with the DBE and PBE were
supershifted by anti-rUSF2 antibodies. Binding activity was enriched in nuclear
proteins from type II cells compared with fibroblasts. Overexpression of rUSF2 in
transfected lung A549 cells increased rSP-A promoter activity and acted
synergistically with rUSF1. We suggest that heterodimers of USF2 and USF1 bound
to two E-box elements in the SP-A gene 5'-flanking region serve a key role in
developmental and hormonal regulation of SP-A gene expression in pulmonary type
II cells.

PMID: 12576297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Biol Rep. 2002 Dec;29(4):337-45.

Partial purification and characterization of an 80-kDa transcription factor
binding to bHLH motif in the rat p53 promoter.

Lee M(1), Lim YB, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry & Molecular Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 
151-742, Korea.

E-box is one of potential cis-regulatory elements for the p53 gene. It was
previously reported that USF bound to the E-box of the p53 gene. Recently, we
demonstrated that an 80-kDa protein other than USF bound to the E-box and
activated the transcription of the p53 gene. In the present study, the 80-kDa
protein was partially purified and characterized. First, we confirmed that
nuclear factors bound to the E-box in sequence-specific manner by the
oligonucleotide competition assay. The binding protein to the E-box was partially
purified by a sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography. The active fraction 
was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and southwestern blotting assay, which showed that the
80-kDa protein was enriched. The binding activity of the 80-kDa protein was not
decreased in the presence of 1.4 M urea. In addition, the binding activity was
stable up to 50 degrees C. Treatment of EDTA showed that the 80-kDa protein did
not require divalent cation such as Mg2+ for the maximum DNA binding activity.
The competition assay with non-specific competitor, poly (dI-dC) showed that the 
80-kDa protein had high affinity to its binding site. These biochemical
properties provide useful insights into the 80-kDa nuclear factor binding to the 
p53 promoter.

PMID: 12549819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Vis. 2003 Jan 2;9:1-9.

The UV responsive elements in the human mimecan promoter: a functional
characterization.

Tasheva ES(1), Conrad GW.

Author information: 
(1)Kansas State University, Division of Biology, Manhattan, KS 66506-4901, USA.
est@ksu.edu

PURPOSE: A major environmental stress encountered by humans is solar UV light,
which can cause a spectrum of eye diseases, such as photokeratitis, cataract,
pterygia, and ocular neoplasms. Mammalian defense mechanisms in response to
adverse effects of UV light result in induction of a number of genes. Studies on 
the transcriptional regulation of genes that are expressed in the eye will
increase understanding of both the physiological functions of these genes in the 
mammalian UV response, and the molecular bases for abnormalities associated with 
the above diseases. Mimecan is an extracellular matrix proteoglycan that is
abundantly expressed in the cornea. The purpose of this study was to determine
and characterize the UV responsive regulatory elements of the human mimecan
promoter.
METHODS: Transcriptional activity of the promoter was evaluated, before and after
UV irradiation, using transient transfection of human mimecan promoter/luciferase
reporter constructs into corneal keratocytes and non-corneal cells. Site directed
mutagenesis and corresponding functional assays were used to determine the
contribution of UV responsive regions to human mimecan transcription.
Co-transfection experiments were used to investigate the role of transcription
factors that bind these elements in the promoter and mediate the UV response.
mRNA expression was analyzed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).
RESULTS: The shortest promoter construct that was strongly activated following UV
irradiation contained three initiator elements, an E-box element that is
conserved between species, and the entire first intron of the human mimecan gene.
Deletion of the intronic p53 binding site from this construct considerably
diminished transcription and the UV response of the promoter. Surprisingly,
deletion of the E-box sequence from this construct completely abolished both
transcription and UV response of the promoter. These results demonstrated that
the E-box is essential to transcription of the human mimecan gene and also is
required for activation by p53. The role of the E-box, and the E-box binding
protein, USF-1, in transcription and UV responses of the human mimecan promoter
were confirmed by co-transfection experiments using dominant negative
transcription factor, A-USF. In addition to these positive regulators, we
demonstrate that the region between nucleotides -1314 and -1907 contains a
transcriptional repressor site that is active in a time dependent manner
following UV irradiation. Finally, we show that UV irradiation results in changes
in mimecan mRNA levels in bovine corneal keratocytes in a time-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: The human mimecan promoter contains several UV responsive regulatory
elements that are conserved between human and bovine species and include the
intronic p53 DNA binding site, the E-box in the proximal promoter, and the region
between nucleotides -1314 and -1907. The E-box plays an important role in
transcription and UV response of the human mimecan promoter. UV irradiation
modulates expression of mimecan mRNA in bovine corneal keratocytes and
non-corneal cells.

PMID: 12533723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jan 3;1625(1):52-63.

Cloning and characterization of the rat Hsf2 promoter: a critical role of
proximal E-box element and USF protein in Hsf2 regulation in different
compartments of the brain.

Lee SS(1), Kwon SH, Sung JS, Han MY, Park YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Incheon, Dohwa-Dong, South Korea.

The complex patterns of tissue-, cell type- and developmental stage-specific
expression of heat shock factor 2 (Hsf2) raise a question of how this can be
achieved for this ubiquitous transcription factor. To explore molecular
mechanisms responsible for the regulated expression of Hsf2, a 2638-bp
5'-flanking region of the rat Hsf2 gene was cloned and characterized. Since the
brain represents one of the most complicated organs composed of several regions
with different cell types, differential regulation of Hsf2 in various brain
regions was investigated in detail. Results show that the major transcription
initiation site of the Hsf2 gene is located at cytosine-155 relative to the
translation initiation site. The E-box element located immediate upstream of the 
transcription initiation site was demonstrated to be critical for Hsf2 promoter
activity, and the upstream stimulatory factor (USF) protein was identified as the
major E-box binding protein. That the only two base exchange of the E-box core
sequences from CACGTG to CACGGT severely impaired Hsf2 promoter activity and
completely eliminated USF binding clearly demonstrated that the specific binding 
of USF to E-box is critical for Hsf2 promoter activity. Here we demonstrated that
the Hsf2 expression levels varied significantly in different brain regions. We
also demonstrated that Hsf2 expression levels in various brain regions relatively
correlated with the E-box binding activity of USF. Based on these results, we
suggest that E-box binding activity of USF protein may act as one of the major
regulators of Hsf2 expression in situ although a possible involvement of other
transcription factors cannot be ruled out. The presence of several transcription 
factor binding sites of biological importance in the Hsf2 promoter suggests that 
identifying the interplay of USF and these factors should help further elucidate 
the molecular mechanisms of tissue-, cell type- and developmental stage-specific 
expression of Hsf2.

PMID: 12527426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3058-64. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Regulation of human beta 2-microglobulin transactivation in hematopoietic cells.

Gobin SJ(1), Biesta P, Van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

beta(2)-Microglobulin (beta(2)m) is a chaperone of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I (-like) molecules that play a central role in antigen
presentation, immunoglobulin transport, and iron metabolism. It is therefore of
importance that beta(2)m is adequately expressed in cells that perform these
functions, such as hematopoietic cells. In this study, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of beta(2)m in lymphoid and myeloid cell lines through
a promoter containing a putative E box, Ets/interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE), and kappa B site. Here we show that upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1) and USF2 bind to the E box and regulate beta(2)m transactivation. The
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) subunits p50 and p65 bind to the kappa B box 
and p65 transactivates beta(2)m. Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), IRF2,
IRF4, and IRF8, but not PU.1, bind to the Ets/ISRE, and IRF1 and IRF3 are strong 
transactivators of beta(2)m. Together, all 3 boxes are important for the
constitutive and cytokine-induced levels of beta(2)m expression in lymphoid and
myeloid cell types. As such, beta(2)m transactivation is under the control of
important transcriptional pathways, which are activated during injury, infection,
and inflammation.

PMID: 12480693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Virol. 2003 Jan;77(1):489-98.

Promoter sequences of varicella-zoster virus glycoprotein I targeted by cellular 
transactivating factors Sp1 and USF determine virulence in skin and T cells in
SCIDhu mice in vivo.

Ito H(1), Sommer MH, Zerboni L, He H, Boucaud D, Hay J, Ruyechan W, Arvin AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, California 94305, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) glycoprotein I is dispensable in cell culture but
necessary for infection of human skin and T cells in SCIDhu mice in vivo. The gI 
promoter contains an activating upstream sequence that binds the cellular
transactivators specificity factor 1 (Sp1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 
and an open reading frame 29 (ORF29)-responsive element (29RE), which mediates
enhancement by ORF29 DNA binding protein of immediate-early 62 (IE62)-induced
transcription. Recombinants, rOKAgI-Sp1 and rOKAgI-USF, with two base pair
substitutions in Sp1 or USF sites, replicated like rOKA in vitro, but infectivity
of rOKAgI-Sp1 was significantly impaired in skin and T cells in vivo. A double
mutant, rOKAgI-Sp1/USF, did not replicate in skin but yielded low titers of
infectious virus in T cells. The repaired protein, rOKAgI:rep-Sp1/USF, was as
infectious as rOKA. Thus, disrupting gI promoter sites for cellular
transactivators altered VZV virulence in vivo, with variable consequences related
to the cellular factor and the host cell type. Mutations in the 29RE of the gI
promoter were made by substituting each of four 10-bp blocks in this region with 
a 10-bp sequence, GATAACTACA, that was predicted to interfere with enhancer
effects of the ORF29 protein. One of these mutants, which was designated
rOKAgI-29RE-3, had diminished replication in skin and T cells, indicating that
ORF29 protein-mediated enhancement of gI expression contributes to VZV virulence.
Mutations within promoters of viral genes that are nonessential in vitro should
allow construction of recombinant herpesviruses that have altered virulence in
specific host cells in vivo and may be useful for designing herpesviral gene
therapy vectors and attenuated viral vaccines.

PMCID: PMC140613
PMID: 12477854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Gene. 2002 Oct 16;299(1-2):65-77.

Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of transforming growth factor
beta type II receptor expression in osteoblasts.

Chang W(1), Parra M, Ji C, Liu Y, Eickelberg O, McCarthy TL, Centrella M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (Plastic Surgery Section), Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8041, USA.

Variations in transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) activity depend on the
expression of specific receptors in normal as well as transformed cells. For
example, in addition to mutations in TGF-beta type II receptor (TbetaRII) that
abrogate normal TGF-beta function, its expression decreases during the transition
from replication to extracellular matrix production, or in response to other
growth regulators in bone. Therefore, to understand how TbetaRII expression is
controlled, we cloned the rat TbetaRII gene promoter and defined basic aspects of
its structure and activity. Among several cis-acting elements, mutations within
an upstream E-box that specifically binds USF nuclear factors or a downstream Sp1
binding site significantly reduced TbetaRII promoter activity in primary cultures
of fetal rat osteoblasts. Treatment with bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2),
which induces further osteoblast differentiation, significantly reduced cell
surface TbetaRII. However, BMP-2 did not alter TbetaRII promoter activity, steady
state TbetaRII mRNA, or total TbetaRII protein, but caused an intracellular
relocation of TbetaRII. Select transcriptional elements thus regulate TbetaRII
gene expression, whereas post-translational events controlled by BMP-2 rapidly
modify the amount of TbetaRII protein on the bone cell surface. Consequently,
several processes can alter functional TbetaRII levels in order to regulate the
biological effects of this important growth factor.

PMID: 12459253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):4353-7. Epub 2002 Nov 25.

Endotoxin enhances liver alcohol dehydrogenase by action through upstream
stimulatory factor but not by nuclear factor-kappa B.

Potter JJ(1), Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is increased by physiological stress and by
chronic administration of growth hormone (GH). Endotoxin plays a role in the
pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease. The effect of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
the endotoxin component of Gram-negative bacteria, was determined on liver ADH.
LPS given daily to rats for 3 days increased ADH mRNA, ADH protein, and ADH
activity. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) in the liver nuclear extracts bound
to an oligonucleotide specifying region -226 to -194 of the ADH promoter, whereas
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) was shown previously to bind to a more proximal
site. LPS increased NF-kappaB and USF binding to the ADH promoter. The NF-kappaB 
(p65) and NF-kappaB (p50) expression vectors inhibited the transfected ADH
promoter activity, which contrasts with the previously demonstrated stimulation
by an USF expression vector. The binding activities of STAT5b and of C/EBPbeta,
which mediate the effect of GH on ADH, were not changed or decreased,
respectively, by LPS, indicating that GH plays no intermediary role in the effect
of LPS. This study shows that LPS increases ADH and that this effect is mediated 
by increased binding of USF to the ADH promoter and not by NF-kappaB, which has
an inhibitory action.

PMID: 12454009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 15;370(Pt 3):979-86.

Identification of a non-canonical E-box motif as a regulatory element in the
proximal promoter region of the apolipoprotein E gene.

Salero E(1), Giménez C, Zafra F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid-CSIC, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

We have used the yeast one-hybrid system to identify transcription factors with
binding capability to specific sequences in proximal regions of the
apolipoprotein E gene ( APOE ) promoter. The sequence between -113 and -80 nt,
which contains regulatory elements in various cell types, was used as a bait to
screen a human brain cDNA library. Four cDNA clones that encoded portions of the 
human upstream-stimulatory-factor (USF) transcription factor were isolated.
Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays ('EMSAs') using nuclear extracts from
various human cell lines as well as from rat brain and liver revealed the
formation of two DNA-protein complexes within the sequence CACCTCGTGAC (region
-101/-91 of the APOE promoter) that show similarity to the E-box element. The
retarded complexes contained USF1, as deduced from competition and supershift
assays. Functional experiments using different APOE promoter-luciferase reporter 
constructs transiently transfected into U87, HepG2 or HeLa cell lines showed that
mutations that precluded the formation of complexes decreased the basal activity 
of the promoter by about 50%. Overexpression of USF1 in U87 glioblastoma cells
led to an increased activity of the promoter that was partially mediated by the
atypical E-box. The stimulatory effect of USF1 was cell-type specific, as it was 
not observed in hepatoma HepG2 cells. Similarly, overexpression of a USF1
dominant-negative mutant decreased the basal activity of the promoter in
glioblastoma, but not in hepatoma, cells. These data indicated that USF, and
probably other related transcription factors, might be involved in the basal
transcriptional machinery of APOE by binding to a non-canonical E-box motif
within the proximal promoter.

PMCID: PMC1223214
PMID: 12444925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2571-80. Epub 2002 Nov 8.

Regulation of expression of the phospholipid hydroperoxide/sperm nucleus
glutathione peroxidase gene. Tissue-specific expression pattern and
identification of functional cis- and trans-regulatory elements.

Borchert A(1), Savaskan NE, Kuhn H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Humboldt University Medical School Charité,
Monbijoustrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

A sperm nucleus glutathione peroxidase (snGPx), which is closely related to the
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (phGPx), was recently
discovered in late spermatids. Both GPx isoforms originate from a joint ph/snGPx 
gene, but their N-terminal peptides are encoded by alternative first exons. The
expression of the two enzymes is differentially regulated in various cells, but
little is known about the regulatory mechanisms. To explore the tissue-specific
regulation of expression of the two isoenzymes, we first investigated their
tissue distribution. Whereas phGPx is expressed at low levels in many organs,
snGPx was only detected in testis, kidney, and in the human embryonic kidney cell
line HEK293. Subcellular fractionation studies and immunoelectron microscopy
revealed a cytosolic localization. To explore the mechanistic reasons for the
differential expression pattern, we first tested the activity of the putative
phGPx and snGPx promoters. The 5'-flanking region of the joint ph/snGPx gene
exhibits strong promoter activity. In contrast, the putative snGPx promoter,
which comprises 334 bp of intronic sequences, lacks major promoter activity.
However, it strongly suppresses the activity of the ph/snGPx promoter. These data
suggest negative regulatory elements in the first intron of the ph/snGPx gene,
and DNase protection assays revealed the existence of several protein-binding
sites. The corresponding trans-regulatory proteins (SP1, ERG1, GATA1, SREBP1,
USF1, and CREBP1) were identified, and in vivo binding of EGR1 and SREBP1 was
shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation. These data indicate for the first time
somatic expression of the snGPx and provide evidence for the existence of
intronic negative cis-regulatory elements in the ph/snGPx gene. Our failure to
detect an alternative snGPx promoter suggests that transcription of the ph/snGPx 
gene may be regulated by a joint basic promoter. The decision, which GPx isoform 
is expressed in a given cell, appears to be made by alternative splicing of a
joint primary transcript.

PMID: 12427732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem J. 2003 Feb 1;369(Pt 3):549-61.

Upstream stimulatory factor activates the vasopressin promoter via multiple
motifs, including a non-canonical E-box.

Coulson JM(1), Edgson JL, Marshall-Jones ZV, Mulgrew R, Quinn JP, Woll PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool L69
3BX, UK. j.m.coulson@liv.ac.uk

We have described previously a complex E-box enhancer (-147) of the vasopressin
promoter in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) extracts [Coulson, Fiskerstrand, Woll
and Quinn, (1999) Biochem. J. 344, 961-970]. Upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
heterodimers were one of the complexes binding to this site in vitro. We now
report that USF overexpression in non-SCLC (NSCLC) cells can functionally
activate vasopressin promoter-driven reporters that are otherwise inactive in
this type of lung cancer cell. Site-directed mutagenesis and electrophoretic
mobility-shift analysis demonstrate that although the -147 E-box contributes,
none of the previously predicted E-boxes (-147, -135, -34) wholly account for
this USF-mediated activation in NSCLC. 5' Deletion showed the key promoter region
as -52 to +42; however, USF-2 binding was not reliant on the -34 E-box, but on a 
novel adjacent CACGGG non-canonical E-box at -42 (motif E). This mediated USF
binding in both SCLC and USF-2-transfected NSCLC cells. Mutation of motif E or
the non-canonical TATA box abolished activity, implying both are required for
transcriptional initiation on overexpression of USF-2. Co-transfected dominant
negative USF confirmed that binding was required through motif E for function,
but that the classical activation domain of USF was not essential. USF-2 bound
motif E with 10-fold lower affinity than the -147 E-box. In NSCLC, endogenous
USF-2 expression is low, and this basal level appears to be insufficient to
activate transcription of arginine vasopressin (AVP). In summary, we have
demonstrated a novel mechanism for USF activation, which contributes to
differential vasopressin expression in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC1223122
PMID: 12403649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biol Reprod. 2002 Nov;67(5):1509-21.

Expression of steroidogenic factor 1 in the testis requires an interactive array 
of elements within its proximal promoter.

Scherrer SP(1), Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is an orphan nuclear receptor that is important for
expression of genes involved in sexual differentiation, testicular and adrenal
development, and hormone synthesis and regulation. To better understand the
mechanisms required for SF-1 production, we employed transient transfection
analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays to characterize the elements
and proteins required for transcriptional activity of the SF-1 proximal promoter 
in testicular Sertoli and Leydig cells and adrenocortical cells. Direct
comparison of SF-1-promoter activity in testis and adrenal cell types established
that a similar set of regulatory elements (an E box, CCAAT box, and Sp1-binding
sites) is required for proximal promoter activity in these cells. Further
evaluation of the E box and CCAAT box revealed a novel synergism between the two 
elements and identified functionally important bases within the elements.
Importantly, DNA/protein-binding studies uncovered new proteins interacting with 
the E box and CCAAT box. Thus, in addition to the previously identified USF and
NF-Y proteins, newly described complexes, having migration properties that
differed between Sertoli and Leydig cells, were observed bound to the E box and
CCAAT box. Transient transfection analysis also identified several
Sp1/Sp3-binding elements important for expression of SF-1 in the testis, one of
which was previously described for expression in the adrenal gland whereas the
other two were newly disclosed elements.

PMCID: PMC1586108
PMID: 12390883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gut. 2002 Nov;51(5):685-90.

Gastroprotective peptide trefoil factor family 2 gene is activated by upstream
stimulating factor but not by c-Myc in gastrointestinal cancer cells.

Al-azzeh E(1), Dittrich O, Vervoorts J, Blin N, Gött P, Lüscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Divson of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics,
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Damage to the gastrointestinal mucosa results in the acute
up-regulation of the trefoil factor family peptides TFF1, TFF2, and TFF3. They
possess protective, healing, and tumour suppressive functions. Little is known
about the regulation of TFF gene expression. The promoters of all three TFF genes
contain binding sites (E box) for upstream stimulating factor (USF) and
Myc/Max/Mad network proteins.
AIMS: To determine the nature and function of transcription factors that bind to 
these E boxes and to understand their role for TFF gene expression.
METHODS: TFF promoter activities were determined by reporter gene assays. DNA
binding was monitored by electromobility shift assays and by chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses. Expression of endogenous TFF was determined by
multiplex RT-PCR.
RESULTS: It was observed that the TFF2 promoter is specifically and efficiently
activated by USF transcription factors but not by c-Myc. USF displayed comparable
binding to a high affinity Myc/Max binding site compared with the three TFF E
boxes, while c-Myc exhibited lower affinity to the TFF E boxes. In contrast,
pronounced binding differences were observed in cells with a strong preference
for USF to interact specifically with the TFF2 E box, while Myc was not above
background. Exogenous expression of USF was sufficient to activate the
chromosomal TFF2 and to a lesser extent, the TFF1 gene.
CONCLUSION: These findings define USF factors as regulators of the TFF2 gene and 
suggest that promoter specific effects are important for a pronounced gene
activation of this cytoprotective peptide.

PMCID: PMC1773432
PMID: 12377807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Cell Sci. 2002 Oct 1;115(Pt 19):3767-77.

Epithelial monolayer wounding stimulates binding of USF-1 to an E-box motif in
the plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 gene.

Providence KM(1), White LA, Tang J, Gonclaves J, Staiano-Coico L, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology & Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 
12208, USA.

Several proteases and their co-expressed inhibitors modulate the interdependent
processes of cell migration and matrix proteolysis during wound repair.
Transcription of the gene encoding plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1
(PAI-1), a serine protease inhibitor important in the control of barrier
proteolysis and cell-to-matrix adhesion, is spatially-temporally regulated
following epithelial denudation injury in vitro as well as in vivo. Using a
well-defined culture model of acute epidermal wounding and reepithelialization,
PAI-1 mRNA/protein synthesis was induced early after monolayer scraping and
restricted to cells comprising the motile cohort. PAI-1 levels in locomoting
cells remained elevated (relative to the distal, contact-inhibited monolayer
regions) throughout the time course of trauma repair. Targeted PAI-1
downregulation by transfection of antisense PAI-1 expression constructs
significantly impaired keratinocyte migration and monolayer scrape wound closure.
Injury-induced PAI-1 transcription closely paralleled growth state-dependent
controls on the PAI-1 gene. An E-box motif (CACGTG) in the PAI-1 proximal
promoter (located at nucleotides -160 to -165), previously shown to be necessary 
for serum-induced PAI-1 expression, was bound by nuclear factors from
wound-stimulated but not quiescent, contact-inhibited, keratinocytes. UV
crosslinking approaches to identify E-box-binding factors coupled with
deoxyoligonucleotide affinity chromatography and gel retardation assays confirmed
at least one major E-box-binding protein in both serum- and wound-activated cells
to be USF-1, a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors. An
intact hexanucleotide E-box motif was necessary and sufficient for USF-1 binding 
using nuclear extracts from both serum- and wound-simulated cells. Two species of
immunoreactive USF-1 were identified by western blotting of total cellular
lysates that corresponded to the previously characterized phosphorylated and
non-phosphorylated forms of the protein. USF-1 isolated by PAI-1 promoter-DNA
affinity chromatography was almost exclusively phosphorylated. Only a fraction of
the total cellular USF-1 in proliferating cultures, by comparison, was
phosphorylated at any given time. PAI-1 E-box binding activity, assessed by probe
mobility shift criteria, increased within 2 hours of monolayer scrape injury, a
time frame consistent with wound-stimulated increases in PAI-1 transcription.
Relative to intact cultures, scrape site-juxtaposed cells had significantly
greater cytoplasmic and nuclear USF-1 immunoreactivity correlating with the
specific in situ-restricted expression of PAI-1 transcripts/protein in the
wound-edge cohort. USF-1 immunocytochemical staining declined significantly with 
increasing distance from the denudation site. These data are the first to
indicate that binding of USF-1 to its target motif can be induced by 'tissue'
injury in vitro and implicate USF-1 as a transcriptional regulator of genes (e.g.
PAI-1) involved in wound repair.

PMID: 12235287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Oct;283(4):C1065-72.

USF-1 and USF-2 trans-repress IL-1beta-induced iNOS transcription in mesangial
cells.

Gupta AK(1), Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical School at
Houston, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene
requires multiple interactions of cis elements and trans-acting factors. Previous
in vivo footprinting studies (Goldring CE, Reveneau S, Algarte M, and Jeannin JF.
Nucleic Acids Res 24: 1682-1687, 1996) of the murine iNOS gene demonstrated
lipopolysaccharide-inducible protection of guanines in the region -904/-883,
which includes an E-box motif. In this report, by using site-directed mutagenesis
of the -893/-888 E-box and correlating functional assays of the mutated iNOS
promoter with upstream stimulatory factor (USF) DNA-binding activities, we
demonstrate that the -893/-888 E-box motif is functionally required for iNOS
regulation in murine mesangial cells and that USFs are in vivo components of the 
iNOS transcriptional response complex. Mutation of the E-box sequence augmented
the iNOS response to interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) in transiently transfected
mesangial cells. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrated that USFs cannot bind to 
the -893/-888 E-box promoter region when the E-box is mutated. Cotransfection of 
USF-1 and USF-2 expression vectors with iNOS promoter-luciferase reporter
constructs suppressed IL-1beta-simulated iNOS promoter activity. Cotransfection
of dominant-negative USF-2 mutants lacking the DNA binding domain or cis-element 
decoys containing concatamers of the -904/-883 region augmented IL-1beta
stimulation of iNOS promoter activity. Gel mobility shift assays showed that only
USF-1 and USF-2 supershifted the USF protein-DNA complexes. These results
demonstrated that USF binding to the E-box at -893/-888 serves to trans-repress
basal expression and IL-1beta induction of the iNOS promoter.

PMID: 12225970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Immunol. 2002 Sep;38(16-18):1193-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the human high affinity IgE receptor alpha-chain
gene.

Takahashi K(1), Nishiyama C, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Advanced Medical
Research Center, Nihon University School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kamimachi,
Itabashi-ku, 173-8610, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding human high affinity IgE receptor 
(Fc epsilon RI) alpha-chain was analyzed. Previously, we reported that GATA-1 and
Elf-1 recognition sites were necessary for cell type-specific activation of the
alpha-chain gene promoter. More detailed analysis revealed that other
transcription factors bound the regions close to the Elf-1 recognition site and
there was a more complex mechanism for the regulation of the promoter activity.
On the other hand, during a course of studies to find cis-elements over this
gene, CAGCTG sequence in the first intron was revealed to serve as an enhancer. A
complex composed of USF1 and USF2 activated the human alpha-chain gene expression
via this intronic element. Furthermore, we found two novel exons at 18.4 and
12.6kb upstream from the reported first exon and discovered an additional distal 
promoter.

PMID: 12217383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Virology. 2002 Aug 1;299(2):256-265.

Regulation of HIV-1 transcription in activated monocyte macrophages.

Yang Y(1), Tesmer VM, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, 1393 Brown Building, West
Lafayette, IN 47907-1393, USA.

DNA-binding and functional assays examined the role played by NF-IL6 in
regulation of HIV-1 transcription in human monocyte/macrophages (U937 cells),
stimulated with LPS+PMA. When incubated with nuclear extracts from stimulated
cells, a region (-189/-147), containing the major NF-IL6-binding sequence and the
USF site, interacted selectively with USF1 and USF2. Anti-C/EBPbeta reacted
poorly with the complexes produced with the wild-type probe. In contrast, complex
formation with NF-IL6 was clearly evident in experiments analyzing a probe
containing an insertion in the USF site. In functional assays, increasing
concentrations of a decoy against NF-IL6 reduced gene expression from the LTR of 
the wild-type HIV-1 variant, supporting a critical role for NF-IL6 in regulation 
of HIV-1 transcription in stimulated monocyte/macrophages. The decoy also reduced
gene expression from a deletion construct lacking NF-IL6-binding sequences. The
results implied that in LPS+PMA-stimulated monocyte/macrophages, the endogenous
NF-IL6 could act via a site-independent pathway in upregulation of HIV-1
transcription. Analysis of a short DNA segment, containing the -189/-147 region, 
suggested functional interactions of NF-IL6 and USF. In activated cells exogenous
NF-IL6 enhanced dramatically gene expression through a short DNA segment
containing the NF-kappaB sites, supporting functional interactions of NF-IL6 and 
NF-kappaB.

PMID: 12202228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44485-96. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Osteopontin transcription in aortic vascular smooth muscle cells is controlled by
glucose-regulated upstream stimulatory factor and activator protein-1 activities.

Bidder M(1), Shao JS, Charlton-Kachigian N, Loewy AP, Semenkovich CF, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The expression of the matrix cytokine osteopontin (OPN) is up-regulated in aortic
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) by diabetes. OPN expression in cultured
VSMCs is reciprocally regulated by glucose and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG; inhibitor of
cellular glucose metabolism). Systematic analyses of OPN promoter-luciferase
reporter constructs identify a CCTCATGAC motif at nucleotides -80 to -72 relative
to the initiation site that supports OPN transcription in VSMCs. The region -83
to -45 encompassing this motif confers basal and glucose- and 2-DG-dependent
transcription on an unresponsive promoter. Competition and gel mobility
supershift assays identify upstream stimulatory factor (USF; USF1:USF2) and
activator protein-1 (AP1; c-Fos:c-Jun) in complexes binding the composite
CCTCATGAC element. Glucose up-regulates both AP1 and USF binding activities
2-fold in A7r5 cells and selectively up-regulates USF1 protein levels. By
contrast, USF (but not AP1) binding activity is suppressed by 2-DG and restored
by glucose treatment. Expression of either USF or AP1 activates the proximal OPN 
promoter in A7r5 VSMCs in part via the CCTCATGAC element. Moreover, glucose
stimulates the transactivation functions of c-Fos and USF1, but not c-Jun, in
one-hybrid assays. Mannitol does not regulate binding, transactivation functions,
USF1 protein accumulation, or OPN transcription. Thus, OPN gene transcription is 
regulated by USF and AP1 in aortic VSMCs, entrained to changes in cellular
glucose metabolism.

PMID: 12200434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 16;296(2):374-82.

A critical function of USF in HGF gene regulation mediated by a multiconsensus
region.

Odenthal M(1), Spindler MP, Kerres K, Dienes HP, Schirmacher P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University Clinic of Cologne, Joseph Stelzmann Str.
9, Koeln, Germany. m.odenthal@uni-koeln.de

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a multifunctional growth factor implicated in a
variety of tissue restructuring processes. Since HGF acts as a highly potent
mitogen, HGF expression is suggested to be under a well-defined transcriptional
control. The 5' sequence of the HGF gene clusters a set of several binding sites 
for transcription factors in a so-called multiconsensus region (MCR) located
between -230 and 260. Our studies demonstrate that a NF1-like element and the
E(1)-box of the MCR form the main complexes with nuclear proteins and that both
are involved in transcriptional silencing of the HGF gene in non-HGF expressing
cell types. The E(1)-box of two tandemly arranged E-boxes was shown to be a
binding site of high affinity interacting with the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF). While recombinant expression of a wild-type USF did not affect gene
expression, a USF variant lacking the DNA binding domain restored the MCR
mediated transcriptional repression. In conclusion, our data provide evidence
that USF is a central factor of cell-type specific HGF regulation, acting in
cooperation with additional regulatory proteins as a bivalent mediator of
transcriptional activation or repression.

PMID: 12163028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35920-31. Epub 2002 Jul 11.

Involvement of an upstream stimulatory factor as well as cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein in the activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
gene promoter I.

Tabuchi A(1), Sakaya H, Kisukeda T, Fushiki H, Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama
Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sugitani 2630, Toyama, Japan.

The use of different brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene promoters
results in the differential production of 5'-alternative transcripts, suggesting 
versatile functions of BDNF in neurons. Among four BDNF promoters I, II, III, and
IV (BDNF-PI, -PII, -PIII, and -PIV), BDNF-PI was markedly activated, as well as
BDNF-PIII, by Ca(2+) signals evoked via neuronal activity. However, little is
known about the mechanisms for the transcriptional activation of BDNF-PI. Using
rat cortical neurons in culture, we assigned the promoter sequences responsible
for the Ca(2+) signal-mediated activation of BDNF-PI and found that the
Ca(2+)-responsive elements were located in two separate (distal and proximal)
regions and that the DNA sequences in the proximal region containing
cAMP-responsive element (CRE), which is overlapped by the upstream stimulatory
factor (USF)-binding element, were largely responsible for the activation of
BDNF-PI. CRE-binding protein (CREB) family transcription factors and USF1/USF2
bind to this overlapping site, depending upon their preferred sequences which
also control the magnitude of the activation. Overexpression of dominant negative
CREB or USF reduced the BDNF-PI activation. These findings support that not only 
CREB but also USF1/USF2 contributes to Ca(2+) signal-mediated activation of
BDNF-PI through the recognition of an overlapping CRE and USF-binding element.

PMID: 12114522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32746-52. Epub 2002 Jun 26.

ChREBP rather than USF2 regulates glucose stimulation of endogenous L-pyruvate
kinase expression in insulin-secreting cells.

Wang H(1), Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

There is controversy whether or not upstream stimulatory factors (USF) regulate
the glucose responsiveness of L-pyruvate kinase (L-PK) promoter activity in
hepatocytes. It has been suggested that USF-2 is required for glucose stimulation
of L-PK promoter activity in single islet beta-cells and INS-1 cells (Kennedy, H.
J., Viollet, B., Rafiq, I., Kahn, A., and Rutter, G. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.
272, 20636-20640). In the present study, the tet-on system has been employed to
achieve tightly controlled and inducible expression of USF-1 and -2 and their
dominant-negative mutants DN-USF-1 (DeltabTDU1) and -2 (TDU2) in INS-1 cells.
Quantitative Northern blot analysis shows that neither basal level nor glucose
responsiveness of endogenous L-PK mRNA is affected by overexpression of USF-1 and
-2. Likewise, the L-PK expression is unaltered by dominant-negative suppression
of USF function. Western blotting demonstrates that USF-1 and -2 and DN-USF-1 and
-2 proteins are stably expressed in nuclear fractions of INS-1 cells.
Immunofluorescence staining indicates the uniform induction of these
transgene-encoded proteins in the cell nuclei. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using the L-PK promoter segment reveal that induction of USF-1 and -2
dramatically enhances the USF binding activity, whereas DN-USF-1 and -2 abolish
binding. DN-USF-1 and -2 exert their dominant-negative effect by forming
non-functional heterodimers with endogenous USF proteins. Carbohydrate response
element-binding protein (ChREBP) was recently shown to regulate the glucose
responsiveness of the L-PK promoter activity in hepatocytes. We now report the
presence of this transcription factor in rat islets and INS-1 cells. Glucose
stimulates ChREBP transcription in INS-1 cells, as shown by nuclear run-on
experiments. Overexpression of ChREBP in INS-1 cells using the tet-on system
results in a left shift of glucose responsiveness of L-PK expression and an
enhanced L-PK promoter activity. Both endogenous and doxycycline-induced ChREBP
proteins bind to the L-PK promoter in a glucose-dependent manner. These
unprecedented results suggest that ChREBP rather than USF mediates
glucose-promoted L-PK expression in insulin-secreting cells.

PMID: 12087089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMC Mol Biol. 2002 Jun 21;3:10. Epub 2002 Jun 21.

USF2 inhibits C/EBP-mediated transcriptional regulation of the RIIbeta subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase.

Dahle MK(1), Taskén K, Taskén KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Oslo, N-0317 Oslo, Norway. m.k.dahle@basalmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) plays a central role in
regulation of energy metabolism. Upon stimulation of testicular Sertoli cells by 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), glycolysis is activated to increase the
production of nutrients for the germ cells, and a new regulatory subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase, RIIbeta, is induced. We have previously shown that
production of the transcription factor C/EBPbeta is rapidly increased by FSH and 
cAMP in primary Sertoli cell cultures, and that C/EBPbeta induces the RIIbeta
promoter.
RESULTS: In this work we show that USF1, USF2 and truncated USF isoforms bind to 
a conserved E-box in the RIIbeta gene. Interestingly, overexpression of USF2, but
not USF1, led to inhibition of both cAMP- and C/EBPbeta-mediated induction of
RIIbeta. Furthermore, Western blots show that a novel USF1 isoform is induced by 
cAMP in Sertoli cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the expression of various USF isoforms
may be regulated by cAMP, and that the interplay between USF and C/EBPbeta is
important for cAMP-mediated regulation of RIIbeta expression. The counteracting
effects of USF2 and C/EBPbeta observed on the RIIbeta promoter is in accordance
with the hypothesis that C/EBP and USF play opposite roles in regulation of
glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC117135
PMID: 12086590  [PubMed]


332. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jun;269(12):3057-64.

Molecular mechanisms underlying SHP-1 gene expression.

Tsui HW(1), Hasselblatt K, Martin A, Mok SC, Tsui FW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular & Molecular Biology, Toronto Western Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

SHP-1, a protein-tyrosine phosphatase with two src-homology 2 domains, is
expressed predominantly in hematopoietic and epithelial cells and has been
implicated in numerous signaling pathways as a negative regulator. Two promoters 
direct the expression of human and murine SHP-1, and two types of transcripts (I)
and (II) SHP-1, are initiated from each of these promoters. The cDNA sequences of
(I)SHP-1 and (II)SHP-1 are identical except in the 5' untranslated region and in 
the first few coding nucleotides. In this report, we show that promoter usage is 
similar in mouse and human hematopoietic cells, but different in epithelial
cells. In human epithelial cells, only (I)SHP-1 transcripts were expressed. In
addition, 4beta-phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate up-regulates human (I)SHP-1
transcript expression in SKOV3 cells (an ovarian cancer cell line). Indirect
evidence suggests that nuclear factor-kappaB might play a role in this induction.
We also show that a 12-bp repeat in the distal SHP-1 promoter, which directs
(I)SHP-1 expression, is of functional relevance as deletion of one copy of this
E-box-containing 12-bp repeat resulted in a significant decrease in promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and supershift experiments showed
that the upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 hetero-dimerize and interact 
with this 12 bp repeat. Our results suggest that USFs which have
antiproliferative functions might regulate the expression of SHP-1, which itself 
is predominantly a negative growth regulator.

PMID: 12071971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2002 Jul;283(1):H213-9.

Role of USF1 phosphorylation on cardiac alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter
activity.

Xiao Q(1), Kenessey A, Ojamaa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, North Shore-Long Island
Jewish Research Institute, New York University School of Medicine, Manhasset, New
York 11030, USA.

Contractile activity of the cardiac myocyte is required for maintaining cell mass
and phenotype, including expression of the cardiac-specific alpha-myosin heavy
chain (alpha-MHC) gene. An E-box hemodynamic response element (HME) located at
position -47 within the alpha-MHC promoter is both necessary and sufficient to
confer contractile responsiveness to the gene and has been shown to bind upstream
stimulatory factor-1 (USF1). When studied in spontaneously contracting cardiac
myocytes, there is enhanced binding of USF1 to the HME compared with quiescent
cells, which correlates with a threefold increase in alpha-MHC promoter activity.
A molecular mechanism by which contractile function modulates alpha-MHC
transcriptional activity may involve signaling via phosphorylation of USF1. The
present studies showed that purified rat USF1 was phosphorylated in vitro by
protein kinase C (PKC) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) but not casein
kinase II. Phosphorylated USF1 by either PKC or PKA had increased DNA binding
activity to the HME. PKC-mediated phosphorylation also leads to the formation of 
USF1 multimers as assessed by gel shift assay. Analysis of in vivo phosphorylated
nuclear proteins from cultured ventricular myocytes showed that USF1 was
phosphorylated, and resolution by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis identified 
at least two distinct phosphorylated USF1 molecules. These results suggest that
endogenous kinases can covalently modify USF1 and provide a potential molecular
mechanism by which the contractile stimulus mediates changes in myocyte gene
transcription.

PMID: 12063293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 15;168(12):6279-85.

Functional analysis of the human complement receptor 2 (CR2/CD21) promoter:
characterization of basal transcriptional mechanisms.

Ulgiati D(1), Pham C, Holers VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Division of Rheumatology, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Human complement receptor (CR) type 2 (CR2/CD21) is a 145-kDa membrane protein
encoded within the regulators of complement activation gene cluster localized on 
human chromosome 1q32. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate CR2 expression 
is important because CR2 is expressed during specific stages of B cell
development, and several lines of evidence suggest a role for altered CR2
function or expression in a number of autoimmune diseases. Additionally, even
modest changes in CR2 expression are likely to affect relative B cell responses. 
In this study we have delineated the transcriptional requirements of the human
CR2 gene. We have studied the human CR2 proximal promoter and identified sites
important for controlling the level of transcription in CR2-expressing cells. We 
have determined that four functionally relevant sites lie within very close
proximity to the transcriptional initiation site. These sites bind the
transcription factors USF1, an AP-2-like transcription factor, and Sp1.

PMID: 12055242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jun 5;520(1-3):40-6.

Variant forms of upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) control the promoter
activity of hTERT, the human gene encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase.

Yago M(1), Ohki R, Hatakeyama S, Fujita T, Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Assembly, Department of Biological
Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

It is known that Myc regulates the expression of TERT, the telomerase catalytic
subunit gene, by binding to E box. Here we show that another E box-binding
protein, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), also regulates TERT expression.
Specifically, the N-terminally truncated form of USF2 is present in
telomerase-negative/resting human lymphocytes, but not in
telomerase-positive/phytohemagglutinin-activated lymphocytes. In electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay, both full-length and truncated USF2s bound to the TERT E
box. In a transient expression assay, the truncated USF had a dominant-negative
effect on both exogenous full-length USF and endogenous positive regulators for
activating TERT expression. These results suggest that the differential abundance
of truncated USF2 may regulate telomerase activity during lymphocyte activation.

PMID: 12044867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Gene. 2002 Feb 20;285(1-2):127-39.

Genomic organization and promoter characterization of the gene encoding a
putative endoplasmic reticulum chaperone, ERp29.

Sargsyan E(1), Baryshev M, Backlund M, Sharipo A, Mkrtchian S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institute, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

ERp29 is a soluble protein localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of
eukaryotic cells, which is conserved in all mammalian species. The N-terminal
domain of ERp29 displays sequence and structural similarity to the protein
disulfide isomerase despite the lack of the characteristic double cysteine motif.
Although the exact function of ERp29 is not yet known, it was hypothesized that
it may facilitate folding and/or export of secretory proteins in/from the ER.
ERp29 is induced by ER stress, i.e. accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER. 
To gain an insight into the mechanisms regulating ERp29 expression we have cloned
and characterized the rat ERp29 gene and studied in details its distribution in
human tissues. Comparison with the murine and human genes and phylogenetic
analysis demonstrated common origin and close ortholog relationships of these
genes. Additionally, we have cloned approximately 3 kb of the 5'-flanking region 
of the ERp29 gene and functionally characterized its promoter. Such
characteristics of the promoter as GC-rich sequence, absence of TATA-box,
multiple transcription start sites taken together with the ubiquitous gene
expression, reaching maximum levels in the specialized secretory tissues,
indicate that ERp29 belongs to the group of the constitutively expressed
housekeeping genes. A 337 bp fragment of the 5' flank was identified as a core
promoter sufficient for the transcriptional activation of the gene. Gel mobility 
shift assay indicated interaction of the predicted GC and E box elements within
the core promoter with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2 transcription factors, respectively,
suggesting their key role in the basal expression of the gene.

PMID: 12039039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biol Reprod. 2002 Jun;66(6):1656-66.

Orphan receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors inhibit
steroid factor-1, upstream stimulatory factor, and activator protein-1 activation
of ovine follicle-stimulating hormone receptor expression via composite
cis-elements.

Xing W(1), Danilovich N, Sairam MR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Reproduction Research Laboratory, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2W 1R7.

The FSH receptor (FSHR) is selectively expressed in the granulosa and Sertoli
cells in a development-dependent manner. Little is known regarding how the
regulatory factors balance expression of this gene in ovarian cycles or
spermatogenic stages. We have used the ovine FSHR promoter as a model system and 
identified a third regulatory element (RE-3) located at -197 to -171 of the
strongest promoter. Gel mobility shift and antibody supershift assays
demonstrated that nuclear factors c-Fos/c-Jun, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1),
upstream stimulatory factor-1/2 (USF-1/2), and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor-1/2 (COUP-TFI/II) potentially bound to RE-3. We
have also extended our previous observations by showing that a sequence
containing an E-box was not only bound by USF proteins but also recognized by
COUP-TF orphan receptors. Functional studies demonstrated that USF-1/2,
c-Fos/c-Jun, and SF-1 were activators, whereas COUP-TFs were repressors. Our
studies indicated that RE-3 mediated SF-1 activation as well as phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation, whereas COUP-TFs inhibited AP-1, USFs, and
SF-1 activation. We also demonstrated that both COUP-TF-binding sites in the core
promoter were required for the bipartite elements to oppose their competitor
binding. These data suggest a mechanism by which positive and negative regulators
compete for the common regulatory elements, providing antagonistic pathways that 
might govern the expression of FSHR in gonadal cells.

PMID: 12021044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 15;30(10):e44.

Combining chromatin immunoprecipitation and DNA footprinting: a novel method to
analyze protein-DNA interactions in vivo.

Kang SH(1), Vieira K, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Powell Gene Therapy Center, 
Center for Mammalian Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Florida, 1600
SW Archer Road, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

A variety of methods are available to analyze protein-DNA interactions in vivo.
Two of the most prominent of these methods are chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and in vivo footprinting. Both of these procedures have specific
limitations. For example, the ChIP assay fails to document where exactly a
protein binds in vivo. The precipitation of a specific segment of DNA with
antibodies directed against DNA-binding proteins does not necessarily indicate
that the protein directly interacts with a sequence in the precipitate but could 
rather reflect protein-protein interactions. Furthermore, the results of in vivo 
footprinting studies are inconclusive if a DNA sequence is analyzed that is bound
by a specific protein in only a certain fraction of cells. Finally, in vivo
footprinting does not indicate which protein is bound at a specific site. We have
developed a new procedure that combines the ChIP assay and DMS footprinting
techniques. Using this method we show here that antibodies specific for USF1 and 
NF-E2 precipitate the murine beta-globin promoter in MEL cells. DMS footprinting 
analysis of the DNA precipitated with NF-E2 antibodies revealed a protection over
a partial NF-E2-binding site in the beta-globin downstream promoter region. We
believe that this novel method will generally benefit investigators interested in
analyzing protein-DNA interactions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC115298
PMID: 12000849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Mar 19;1574(2):175-86.

Functional analysis of the glucose response element of the rat glucagon receptor 
gene in insulin-producing INS-1 cells.

Portois L(1), Tastenoy M, Viollet B, Svoboda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Medical School, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, CP 611, 808 Route de Lennik, B-1070, Brussels, Belgium.

Glucose stimulates the transcription of the glucagon receptor gene in hepatocytes
and in pancreatic beta cells. We recently identified a glucose response element
in the immediate upstream non-coding region of the rat glucagon receptor gene. We
previously showed that this DNA element is centered on a palindromic sequence of 
19 nucleotides (termed as G box), containing two E boxes separated by three
nucleotides. In the present study, we further characterized the DNA sequence
requirements for the glucose induced expression of the rat glucagon receptor
gene. Transfection study realized in the insulin-producing INS-1 cells revealed
that a fragment of 49 nucleotides, centered on the G box, bears all the features 
required for the glucose activation. Mutations performed in the 5'-E box totally 
abolished the glucose responsiveness, whereas mutations or deletion of the 3'-E
box only had a limited effect. Deletions performed upstream from the G box
revealed that an accessory factor binding site, located in the region just
upstream from the G box, is required for full stimulation by glucose. Finally, by
using G box based probes in gel shift experiments, we demonstrated that USF1/USF2
transcription factors are part of the proteinic complex that binds to the glucose
response element of the rat glucagon receptor gene promoter. In conclusion, in
contrast to many other glucose regulated genes, only the 5'-E box appears to be a
crucial DNA element for the glucose transcriptional effect. However, an accessory
factor binding site located in the region just upstream from the G box is
required for a complete stimulation by glucose.

PMID: 11955627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Genesis. 2002 Apr;32(4):247-58.

Cooperative E-box regulation of human GLI1 by TWIST and USF.

Villavicencio EH(1), Yoon JW, Frank DJ, Füchtbauer EM, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern
University Medical School, 2300 Children's Plaza, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Sonic hedgehog signaling plays a critical role in vertebrate patterning, and
signaling defects are associated with severe birth defects and cancer in man.
GLI1 encodes a critical transcription activator in this pathway. GLI1 is
expressed in human basal cell carcinomas and sarcomas. Despite the significance
of the GLI1 gene in human disease, few immediate upstream regulators of GLI1
expression are known. We previously demonstrated that a 5' region, including 5'
flanking sequence, an untranslated exon, and 425 bp of the first intron,
regulates the human GLI1 gene. Here we show that inactivating mutations in E-box,
GC box, AP-2, GATA, GSG, PuF, and Zeste sites identified three critical
regulatory elements, including a GC box that binds Sp1 and two intronic E-boxes
that bind USF proteins or Twist. Expression of Twist but not a frame shift
mutation of Twist activates the wild-type human GLI1 regulatory sequences but not
with inactivating mutations of the E-boxes. Twist activates GLI1 reporter
expression through E-box +482 but requires binding of USF proteins to E-box +157.
Twist mutations cause human birth defects and Twist is overexpressed in many
rhabdomyosarcomas, suggesting that one of Twist's primary roles is the regulation
of GLI1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11948912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Apr 15;30(8):1789-98.

Binding of USF to a non-canonical E-box following stress results in a
cell-specific derepression of the lama3 gene.

Virolle T(1), Coraux C, Ferrigno O, Cailleteau L, Ortonne JP, Pognonec P, Aberdam
D.

Author information: 
(1)U385 INSERM, Faculté de Médecine, 06107 Nice Cedex 2, France.

Expression of the lama3 gene, encoding the laminin alpha3A chain, is restricted
to specialized epithelia. We previously showed that lama3 gene expression is
controlled by an epithelial enhancer through the cooperative effect of AP-1
binding sites. In fibroblasts, there is no lama3 expression because of the
recruitment of a repressor complex absent or inactive in epithelial cells. In
this paper, we show evidence that this repression of the lama3 gene is relieved
by exogenous and UV-induced USF-1 through its interaction with a non-canonical
E-box site. Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we find that UV stress
induces USF to bind to the lama3 promoter in vivo. We further demonstrate that
this loss of cell specificity is directly related to the accessibility of the
E-box, resulting in a strong induction in fibroblasts, while expression remains
constitutively high in keratinocytes. This accessibility appears to be dependent 
upon the recruitment of a fibroblastic repressor complex. Therefore, we speculate
that anchorage of this repressor complex in fibroblasts modifies the enhancer
geometry, allowing USF to interact under stress-inducing conditions with its
heptameric binding site.

PMCID: PMC113197
PMID: 11937633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Lipid Res. 2002 Feb;43(2):297-306.

The E-box motif in the proximal ABCA1 promoter mediates transcriptional
repression of the ABCA1 gene.

Yang XP(1), Freeman LA, Knapper CL, Amar MJ, Remaley A, Brewer HB Jr,
Santamarina-Fojo S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Disease Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1666, USA.

To identify regulatory elements in the proximal human ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 (hABCA1) gene promoter we transfected RAW cells with plasmids
containing mutations in the E-box, AP1, and liver X receptor (LXR) elements as
well as the two Sp1 motifs. Point mutations in either Sp1 site or in the AP1 site
had only a minor effect whereas mutation of the LXR element decreased promoter
activity. In contrast, mutation or deletion of the E-box motif caused a 3-fold
increase in transcriptional activity under basal conditions. Gel shift and DNaseI
footprint analysis showed binding of a protein or protein complex to this region.
Preincubation of nuclear extracts with antibodies established that USF1, USF2,
and fos related antigen (Fra) 2 bind to DNA sequences in the human ABCA1 promoter
that contains the intact E-box but not the mutant or deleted E-box.
Co-transfection of USF1 and USF2 enhanced, but Fra2 repressed, ABCA1 promoter
activity. Thus, a complex consisting of USF1, USF2, and Fra2 binds the E-box
motif 147 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site and facilitates
repression of the human ABCA1 promoter. These combined studies identify a novel
site in the human ABCA1 promoter involved in the regulation of ABCA1 gene
expression.

PMID: 11861672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):15199-206. Epub 2002 Feb 11.

Two initiator-like elements are required for the combined activation of the human
apolipoprotein C-III promoter by upstream stimulatory factor and hepatic nuclear 
factor-4.

Pastier D(1), Lacorte JM, Chambaz J, Cardot P, Ribeiro A.

Author information: 
(1)U505 INSERM, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Institut des Cordeliers, 15 rue
de l'Ecole de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France.

Human apoC-III (-890/+24) promoter activity is strongly activated by hepatic
nuclear factor (HNF)-4 through its binding to the proximal (-87/-72) element B.
This site overlaps the binding site for an activity that we identified as the
ubiquitously expressed upstream stimulatory factor (USF) (Ribeiro, A., Pastier,
D., Kardassis, D., Chambaz, J., and Cardot, P. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274,
1216-1225). In the present study, we characterized the relationship between USF
and HNF-4 in the activation of human apoC-III transcription. Although USF and
HNF-4 binding to element B is mutually exclusive, co-transfection experiments in 
HepG2 cells surprisingly showed a combined effect of USF and HNF-4 in the
transactivation of the (-890/+24) apoC-III promoter. This effect only requires
the proximal region (-99/+24) of the apoC-III promoter and depends neither on USF
binding to its cognate site in element B nor on a USF-dependent facilitation of
HNF-4 binding to its site. By contrast, we found by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and footprinting analysis two USF low affinity binding sites, located
within the proximal promoter at positions -58/-31 (element II) and -19/-4
(element I), which are homologous to initiator-like element sequence.
Co-transfection experiments in HepG2 cells show that a mutation in element II
reduces 2-fold the USF transactivation effect on the proximal promoter of
apoC-III and that a mutation in element I inhibits the combined effect of USF and
HNF-4. In conclusion, these initiator-like elements are directly involved in the 
transactivation of the apoC-III promoter by USF and are necessary to the combined
effect between USF and HNF-4 for the apoC-III transcription.

PMID: 11839757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Diabetes. 2002 Feb;51(2):293-300.

Transcriptional regulation of adipocyte hormone-sensitive lipase by glucose.

Smih F(1), Rouet P, Lucas S, Mairal A, Sengenes C, Lafontan M, Vaulont S, Casado 
M, Langin D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 317, Institut Louis Bugnard, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Rangueil, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the
mobilization of fatty acids from adipose tissue, thus determining the supply of
energy substrates in the body. HSL mRNA was positively regulated by glucose in
human adipocytes. Pools of stably transfected 3T3-F442A adipocytes were generated
with human adipocyte HSL promoter fragments from -2,400/+38 to -31/+38 bp linked 
to the luciferase gene. A glucose-responsive region was mapped within the
proximal promoter (-137 bp). Electromobility shift assays showed that upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)-1 and USF2 and Sp1 and Sp3 bound to a consensus E-box
and two GC-boxes in the -137-bp region. Cotransfection of the -137/+38 construct 
with USF1 and USF2 expression vectors produced enhanced luciferase activity.
Moreover, HSL mRNA levels were decreased in USF1- and USF2-deficient mice.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the HSL promoter showed that the GC-boxes, although 
contributing to basal promoter activity, were dispensable for glucose
responsiveness. Mutation of the E-box led to decreased promoter activity and
suppression of the glucose response. Analogs and metabolites were used to
determine the signal metabolite of the glucose response. The signal is generated 
downstream of glucose-6-phosphate in the glycolytic pathway before the triose
phosphate step.

PMID: 11812735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 1;290(4):1295-9.

NF-Y involvement in the polyunsaturated fat inhibition of fatty acid synthase
gene transcription.

Teran-Garcia M(1), Rufo C, Nakamura MT, Osborne TF, Clarke SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Texas, Austin 78712, USA.

Dietary polyunsaturated fats (PUFA) reduce the hepatic content of SREBP-1 65-75%,
and this is paralleled by a comparable decrease in the expression of fatty acid
synthase (FAS) gene. The close association between the nuclear content of SREBP-1
and FAS transcription has led to the conclusion that PUFA inhibit lipogenic gene 
transcription by suppressing SREBP-1 expression, but this conclusion is based
upon correlative data. When in fact the SREBP-1/USF sites of the insulin response
element of FAS were mutated, only 25% of the PUFA inhibition of FAS promoter
activity was lost. On the other hand, mutating the -99/-93 NF-Y site reduced
overall promoter activity 85%, and eliminated 50% of the PUFA suppression of FAS 
promoter activity. In addition, extended cloning and transfection-reporter assays
revealed that the FAS gene contains a second PUFA response region (PUFA-RR) in
the distal area of -7382/-6970. Interestingly, the distal PUFA-RR(FAS) has many
similarities to the PUFA-RR of l-pyruvate kinase gene while the proximal
PUFA-RR(FAS) is comparable to the PUFA-RR of the S14 and stearoyl-CoA desaturase 
genes.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11812004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2001 Nov-Dec;37(10):684-90.

Transcriptional regulation of the transforming growth factor-beta2 gene in
glioblastoma cells.

Kingsley-Kallesen M(1), Luster TA, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases and Department of 
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
68198-6805, USA.

The expression of transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) appears to play a 
strong role in the establishment and progression of glial tumors. In particular, 
elevated expression of TGF-beta2 appears to be responsible for the impaired
cell-mediated immunity often observed in patients with a glioblastoma. This study
examined the regulation of the TGF-beta2 at the transcriptional level in the
U87MG glioblastoma cell line. We demonstrate that a cAMP response
element/activating transcription factor (CRE/ATF) site and an E-box motif located
just upstream of the transcription start site are essential for the transcription
of the TGF-beta2 gene in U87MG cells. Gel mobility analysis determined that
activating transcription factor-1, and possibly cAMP-responsive element binding
protein, binds to the CRE/ATF site, and upsteam stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and
USF2 bind to the E-box motif. Interestingly, expression of a dominant negative
USF protein down-regulates TGF-beta2 activity by 80-95% in glioblastoma cells. We
conclude that the binding of transcription factors, in particular the USF
proteins, to the TGF-beta2 promoter is essential for its expression and possibly 
its up-regulation in glioblastomas.

PMID: 11776974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):8775-89. Epub 2001 Dec 10.

Upstream stimulatory factors binding to an E box motif in the R region of the
bovine leukemia virus long terminal repeat stimulates viral gene expression.

Calomme C(1), Nguyen TL, de Launoit Y, Kiermer V, Droogmans L, Burny A, Van Lint 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Service de Chimie Biologique, Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire,
Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

The bovine leukemia virus (BLV) promoter is located in its 5'-long terminal
repeat and is composed of the U3, R, and U5 regions. BLV transcription is
regulated by cis-acting elements located in the U3 region, including three 21-bp 
enhancers required for transactivation of the BLV promoter by the virus-encoded
transactivator Tax(BLV). In addition to the U3 cis-acting elements, both the R
and U5 regions contain stimulatory sequences. To date, no transcription
factor-binding site has been identified in the R region. Here sequence analysis
of this region revealed the presence of a potential E box motif (5'-CACGTG-3').
By competition and supershift gel shift assays, we demonstrated that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors USF1 and USF2 specifically interacted with
this R region E box motif. Mutations abolishing upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
binding caused a reproducible decrease in basal or Tax-activated BLV
promoter-driven gene expression in transient transfection assays of B-lymphoid
cell lines. Cotransfection experiments showed that the USF1 and USF2a
transactivators were able to act through the BLV R region E box. Taken together, 
these results physically and functionally characterize a USF-binding site in the 
R region of BLV. This E box motif located downstream of the transcription start
site constitutes a new positive regulatory element involved in the
transcriptional activity of the BLV promoter and could play an important role in 
virus replication.

PMID: 11741930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47658-63. Epub 2001 Oct 17.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate aortic preferentially expressed gene-1
expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Chen YH(1), Layne MD, Watanabe M, Yet SF, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care and Cardiovascular Divisions, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The phenotypic modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) plays a central 
role in the pathogenesis of arteriosclerosis. Aortic preferentially expressed
gene-1 (APEG-1), a VSMC-specific gene, is expressed highly in differentiated but 
not in dedifferentiated VSMC. Previously, we identified an E-box element in the
mouse APEG-1 proximal promoter, which is essential for VSMC reporter activity. In
this study, we investigated the role of upstream stimulatory factors (USF) in the
regulation of APEG-1 transcription via this E-box element. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, recombinant USF1 and USF2 homo- and heterodimers bound
specifically to the APEG-1 E-box. Nuclear extracts prepared from primary cultures
of rat aortic smooth muscle cells exhibited specific USF1 and USF2 binding to the
APEG-1 E-box. To investigate the binding properties of USF during VSMC
differentiation, nuclear extracts were prepared from the neural crest cell line, 
MONC-1, which differentiates into VSMC in culture. Maximal USF1 and USF2 protein 
levels and binding to the APEG-1 E-box occurred 3 h after the differentiation of 
MONC-1 cells was initiated. Co-transfection experiments demonstrated that
dominant negative USF repressed APEG-1 promoter activity, and USF1, but not USF2,
transactivated the APEG-1 promoter. Our studies demonstrate that USF factors
contribute to the regulation of APEG-1 expression and may influence the
differentiation of VSMC.

PMID: 11606591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Endocrinology. 2001 Nov;142(11):4643-51.

Up-regulation of upstream stimulatory factors by protein malnutrition and its
possible role in regulation of the IGF-binding protein-1 gene.

Matsukawa T(1), Inoue Y, Oishi Y, Kato H, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Protein malnutrition drastically induces the expression of the IGF-binding
protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene. We have previously shown that the region between -77
and -112 bp upstream of the rat IGFBP-1 gene contributes to the response of this 
gene to amino acid limitation. In an attempt to elucidate the basis of the
responsiveness of this putative amino acid response unit (AARU), we searched the 
nucleus of the rat liver for a trans-acting factor whose binding to AARU was
dependent on protein nutrition. Liver nuclear extracts of rats fed a protein-free
diet and of those fed a control diet were compared by EMSA using the AARU as
probe. One of the protein-probe complexes underwent a drastic increase after
dietary protein deprivation. Assays using specific antibodies and several
competitor oligonucleotides led to identification of the protein composing the
complex as upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF) and USF-2. The binding site of the
USF proteins in the AARU turned out to be a CACGGG sequence that was homologous
to the consensus USF-binding sequence (E box; CANNTG). Further, Western blot
analyses showed that a protein-free diet caused significant increases in USF-1
and USF-2 levels. Thus, elevated expression of the IGFBP-1 gene under protein
malnutrition can be attributable to increased binding of USF to its promoter,
which results from increased USF levels. The data suggest that the changes in
these ubiquitously distributed transcription factors play an important role in
the nutritional regulation of expression of mammalian genes.

PMID: 11606429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Anim Sci. 2001 Sep;79(9):2336-45.

Transcriptional regulation of fatty acid synthase gene by somatotropin in
3T3-F442A adipocytes.

Yin D(1), Clarke SD, Etherton TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy and Animal Science, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park 16802, USA. dezhong_2_yin@sbphrd.com

Somatotropin (ST) antagonizes insulin stimulation of fatty acid synthase (FAS)
enzyme activity and gene transcription in adipocytes. Previous studies have shown
that an insulin response element (IRE) is located in the proximal region of the
FAS promoter (-71 to -50) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 binds to this
IRE. The present study was conducted to initially evaluate whether there is a
somatotropin response element (STRE) in the 5'flanking region of the FAS gene and
to determine whether USF1 mediates the effect of ST on FAS gene transcription in 
3T3-F442A adipocytes. Two 5' deletion FAS promoter constructs (pFAS-CATS4 and
pFAS-CAT5), which contain the 5' flanking sequences of the rat FAS gene at -112
to +65 and -2195 to +65, respectively, were stably transfected into 3T3-F442A
preadipocytes. Insulin stimulated chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
activity 1.7- and 4.7-fold (P < 0.05) in 3T3-F442A adipocytes transfected with
pFAS-CATS4 and pFAS-CAT5, respectively. In contrast, bovine somatotropin (bST)
attenuated the stimulatory effect of insulin on CAT activity by approximately 60%
(P < 0.05) in both constructs. When 3T3-F442A adipocytes were treated with
insulin (10 ng/mL) or insulin (10 ng/mL) plus bST (100 ng/mL) for 24, 48, or 72
h, neither insulin nor bST significantly affected USF1 mRNA levels. When human
USF1 (hUSF1) cDNA probe was used, however, insulin increased the abundance of an 
unidentified transcript (named hUSF1-like mRNA) 11- to 25-fold (P < 0.05) and ST 
decreased the stimulatory effect of insulin on hUSF1-like mRNA levels by 50 to
90% (P < 0.05). Western blot analyses of nuclear extracts from cells treated with
insulin (10 ng/mL) or insulin (10 ng/mL) plus bST (100 ng/mL) for 48 h
demonstrated that the abundance of USF1 was not affected by insulin or ST.
Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift analyses (EMSA) of nuclear extracts
revealed that neither insulin nor ST had an effect on the binding of USF1 to the 
IRE. These results suggest that a STRE may be located within the first 112 bp of 
the FAS promoter and that USF1 does not directly mediate the effect of ST on
transcription of the FAS gene in 3T3-F442A adipocytes.

PMID: 11583420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45530-8. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Critical roles of a cyclic AMP responsive element and an E-box in regulation of
mouse renin gene expression.

Pan L(1), Black TA, Shi Q, Jones CA, Petrovic N, Loudon J, Kane C, Sigmund CD,
Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Mouse As4.1 cells, obtained after transgene-targeted oncogenesis to induce
neoplasia in renal renin expressing cells, express high levels of renin mRNA from
their endogenous Ren-1(c) gene. We have previously identified a 242-base pair
enhancer (coordinates -2866 to -2625 relative to the CAP site) upstream of the
mouse Ren-1(c) gene. This enhancer, in combination with the proximal promoter
(-117 to +6), activates transcription nearly 2 orders of magnitude in an
orientation independent fashion. To further delimit sequences necessary for
transcriptional activation, renin promoter-luciferase reporter gene constructs
containing selected regions of the Ren-1(c) enhancer were analyzed after
transfection into As4.1 cells. These results demonstrate that several regions are
required for full enhancer activity. Sequences from -2699 to -2672, which are
critical for the enhancer activity, contain a cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE)
and an E-box. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that
transcription factors CREB/CREM and USF1/USF2 in As4.1 cell nuclear extracts bind
to oligonucleotides containing the Ren-1(c) CRE and E-box, respectively. These
two elements are capable of synergistically activating transcription from the
Ren-1(c) promoter. Moreover, mutation of either the CRE or E-box results in
almost complete loss of enhancer activity, suggesting the critical roles these
two elements play in regulating mouse Ren-1(c) gene expression. Although the
Ren-1(c) gene contains a CRE, its expression is not induced by cAMP in As4.1
cells. This appears to reflect constitutive activation of protein kinase A in
As4.1 cells since treatment with the protein kinase A inhibitor, H-89, caused a
significant reduction in Ren-1(c) gene expression and this reduction is mediated 
through the CRE at -2699 to -2688.

PMID: 11564732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. FEBS Lett. 2001 Sep 7;505(1):57-62.

Cell type-dependent regulation of human DNA topoisomerase III alpha gene
expression by upstream stimulatory factor 2.

Han SY(1), Kim JC, Suh JM, Chung IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Protein Network Research Center,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, South Korea.

Here, we report that an E-box element located within the human topoisomerase III 
alpha (hTOP3 alpha) gene promoter acts as a cell type-specific enhancer. The
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) was shown to specifically recognize the
mutationally sensitive E-box element. When assayed by transient transfection with
hTOP3 alpha promoter-dependent reporter genes, USF is transcriptionally active in
HeLa cells but lacks transcriptional activity in Saos-2 cells. The hTOP3 alpha
mRNA level in Saos-2 cells was reduced to about 30% of the level observed for
HeLa cells, suggesting that the inactivity of USF in hTOP3 alpha promoter
activity may be the cause of the marked reduction of hTOP3 alpha mRNA levels in
Saos-2 cells. Using transient transfection assays in HeLa cells, we demonstrated 
that ectopically expressed USF2, but not USF1, was capable of activating hTOP3
alpha transcription through the E-box element. However, USF2 did not stimulate
hTOP3 alpha promoter activity in Saos-2 cells. This cell type-specific regulation
of promoter activity by USF2 may provide a mechanism for the differential
expression of hTOP3 alpha in various tissues and during developmental stages.

PMID: 11557042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. EMBO J. 2001 Sep 3;20(17):5022-31.

The Usf-1 transcription factor is a novel target for the stress-responsive p38
kinase and mediates UV-induced Tyrosinase expression.

Galibert MD(1), Carreira S, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The
Chart, Oxted RH8 0TL, UK.

The stress-activated signalling cascade leading to phosphorylation of the p38
family of kinases plays a crucial role during development and in the cellular
response to a wide variety of stress-inducing agents. Although alterations in
gene expression characteristic of the stress response require the regulation of
key transcription factors by the p38 family, few downstream targets for this
signalling pathway have been identified. By examining the ability of pigment
cells to respond to UV irradiation as part of the UV-induced tanning response, we
show that while the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor Mitf regulates
basal Tyrosinase expression, it is the ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix-leucine 
zipper transcription factor Usf-1 that is required for the UV activation of the
Tyrosinase promoter. Consistent with this we demonstrate that Usf-1 is
phosphorylated and activated by the stress-responsive p38 kinase. The results
suggest that activation of Usf-1 by p38 at a wide variety of viral and cellular
promoters will provide a link between stimuli as diverse as UV irradiation,
glucose, viral infection and pro-inflammatory cytokines, and the changes in gene 
expression associated with the stress response.

PMCID: PMC125271
PMID: 11532965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Oncogene. 2001 Aug 2;20(34):4750-6.

Cross-regulatory interaction between Stra13 and USF results in functional
antagonism.

Dhar M(1), Taneja R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, One Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Transcription factors belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family are
critical regulators of cellular proliferation and differentiation. The functional
activity of these proteins can be regulated by heterodimerization through the HLH
domain, as a result of formation of functional or non-functional heterodimers.
The presence of a leucine zipper in bHLH-leucine zipper (bHLHZip) proteins,
however, prevents such heterodimeric interactions via the HLH domain between bHLH
and bHLHZip proteins. To identify cellular proteins that directly interact with
and modulate transcriptional repression mediated by the bHLH protein Stra13, we
carried out a yeast two hybrid screen. The bHLHZip protein USF (Upstream
Stimulatory factor) was identified as a Stra13 interacting protein. We
demonstrate a direct interaction between Stra13 and USF that is dependent upon
the C-terminal repression domain of Stra13 and the DNA-binding domain of USF.
Stra13 and USF also colocalize and functionally interact in mammalian cells.
Co-expression of USF abrogates Stra13-mediated repression of target genes and
conversely, Stra13 inhibits DNA-binding and USF-mediated transactivation. Taken
together, our data demonstrate that Stra13 and USF interact physically and
functionally, and identify a novel mode of cross regulatory interaction between
members of the bHLH and bHLHZip families that abrogates their functional
activity.

PMID: 11498797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 31;40(30):8887-97.

TFEC can function as a transcriptional activator of the nonmuscle myosin II heavy
chain-A gene in transfected cells.

Chung MC(1), Kim HK, Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1762, USA.

Transcription of the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain-A (NMHC-A) gene is
regulated via multiple elements located in intron 1, including element F which
contains an E-box. In this study we have identified and characterized the factors
that are capable of binding to element F. Yeast one-hybrid screening using
element F allowed isolation of cDNAs encoding transcriptional factors TFEC, TFE3,
and USF2, each of which contains basic helix-loop-helix and leucine zipper
motifs. Furthermore, cDNA cloning by polymerase chain reaction yielded cDNAs for 
two TFEC isoforms, designated TFEC-l and TFEC-s, which are generated by
alternative pre-mRNA splicing. In addition to these four factors, USF1, which is 
known to share the same DNA binding elements with USF2, was isolated for
comparison. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and cotransfection studies of
the expression constructs with reporter gene constructs revealed that the above
five factors have different binding activities for element F with different
transactivation potencies. USF1 and USF2 demonstrate the highest binding activity
to element F, yet show the lowest element F-dependent transactivation. TFE3 has a
high transactivation potency but the lowest binding activity. TFEC-l demonstrates
a high binding activity with the highest transactivation potency, whereas TFEC-s 
has the same binding activity as TFEC-l with intermediate transactivation. We
also demonstrate that an N-terminal activation domain exists only in TFEC-l,
whereas a C-terminal activation domain is common to both the l and s isoforms.
This study provides the first evidence of TFEC being an activator of
transcription, with two separate activation domains.

PMID: 11467950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 May;15(5):704-15.

Activation of the rat follicle-stimulating hormone receptor promoter by
steroidogenic factor 1 is blocked by protein kinase a and requires upstream
stimulatory factor binding to a proximal E box element.

Heckert LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology The University of Kansas
Medical Center Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

The receptor for the pituitary glycoprotein hormone FSH (FSHR) and the nuclear
hormone receptor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) play important roles in control of
the hypothalamic-pituitary- gonadal axis. FSHR is essential for integrating the
pituitary FSH signal to gonadal response, while SF-1 is an important
transcriptional regulator of many genes that function within this axis and is
essential for the development of gonads and adrenal glands. Given the critical
role of SF-1 in regulation of the gonads and the coexpression of FSHR and SF-1 in
Sertoli and granulosa cells, we examined the ability of SF-1 to regulate
transcription of the FSHR gene. We found that SF-1 stimulated rat FSHR promoter
activity in a dose-dependent and promoter-specific manner. Examination of various
promoter deletion mutants indicated that SF-1 acts through the proximal promoter 
region and upstream promoter sequences. An E box element within the proximal
promoter is essential for activation of the FSHR promoter by SF-1. This element
binds the transcriptional regulators USF1 and USF2 (upstream stimulatory factors 
1 and 2) but not SF-1, as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In
addition, functional studies identified a requirement for the USF proteins in
SF-1 activation of FSHR and mapped an important regulatory domain within exons 4 
and 5 of USF2. Cotransfection studies revealed that activation of protein kinase 
A leads to inhibition of SF-1-stimulated transcription of FSHR, while it
synergized with SF-1 to activate the equine LH beta-promoter (ebeta). Thus,
stimulation of the cAMP pathway differentially regulates SF-1 activation of the
FSHR and ebeta-promoters.

PMCID: PMC1496918
PMID: 11328853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 4;283(2):384-91.

Regulation of mouse DNA topoisomerase IIIalpha gene expression by YY1 and USF
transcription factors.

Park EJ(1), Han SY, Chung IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Protein Network Research Center,
Yonsei University, Seoul, 120-749, Korea.

To investigate the mechanisms responsible for the regulation of DNA topoisomerase
IIIalpha (TOP3alpha) gene expression, the promoter region of the mouse gene has
been cloned and analyzed. The promoter region is moderately high in GC content
and lacks a canonical TATA box, typical for promoters of a number of housekeeping
genes. Transient expression of a luciferase reporter gene under the control of
serially deleted 5'-flanking sequences demonstrated that the 34-bp region from
-137 to -170 upstream of the transcription initiation site contains a positive
regulatory element(s) for the efficient expression of mouse TOP3alpha gene.
Combined analyses by gel mobility shift and supershift assays revealed that both 
YY1 and USF transcription factors were capable of binding to the 34-bp region.
When YY1 and USF-binding elements were selectively mutated, the luciferase
activity of the resulted constructs was greatly reduced, indicating that both YY1
and USF function as transcriptional activators. Interestingly, YY1 and
USF-binding elements are conserved in both human and mouse TOP3alpha promoters.
This suggests that mammalian TOP3alpha genes may possess a common mechanism of
transcription regulation through these elements.

PMID: 11327713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Blood. 2001 May 1;97(9):2657-66.

The upstream stimulatory factor-2a inhibits plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
gene expression by binding to a promoter element adjacent to the
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 binding site.

Samoylenko A(1), Roth U, Jungermann K, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Humboldtallee 23,
Göttingen, Germany.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) expression is induced by hypoxia (8%
O(2)) via the PAI-1 promoter region -175/-159 containing a hypoxia response
element (HRE-2) binding the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and an adjacent
response element (HRE-1) binding a so far unknown factor. The aim of the present 
study was to identify this factor and to investigate its role in the regulation
of PAI-1 expression. It was found by supershift assays that the upstream
stimulatory factor-2a (USF-2a) bound mainly to the HRE-1 of the PAI-1 promoter
and to a lesser extent to HRE-2. Overexpression of USF-2a inhibited PAI-1
messenger RNA and protein expression and activated L-type pyruvate kinase
expression in primary rat hepatocytes under normoxia and hypoxia. Luciferase
(Luc) gene constructs driven by 766 and 276 base pairs of the 5'-flanking region 
of the PAI-1 gene were transfected into primary hepatocytes together with
expression vectors encoding wild-type USF-2a and a USF-2a mutant lacking DNA
binding and dimerization activity (DeltaHU2a). Cotransfection of the wild-type
USF-2a vector reduced Luc activity by about 8-fold, whereas cotransfection of
DeltaHU2a did not influence Luc activity. Mutation of the HRE-1 (-175/-168) in
the PAI-1 promoter Luc constructs decreased USF-dependent inhibition of Luc
activity. Mutation of the HRE-2 (-165/-158) was less effective. Cotransfection of
a HIF-1alpha vector could compete for the binding of USF at HRE-2. These results 
indicated that the balance between 2 transcriptional factors, HIF-1 and USF-2a,
which can bind adjacent HRE sites, appears to be involved in the regulation of
PAI-1 expression in many clinical conditions.

PMID: 11313255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biochem Cell Biol. 2001;79(2):153-8.

Identification of a transcription factor, an 80-kDa protein that interacts with
the HLH recognition motif of the rat p53 promoter.

Song H(1), Lee M, Yu S, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Korea.

The p53 promoter has been shown to contain a number of potential regulatory
motifs. It was previously reported that the upstream stimulating factor (USF)
played a central role in regulating the p53 expression. The USF binding site,
E-box, is located around 40 bp upstream of the major transcription start site. In
this study, it was confirmed that the E-box binds to proteins by DNase I
footprinting assay. In the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), two
retarded bands were detected. One band was abolished by the competition of USF
consensus oligonucleotide, but the other band was not. This result indicated that
a factor, other than USF, was bound to the E-box. The molecular masses of the
binding proteins were determined by a Southwestern-blotting assay. As a result,
46- and 80-kDa proteins were detected. The 46-kDa protein was eliminated by the
competition of USF consensus oligonucleotide. Also, the Southwestern-blotting
assay with 32P-labeled USF consensus oligonucleotide showed only a 46-kDa
protein. Therefore, the 46-kDa protein was USF. These results showed that USF and
the 80-kDa protein were bound to the E-box. In addition, it was proved by in
vitro transcription assay that this 80-kDa protein had a basal transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 11310562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Exp Med. 2001 Apr 16;193(8):935-42.

Identification of a chlamydial protease-like activity factor responsible for the 
degradation of host transcription factors.

Zhong G(1), Fan P, Ji H, Dong F, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA. zhong@uthscsa.edu

Microbial pathogens have been selected for the capacity to evade or manipulate
host responses in order to survive after infection. Chlamydia, an obligate
intracellular pathogen and the causative agent for many human diseases, can
escape T lymphocyte immune recognition by degrading host transcription factors
required for major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigen expression. We have
now identified a chlamydial protease- or proteasome-like activity factor (CPAF)
that is secreted into the host cell cytosol and that is both necessary and
sufficient for the degradation of host transcription factors RFX5 and upstream
stimulation factor 1 (USF-1). The CPAF gene is highly conserved among chlamydial 
strains, but has no significant overall homology with other known genes. Thus,
CPAF represents a unique secreted protein produced by an obligate intracellular
bacterial pathogen to interfere with effective host adaptive immunity.

PMCID: PMC2193410
PMID: 11304554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Apr 24;98(9):5037-42. Epub 2001 Apr 10.

Muscle-regulated expression and determinants for neuromuscular junctional
localization of the mouse RIalpha regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent protein
kinase.

Barradeau S(1), Imaizumi-Scherrer T, Weiss MC, Faust DM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, Département de Biologie Moléculaire,
Institut Pasteur, Unité de Recherche Associée 1773 du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, 25, Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

In skeletal muscle, transcription of the gene encoding the mouse type Ialpha
(RIalpha) subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase is initiated from the
alternative noncoding first exons 1a and 1b. Here, we report that activity of the
promoter upstream of exon 1a (Pa) depends on two adjacent E boxes (E1 and E2) in 
NIH 3T3-transfected fibroblasts as well as in intact muscle. Both basal activity 
and MyoD transactivation of the Pa promoter require binding of the upstream
stimulating factors (USF) to E1. E2 binds either an unknown protein in a USF/E1
complex-dependent manner or MyoD. Both E2-bound proteins seem to function as
repressors, but with different strengths, of the USF transactivation potential.
Previous work has shown localization of the RIalpha protein at the neuromuscular 
junction. Using DNA injection into muscle of plasmids encoding segments of
RIalpha or RIIalpha fused to green fluorescent protein, we demonstrate that
anchoring at the neuromuscular junction is specific to RIalpha subunits and
requires the amino-terminal residues 1-81. Mutagenesis of Phe-54 to Ala in the
full-length RIalpha-green fluorescent protein template abolishes localization,
indicating that dimerization of RIalpha is essential for anchoring. Moreover, two
other hydrophobic residues, Val-22 and Ile-27, are crucial for localization of
RIalpha at the neuromuscular junction. These amino acids are involved in the
interaction of the Caenorhabditis elegans type Ialpha homologue R(CE) with
AKAP(CE) and for in vitro binding of RIalpha to dual A-kinase anchoring protein
1. We also show enrichment of dual A-kinase anchoring protein 1 at the
neuromuscular junction, suggesting that it could be responsible for RIalpha
tethering at this site.

PMCID: PMC33159
PMID: 11296260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16207-15. Epub 2001 Jan 17.

DNA binding by the ETS-domain transcription factor PEA3 is regulated by
intramolecular and intermolecular protein.protein interactions.

Greenall A(1), Willingham N, Cheung E, Boam DS, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle Upon Tyne, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

The control of DNA binding by eukaryotic transcription factors represents an
important regulatory mechanism. Many transcription factors are controlled by
cis-acting autoinhibitory modules that are thought to act by blocking promiscuous
DNA binding in the absence of appropriate regulatory cues. Here, we have
investigated the determinants and regulation of the autoinhibitory mechanism
employed by the ETS-domain transcription factor, PEA3. DNA binding is inhibited
by a module composed of a combination of two short motifs located on either side 
of the ETS DNA-binding domain. A second type of protein, Ids, can act in trans to
mimic the effect of these cis-acting inhibitory motifs and reduce DNA binding by 
PEA3. By using a one-hybrid screen, we identified the basic
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factor USF-1 as an interaction
partner for PEA3. PEA3 and USF-1 form DNA complexes in a cooperative manner.
Moreover, the formation of ternary PEA3.USF-1.DNA complexes requires parts of the
same motifs in PEA3 that form the autoinhibitory module. Thus the binding of
USF-1 to PEA3 acts as a switch that modifies the autoinhibitory motifs in PEA3 to
first relieve their inhibitory action, and second, promote ternary nucleoprotein 
complex assembly.

PMID: 11278941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Drug Metab Rev. 2001 Feb;33(1):37-47.

Competitive inhibition of the transcription of rabbit CYP1A1 gene by upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF1).

Takahashi Y(1), Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The induction of CYP1A1 by 3-methylcholanthrene occurs in neonatal but not in
adult rabbits. The expression of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear 
translocator (Arnt) mRNAs is seen even in adult rabbits. The CYP1A1 inducibility 
does not seem to be regulated by DNA methylation, known to inhibit the
transcription of a gene(s). Preliminary experiments suggest that a constitutive
factor(s) in adult liver nuclear extracts is bound to the core sequence of rabbit
xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE). The sequence of rabbit XRE overlaps with
that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)-binding site. The
AhR/Arnt-mediated activation of XRE-TK/Luc reporter gene in RK13 cells is blocked
by transfection with a USF1 expression vector. These results indicate that the
XRE of the rabbit CYP1A1 gene is recognized by the basic helix-loop-helix
proteins to regulate the expression of CYP1A1 in both an agonistic (AhR/Arnt) and
an antagonistic (USF1) manner.

PMID: 11270661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Atherosclerosis. 2001 Feb 15;154(3):625-32.

Hepatic lipase promoter activity is reduced by the C-480T and G-216A
substitutions present in the common LIPC gene variant, and is increased by
Upstream Stimulatory Factor.

Botma GJ(1), Verhoeven AJ, Jansen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute (COEUR), Erasmus
University Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The common -216G-->A and -480C-->T substitutions in the promoter region of the
human hepatic lipase (LIPC) gene show high allelic association, and are
correlated with decreased hepatic lipase activity and increased high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels. To test the functionality of these substitutions,
CAT-reporter assays were performed in HepG2 cells. LIPC (-650/+48) but not
(-650/+61) promoter constructs showed transcriptional activity. LIPC (-650/+48)
constructs with both -216A and -480T exhibited significantly lower promoter
activity (-45%) than the wild-type form. Activities of -289/+48 constructs were
not significantly affected by the -216G-->A substitution. The -480C/T site lies
within a binding region for Upstream Stimulatory Factor (USF). Gel-shift assays
showed that the binding affinity of USF protein for HL specific oligonucleotides 
was decreased four-fold by the -480C-->T substitution. However, promoter activity
of the -650/+48 constructs was not significantly affected by the -480C-->T
substitution alone. Co-transfection of HepG2 cells with USF(43) cDNA yielded a
similar dose-dependent increase in activity of all -650/+48 constructs; the
absolute difference in promoter activity increased but the relative difference
between the variant promoter forms was maintained. Our studies demonstrate that
the common LIPC promoter variation is functional, which explains the association 
of the -480T allele with a lower hepatic lipase activity in man.

PMID: 11257263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Cell Biochem. 2001 Mar 26;81(2):262-77.

Upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) and USF2 bind to and activate the promoter
of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene.

Jaiswal AS(1), Narayan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene product is involved in cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis, and loss of function is associated with the development of 
colorectal carcinogenesis. Although it has been demonstrated that the APC gene is
inducible, its transcriptional regulation has not been elucidated. Therefore, we 
characterized the promoter region of the APC gene and transcription factors
required for basal expression. The APC gene has a TATA-less promoter and contains
consensus binding sites for Octamer, AP2, Sp1, a CAAT-box, and three nucleotide
sequences for E-box A, B, and M. The E-boxes are functional in several cancer
cell lines and upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) and USF2 interact with these 
sites, with a preferred sequence-specificity for the B site. Analysis of
activation of the cloned APC promoter by USF1 and USF2 in transient transfection 
assays in HCT-116 cells demonstrated that mutation of the E-box B site completely
abolished the basal promoter activity. Further, the ectopic USF1 and USF2
expression in HCT-116 cells with deletion mutations of E-box A, B, and M sites
showed that these E-boxes contribute to USF1- and USF2-mediated transcriptional
activation of the APC promoter, with maximum promoter activity being associated
with the E-box B site. Thus, USF1 and USF2 transcription factors are critical for
APC gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11241666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 9;281(4):1006-11.

Human RNA helicase II/Gu gene: genomic organization and promoter analysis.

Zhu K(1), Henning D, Valdez B, Busch H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Human RNA helicase II/Gu (hRH II/Gu) protein unwinds double-stranded RNA, folds
single-stranded RNA, and may play important roles in ribosomal RNA biogenesis,
RNA editing, RNA transport, and general transcription. The genomic organization
and the regulation of expression of the hRH II/Gu gene were analyzed. The hRH
II/Gu gene is over 29 kb in length, and includes 15 exons. All intron-exon
junctions contain consensus GT-AG sequences. An 85 bp basic promoter was
identified which lacks a functional TATA box. In LNCaP cells, the hRH II/Gu
promoter was up to 50 times as active as pGL2-control vector which has an SV 40
early promoter. Mutation of a putative c-Myc/USF binding site in the region
between -110 and -85 caused a decrease in the promoter activity by 2- to 3-fold. 
A negative regulatory region was also found between -324 and -264. Studies of
transcriptional regulation of hRH II/Gu under different physiological and
pathophysiological conditions may provide clues to its biological function.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. EMBO J. 2001 Mar 1;20(5):1114-22.

The transcription factors MTF-1 and USF1 cooperate to regulate mouse
metallothionein-I expression in response to the essential metal zinc in visceral 
endoderm cells during early development.

Andrews GK(1), Lee DK, Ravindra R, Lichtlen P, Sirito M, Sawadogo M, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160-7421, USA.
gandrews@kumc.edu

During early development of the mouse embryo, expression of the metallothionein-I
(MT-I) gene is heightened specifically in the endoderm cells of the visceral yolk
sac. The mechanisms of regulation of this cell-specific pattern of expression of 
metallothionein-I are unknown. However, it has recently been shown that MTF-1,
functioning as a metalloregulatory transcription factor, activates
metallothionein genes in response to the essential metal zinc. In contrast with
the metallothionein genes, MTF-1 is essential for development; null mutant
embryos die due to liver degeneration. We report here that MTF-1 is absolutely
essential for upregulation of MT-I gene expression in visceral endoderm cells and
that optimal expression also involves interactions of the basic helix-loop-helix 
upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF1) with an E-box1-containing sequence at -223
bp in the MT-I promoter. Expression of MT-I in visceral endoderm cells was
dependent on maternal dietary zinc. Thus, the essential metal, zinc, apparently
provides the signaling ligand that activates cell-specific MT-I expression in
visceral endoderm cells.

PMCID: PMC145491
PMID: 11230134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2000 Winter;2(4):739-52.

Role for copper in transient oxidation and nuclear translocation of MTF-1, but
not of NF-kappa B, by the heme-hemopexin transport system.

Vanacore RM(1), Eskew JD, Morales PJ, Sung L, Smith A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64110-2499, USA.

Heme-hemopexin (2-10 microM) is used as a model for intravenous heme released in 
trauma, stroke, and ischemia-reperfusion. A transient increase in cellular
protein oxidation occurs during receptor-mediated heme transport from hemopexin
which is inhibited by the nonpermeable Cu(I) chelator, bathocuproinedisulfonate. 
Thus, participation of surface redox process involving Cu(I) generation are
proposed to be linked to the induction of the protective proteins heme
oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and metallothionein-1 (MT-1) by heme-hemopexin. The region
(-153 to -42) in the proximal promoter of the mouse MT-1 gene responds to heme-
and CoPP-hemopexin in transient transfection assays and contains metal-responsive
elements for MTF-1 and an antioxidant-responsive element (ARE) overlapping a
GC-rich E-box to which USF-1 and -2 bind. No decreases in DNA binding of the
diamide-oxidation sensitive USF-1 and -2 occur upon exposure of cells to
heme-hemopexin. MTF-1 and the ARE-binding proteins are relatively resistant to
diamide oxidation and are induced approximately eight- and two-fold,
respectively, by heme-hemopexin. BCDS prevents the nuclear translocation of MTF-1
by both heme- and CoPP-hemopexin complexes as well as MT-1 mRNA induction by
CoPP-hemopexin. Thus, copper is needed for the surface oxidation events and yet
the nuclear translocation of MTF-1 in response to hemopexin occurs via copper,
probably Cu(I),-dependent signaling cascades from the hemopexin receptor rather
than the oxidation per se.

PMID: 11213479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Feb;31(2):590-9.

A complex composed of USF1 and USF2 activates the human FcepsilonRI alpha chain
expression via a CAGCTG element in the first intron.

Takahashi K(1), Nishiyama C, Nishiyama M, Okumura K, Ra C, Ohtake Y, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Foods & Pharmaceuticals Research & Development Laboratory, Asahi Breweries
Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan. Kyoko.takahashi@asahibeer.co.jp

The high-affinity IgE receptor, FcepsilonRI, is a key regulatory molecule in the 
allergic reaction. During the course of studies to find cis-acting elements for
FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene expression, a CAGCTG sequence located in the first
intron was revealed to serve as a crucial enhancer element. Electromobility shift
assays using antibodies and in vitro translation products showed that the CAGCTG 
element was recognized by the USF1/USF2 complex. As was the case for other
intronic cis-elements, the CAGCTG element regulated the promoter in an
orientation- and position-dependent manner. Overexpression of USF2 antisense
repressed the FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene promoter and decreased the amount of
alpha chain mRNA in mast cell lines. All these results indicated that the
USF1/USF2 complex activates the human FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene expression via
the CAGCTG element in the first intron.

PMID: 11180124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Gen Virol. 2001 Mar;82(Pt 3):547-59.

Upstream stimulating factor affects human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
long terminal repeat-directed transcription in a cell-specific manner,
independently of the HIV-1 subtype and the core-negative regulatory element.

Naghavi MH(1), Estable MC, Schwartz S, Roeder RG, Vahlne A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Virology, Karolinska Institute, F68, Huddinge University 
Hospital, S-141 86 Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. Mojgan.Naghavi@impi.ki.se

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is classified into subtypes on the
basis of phylogenetic analysis of sequence differences. Inter- and intra-subtype 
polymorphism extends throughout the genome, including the long terminal repeat
(LTR). In this study, the importance of the upstream stimulating factor
(USF)-binding site (E-box) in the core-negative regulatory element (NRE) of the
LTR of HIV-1 subtypes A, B, C, D, E and G was investigated. In vivo, USF was
found to repress transcription directed from representative HIV-1 LTR sequences
of all the subtypes tested in an epithelial cell line, yet activate the same
transcription in a T-cell line. Mutation of the core-NRE USF site of the
representative subtype B LTR did not affect the cell-specific,
subtype-independent, dual role of USF. In vitro binding assays showed that
recombinant USF(43) interacts with the core-NRE from subtypes B and C, but not A,
D, E or G. Thus, USF affects LTR-directed transcription in a cell-specific
manner, independently of both the HIV-1 subtype from which the LTR was derived
and the core-NRE USF site sequences.

PMID: 11172096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Feb 14;172(1-2):91-103.

Transcriptional activation of cathepsin D gene expression by 17beta-estradiol:
mechanism of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated inhibition.

Wang F(1), Samudio I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

17beta-estradiol (E2) induces cathepsin D gene expression in MCF-7 human breast
cancer cells and this response is inhibited by aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
agonists, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Analysis of the
cathepsin D gene promoter initially identified a pentanucleotide GCGTG core
dioxin responsive element (DRE) that blocked E2 action by inhibiting formation of
a transcriptionally active estrogen receptor (ER)-Sp1 complex. A second
functional downstream inhibitory DRE (iDRE2) (-130 to -126) has now been
identified in the cathepsin D gene promoter and inhibition of E2-induced
transactivation involves inhibitory AhR crosstalk with the E2-responsive
adenovirus major late promoter element (MLPE) at -124 to -104 in the cathepsin D 
gene promoter. The MLPE site primarily binds USF1/USF2 and ERalpha, and gel
mobility shift and DNA footprinting assays show that the AhR complex decreases
binding of these transcription factors to the MLPE.

PMID: 11165043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Biol Reprod. 2001 Feb;64(2):602-10.

Site-specific methylation of the promoter alters deoxyribonucleic acid-protein
interactions and prevents follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene
transcription.

Griswold MD(1), Kim JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, 630 Fulmer
Hall, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.
griswold@mail.wsu.edu

In the male gonad, the FSH receptor (FSHR) gene is expressed only in Sertoli
cells. To date, the mechanism(s) responsible for Sertoli cell-specific expression
of the FSHR gene are unknown. In this study, DNA methylation at specific sites in
the promoter are shown to lead to changes in the DNA-protein interactions at
those sites and, subsequently, to transcriptional repression of the gene. The
extent of methylation of cytosine residues within the core promoter region of
genomic DNA isolated from cells/tissues that expressed, or did not express, the
FSHR gene was analyzed by the sodium bisulfite conversion technique. All seven
cytosine residues in CpG dinucleotides within the core promoter region were found
to be unmethylated in primary cultured rat Sertoli cells that were actively
expressing FSHR mRNA. In contrast, in tissues not expressing FSHR the same region
of the gene was methylated at each of the CpG dinucleotides examined. In
addition, DNA-protein interactions in three primary regulatory regions of the
promoter were examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) with
synthetic oligonucleotides containing selectively methylated cytosine residues.
Methylation of a CpG sequence within a consensus E box element (CACGTG,
-124/-119) decreased the binding affinity of USF1/2 transcription factors for
this element. Methylation of the CpG sequence in the Inr region (CCGG, -85/-82)
allowed the formation of an additional DNA-protein complex. Methylation at both
cytosine residues in the E2F element ((m)CG(m)CG) generated a new
methylcytosine-specific DNA-protein complex. The core FSHR promoter region of a
mouse Sertoli cell line (MSC-1) that does not express FSHR was shown to be
methylated at four CpG dinucleotides. The demethylation of these four sites by
treatment of the MSC-1 cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR) activated the
transcription of the FSHR gene. Taken together, these results suggest that
cytosine methylation is a major factor in the repression of the expression of the
FSHR gene.

PMID: 11159363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2000 Dec 10;16(18):1981-9.

Suppression of HIV type 1 replication by a dominant-negative Ets-1 mutant.

Posada R(1), Pettoello-Mantovani M, Sieweke M, Graf T, Goldstein H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461, USA.

Activity of the distal region of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) long
terminal repeat (LTR), which contains binding sites for the Ets-1 and USF-1
proteins, is integral for HIV-1 replication. The Ets-1 and USF-1 proteins play a 
critical role in the activity of the HIV-1 LTR distal enhancer region, as
indicated by the potent dominant negative effect of a mutant Ets-1 lacking
trans-activation domains on the transcriptional activity of the LTR. To determine
the biological relevance of the Ets-1 and USF-1 proteins in HIV-1 replication, we
examined the effect of expression of the dominant-negative mutant of Ets-1
(dnEts-1) on HIV-1 infection of T cells. We demonstrated that expression of dnEts
markedly suppressed HIV-1 infection of a T cell line. This finding indicates that
formation of a transcriptionaly active USF-1/Ets-1 complex is important in the
productive infection of cells by HIV-1, and suggests that inhibition of the
interaction between USF-1 and Ets-1 with the HIV-1 LTR may provide a new target
for anti-HIV-1 gene therapy.

PMID: 11153081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):119-27.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 stimulates transcription through an initiator
element in the mouse cytochrome c oxidase subunit Vb promoter.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
P.O. Box 830688, Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
transcription factor that plays an important role in transcriptional activation
and cell proliferation. In this article, we demonstrate that the mouse cytochrome
c oxidase subunit Vb gene (Cox5b) can be transactivated by ectopic expression of 
USF2 through an initiator (Inr) element in the core promoter. Importantly, using 
a dominant-negative mutant of USF2, we demonstrate the role of endogenous USF2
proteins in the transcriptional activation of the Cox5b Inr. Domains of USF2
encoded by exon 4, exon 5 and the USF-specific region are important for maximum
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Using the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein, we show that
p300/CBP acts as a coactivator in the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr.
We also demonstrate that although expression of multifunctional regulatory
factor, Yin Yang 1 (YY1), can stimulate transcription of the Cox5b Inr to a
modest extent, expression of YY1 together with USF2 greatly reduces the level of 
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Furthermore, we show that the transcription factor, 
Sp1, represses both the YY1- and the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr, 
indicating competition among Sp1, YY1, and USF2.

PMID: 11118624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):73-81.

Upstream stimulatory factor is involved in the regulation of the human calcyclin 
(S100A6) gene.

Lesniak W(1), Jezierska A, Kuznicki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

Calcyclin (S100A6) is a calcium-binding protein overexpressed in several tumor
cell lines including melanoma with high metastatic activity. The calcyclin gene
promoter fragment -361/-167 activates transcription several fold when compared to
the basal -167/+134 promoter fragment indicating the presence of enhancer element
within -361/-167 bp region. By means of the electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
(EMSA) we found that this region contains a protein-binding site and mapped it to
an E-box sequence at position -283/-278. Using antibodies against USF1 we
identified the upstream stimulatory factor as the transcription factor bound to
the E-box sequence in EMSA. This factor was also enriched in protein fractions
obtained from Ehrlich ascites tumor cells nuclear extract by affinity
chromatography using the E-box sequence as a ligand. Cotransfection of the USF1
expression vector with a plasmid carrying the luciferase gene under control of
the -361/+134 calcyclin gene promoter fragment resulted in several fold
activation of luciferase activity. On the other hand, mutations within the E-box 
led to a marked decrease in the efficiency of calcyclin gene promoter fragment.
The results indicate that USF1 binds to an E-box sequence of the calcyclin gene
promoter and enhances its transcription activity. This mechanism might be
responsible for the upregulation of calcyclin gene expression in response to
various stimuli and in tumors.

PMID: 11118618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):8484-91. Epub 2000 Dec 13.

Identification of c-myc as a down-stream target for pituitary tumor-transforming 
gene.

Pei L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Cedars-Sinai Research Institute,
UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90048, USA. pei@cshs.org

Pituitary tumor-transforming gene (PTTG) encodes a protein implicated in cellular
transformation and transcriptional regulation. To identify downstream target
genes, I established cell lines with tightly regulated inducible expression of
PTTG. DNA arrays were used to analyze gene expression profiles after PTTG
induction. I identified c-myc oncogene as a major PTTG target. Induction of PTTG 
resulted in increased cell proliferation through activation of c-myc. I showed
that PTTG activates c-myc transcription in transfected cells. PTTG binds to c-myc
promoter near the transcription initiation site in a protein complex containing
the upstream stimulatory factor (USF1). I have defined the PTTG DNA-binding site 
and mapped PTTG DNA binding domain to a region between amino acids 61 and 118.
Furthermore, I demonstrated that PTTG DNA binding is required for its
transcriptional activation function. These results definitively established the
role of PTTG as a transcription activator and indicate that PTTG is involved in
cellular transformation and tumorigenesis through activation of c-myc oncogene.

PMID: 11115508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Gene. 2000 Nov 27;258(1-2):77-84.

Identification of upstream stimulatory factor as an activator of the human
dipeptidyl peptidase IV gene in Caco-2 cells.

Erickson RH(1), Lai RS, Lotterman CD, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, 4150 Clement St., San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. neko@itsa.ucsf.edu

The 5' upstream region (-448/-443) of the human dipeptidyl peptidase IV gene
promoter containing a consensus E-box (CACGTG) was shown to bind upstream
stimulatory factor using nuclear extracts from mouse (3T3) fibroblasts and the
human intestinal and hepatic epithelial cell lines Caco-2 and HepG2. Supershift
analysis with specific antibodies to USF-1 and USF-2 indicates that USF-1 is the 
primary isoform binding to the E-box in nuclear extracts from these cells. Using 
cell culture, transient cotransfection of USF expression vectors with dipeptidyl 
peptidase IV promoter constructs revealed that both USF-1 and USF-2 caused an
approximately tenfold increase in reporter gene expression in Caco-2 cells.
Mutant forms of USF-1 and -2 lacking the DNA binding or transcriptional
activation domains were unable to stimulate reporter gene expression. Mutation of
the E-box prevented binding of USF, although stimulation of reporter gene
expression by cotransfection with USF was reduced by only 50%. By using a series 
of deletion constructs in cotransfection experiments, a second possible site of
USF interaction with the dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter was localized to the
-119/-88 region.

PMID: 11111045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Exp Med. 2000 Nov 20;192(10):1479-90.

Hematopoietic expression of HOXB4 is regulated in normal and leukemic stem cells 
through transcriptional activation of the HOXB4 promoter by upstream stimulating 
factor (USF)-1 and USF-2.

Giannola DM(1), Shlomchik WD, Jegathesan M, Liebowitz D, Abrams CS, Kadesch T,
Dancis A, Emerson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

The homeobox genes encode a family of transcription factors that regulate
development and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Since HOXB4 plays a key role in
regulating the balance between hematopoietic stem cell renewal and
differentiation, we studied the molecular regulation of HOXB4 expression in human
hematopoietic stem cells. HOXB4 expression in K562 cells is regulated at the
level of transcription, and transient transfection defines primary HOXB4
regulatory sequences within a 99-bp 5' promoter. Culture of highly purified human
CD34(+) bone marrow cells in thrombopoietin/Flt-3 ligand/stem cell factor induced
HOXB4 3-10-fold, whereas culture in granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating
factor, only increased HOXB4/luciferase expression 20-50%. Mutations within the
HOXB4 promoter identified a potential E box binding site (HOX response element
[HXRE]-2) as the most critical regulatory sequence, and yeast one hybrid assays
evaluating bone marrow and K562 libraries for HXRE-2 interaction identified
upstream stimulating factor (USF)-2 and micropthalmia transcription factor
(MITF). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay with K562 extracts confirmed that
these proteins, along with USF-1, bind to the HOXB4 promoter in vitro.
Cotransfection assays in both K562 and CD34(+) cells showed that USF-1 and USF-2,
but not MITF, induce the HOXB4 promoter in response to signals stimulating stem
cell self-renewal, through activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway. Thus hematopoietic expression of the human HOXB4 gene is regulated by
the binding of USF-1 and USF-2, and this process may be favored by cytokines
promoting stem cell self-renewal versus differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2193192
PMID: 11085749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Nov;14(11):1836-48.

The USF proteins regulate transcription of the follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor but are insufficient for cell-specific expression.

Heckert LL(1), Sawadogo M, Daggett MA, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

Expression of the FSH receptor (FSHR) is limited to granulosa cells of the ovary 
and Sertoli cells of the testis. Previous studies showed that an E box in the
proximal promoter of the FSHR gene is required for transcription and that the
predominant E box binding proteins are the ubiquitous transcription factors,
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2. Through cotransfection analysis,
we have shown that both wild-type and dominant negative forms of the USF proteins
regulate the rat FSHR promoter and that transcriptional activation of FSHR
required several domains within the amino-terminal portion of the USF proteins.
Analysis of the FSHR promoter region using in vivo genomic footprinting indicated
that the E box is occupied by proteins in Sertoli cells but not in cells that
fail to express the receptor, despite the presence of the USF proteins. To help
delineate the regions of the rat FSHR gene required for correct spatial and
temporal expression, transgenic mice harboring two constructs containing variable
amounts of 5'-flanking sequence (5,000 bp and 100 bp) were generated. Examination
of 16 different transgenic lines revealed varied transgene expression profiles
with multiple lines having different amounts of ectopic expression and two lines 
failing to express the transgene. In addition, little or no expression was
observed in Sertoli cells. These studies indicate that additional regulatory
sequences outside the region from -5,000 to +123 bp are needed for proper
expression in Sertoli cells.

PMCID: PMC1496886
PMID: 11075816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 9;276(6):4357-64. Epub 2000 Oct 31.

Interaction of the transcription factors USF1, USF2, and alpha -Pal/Nrf-1 with
the FMR1 promoter. Implications for Fragile X mental retardation syndrome.

Kumari D(1), Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Genomic Structure and Function, Laboratory of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0830, USA.

Hypermethylation of the FMR1 promoter reduces its transcriptional activity,
resulting in the mental retardation and macroorchidism characteristic of Fragile 
X syndrome. How exactly methylation causes transcriptional silencing is not known
but is relevant if current attempts to reactivate the gene are to be successful. 
Understanding the effect of methylation requires a better understanding of the
factors responsible for FMR1 gene expression. To this end we have identified five
evolutionarily conserved transcription factor binding sites in this promoter and 
shown that four of them are important for transcriptional activity in neuronally 
derived cells. We have also shown that USF1, USF2, and alpha-Pal/Nrf-1 are the
major transcription factors that bind the promoter in brain and testis extracts
and suggest that elevated levels of these factors account in part for elevated
FMR1 expression in these organs. We also show that methylation abolishes
alpha-Pal/Nrf-1 binding to the promoter and affects binding of USF1 and USF2 to a
lesser degree. Methylation may therefore inhibit FMR1 transcription not only by
recruiting histone deacetylases but also by blocking transcription factor
binding. This suggests that for efficient reactivation of the FMR1 promoter,
significant demethylation must occur and that current approaches to gene
reactivation using histone deacetylase inhibitors alone may therefore have
limited effect.

PMID: 11058604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. FASEB J. 2000 Dec;14(15):2393-5.

Heat shock enhances transcriptional activation of the murine-inducible nitric
oxide synthase gene.

Goldring CE(1), Reveneau S, Chantome A, Pance A, Fleury C, Hume DA, Sester D,
Mignotte B, Jeannin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK.

There is considerable interest in determining the conditions leading to enhanced 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression and nitric oxide (NO)
biosynthesis. Using in vivo footprinting, we demonstrate that heat shock of
murine macrophages concurrent with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment stimulated 
changes in guanine methylation sensitivity at ?898/9, at a putative partial heat 
shock element (HSE) and at -893/4, a site bordering an E-box, within the iNOS
gene enhancer, suggesting inducible occupation by transcription factors at these 
regions. LPS treatment accompanied by heat shock provoked increased iNOS gene
transcription, increased levels of iNOS protein, and increased production of NO
compared with LPS treatment alone. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis
revealed low constitutive levels of specific binding to an E-box and a partial
HSE within the iNOS enhancer. Binding to the E-box was increased by LPS treatment
or by heat shock, achieving a greater increase by a combination of both
treatments. The proteins occupying this site were identified as belonging to the 
USF family of transcription factors. Heat shock or LPS increased binding to the
HSE, and the factor responsible for this interaction was identified as heeat
shock factor-1 (HSF-1). Mutations at the HSE revealed the importance of HSF-1 in 
the induction of iNOS by LPS. Thus, our data reveal two novel regulatory sites in
the murine iNOS gene, one of which is implicated in enhancing iNOS expression via
LPS stimulation, and provide the first evidence that heat shock enhances
transcription of the iNOS gene. These results could have implications in the host
response mechanism to fever-associated gram-negative infection.

PMID: 11024011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biochem J. 2000 Oct 15;351 Pt 2:385-92.

Characterization of the human liver fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase gene promoter.

Herzog B(1), Waltner-Law M, Scott DK, Eschrich K, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Leipzig,
Liebigstrasse 16, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase; EC 3.1.3.11), an important gluconeogenic
enzyme, catalyses the hydrolysis of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate to fructose
6-phosphate and P(i). Enzyme activity is mainly regulated by the allosteric
inhibitors fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate and AMP. Although some observations about
hormonal regulation of the enzyme have been published, the FBPase promoter has
not been studied in detail. Here we report an in vitro characterization of the
FBPase promoter with respect to the elements that are required for basal promoter
activity. Transient transfection of H4IIE rat hepatoma cells, combined with
site-directed mutagenesis, demonstrated that an enhancer box, three GC-boxes and 
a nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)-binding element are important for hepatic
FBPase promoter activity. These elements are found in the region located between 
-405 to +25 bp relative to the transcription start site.
Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays and supershift analysis confirmed that
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)/USF2, specificity protein 1 (Sp1)/Sp3 and
NF-kappaB respectively bind to these sites. The present study provides the basis 
for a more comprehensive screening for mutations in FBPase-deficient patients and
for further studies of the transcriptional regulation of this gene.

PMCID: PMC1221374
PMID: 11023824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Oct 10;260(1):127-35.

Growth state-dependent binding of USF-1 to a proximal promoter E box element in
the rat plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 gene.

White LA(1), Bruzdzinski C, Kutz SM, Gelehrter TD, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology & Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, New
York 12208, USA.

Induced PAI-1 gene expression in renal epithelial (NRK-52E, clone EC-1) cells
occurs as part of the immediate-early response to serum. PAI-1 transcripts are
maximally expressed early in G(1) (within 4 h of serum addition to quiescent EC-1
cells) and then subsequently decline to basal levels prior to entry into DNA
synthetic phase. Comparative analysis of PAI-1 mRNA abundance and de
novo-synthesized thiolated RNA in quiescent cells, as well as at 4 h (early G(1))
and 20 h (late G(2)) postserum addition, in conjunction with RNA decay
measurements indicated that PAI-1 gene regulation upon growth activation was
predominantly transcriptional. An E box motif (CACGTG), important in the induced 
expression of some growth state-dependent genes, mapped to nucleotides -160 to
-165 upstream of the transcription start site in the PAI-1 proximal promoter.
Mobility-shift assessments, using a 18-bp deoxyoligonucleotide construct
containing the E box within the context of PAI-1-specific flanking sequences,
confirmed binding of EC-1 nuclear protein(s) to this probe and, specifically, to 
the E box hexanucleotide site. The specificity of this protein-probe interaction 
was verified by competition analyses with double-stranded DNA constructs that
included E box deoxyoligonucleotides with non-PAI-1 flanking bases, mutant E box 
sequences incapable of binding NRK nuclear proteins, and unrelated (i.e., AP-1)
target motifs. Extract immunodepletion and supershift/complex-blocking
experiments identified one PAI-1 E box-binding protein to be upstream stimulatory
factor-1 (USF-1), a member of the HLH family of transcription factors. Mutation
of the CACGTG site to TCCGTG in an 18-bp PAI-1 probe inhibited the formation of
USF-1-containing complexes confirming that an intact E box motif at -160 to -165 
bp in the PAI-1 promoter and, in particular, the CA residues at -165 and -164 are
essential for USF-1 binding. Incorporation of this 2 bp change into a reporter
construct containing 764 bp of the proximal PAI-1 "promoter" ligated to a CAT
gene effectively reduced (by 74%) CAT activity in cycling cells. An intact E box 
motif at nucleotides -160 to -165 in the PAI-1 promoter, thus, is an important
functional element in the regulation of PAI-1 transcriptional activity in renal
cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11010817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Jul;210(1-2):13-21.

An indirect role for upstream stimulatory factor in glucose-mediated induction of
pyruvate kinase and S14 gene expression.

Kaytor EN(1), Qian J, Towle HC, Olson LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Transcription of the L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) and S14 genes is induced in
hepatocytes in response to increased glucose metabolism. The regulatory sequences
of these genes responsible for induction by glucose have been mapped to related
E-box containing motifs in the promoters. Similarly, L-PK promoter activity is
stimulated in a differentiated pancreatic beta-cell line, INS-1, in response to
elevated glucose. By mutational analysis, we demonstrate that the sequence
requirements for glucose induction in the INS-1 cell are identical to those
observed in the hepatocyte, suggesting that the same transcriptional factor(s) is
responsible for regulation of L-PK expression in the two cell types. One nuclear 
factor that binds to the glucose regulatory sequences of both of these genes is
the Upstream Stimulatory Factor (USF), a ubiquitous E-box binding protein. Mice
deleted for the USF2 gene display a severely delayed response to carbohydrate
feeding (Vallet et al. [26]). This observation, however, does not differentiate
between a direct and an indirect role for USF in the process. To gain further
insight into the possible involvement of USF in glucose signaling, we have used a
recombinant adenoviral construct that expresses a dominant negative form of USF. 
This dominant negative can dimerize with endogenous USF and is shown to inhibit
DNA binding of USF in hepatocytes and INS-1 cells. However, expression of the
dominant negative USF did not block the ability of glucose to stimulate L-PK or
S14 gene expression in hepatocytes or L-PK promoter activity in INS-1 cells. We
conclude that USF does not act by binding to the glucose regulatory sequences of 
the S14 or L-PK genes and the role of USF in the process of glucose induction is 
indirect.

PMID: 10976753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Mol Biol. 2000 Sep 15;302(2):315-26.

Differential remodeling of the HIV-1 nucleosome upon transcription activators and
SWI/SNF complex binding.

Angelov D(1), Charra M, Seve M, Côté J, Khochbin S, Dimitrov S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire de la Différenciation,
équipe Mécanismes d'Assemblage du Matériel Génétique, INSERM U 309, France.

Here we have examined HIV-1 nucleosome remodeling upon the binding of
transcription factors and the SWI/SNF complex using a novel approach. The
approach combines UV laser protein-DNA crosslinking, electrophoretic
mobility-shift analysis and DNase I protection analysis with immunochemical
techniques. It was found that single activator-bound HIV-1 nucleosomes exhibit
very weak perturbation in histone NH(2) tail-DNA interactions. However, the
simultaneous binding of the transcription activators Sp1, NF-kB1, LEF-1 and USF
synergistically increased the release of histone NH(2) tails from nucleosomal
DNA. In contrast, the binding of SWI/SNF complex to HIV-1 nucleosome disrupted
structured histone domain-DNA contacts, but not histone NH(2) tail-DNA
interactions. Stable remodeled nucleosomes, (obtained after detachment of
SWI/SNF), displayed identical structural alterations with those bound to SWI/SNF.
These results demonstrate a different in vitro remodeling of the HIV-1 nucleosome
upon the binding of multiple transcription activators and of SWI/SNF complex.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10970736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Genes Cells. 2000 Aug;5(8):661-76.

Regulation of human myocilin/TIGR gene transcription in trabecular meshwork cells
and astrocytes: role of upstream stimulatory factor.

Kirstein L(1), Cvekl A, Chauhan BK, Tamm ER.

Author information: 
(1)University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department of Anatomy, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the myocilin (MYOC)/TIGR gene are responsible for
autosomal-dominant juvenile primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG). In patients with 
non-autosomal-dominant POAG, such mutations are rare, but the expression of
MYOC/TIGR in the trabecular meshwork (TM) of the eye is considerably higher than 
in normals. We performed transfection, DNAse I footprinting, mutagenesis and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) to identify elements responsible for
the basal transcription of MYOC/TIGR in TM cells and astrocytes.
RESULTS: DNAse I footprinting experiments of the human MYOC/TIGR promoter showed 
a major protected area between nt -106 to -77, which was not conserved in the
homologous region of the mouse myoc/tigr promoter. In addition, the TATA-box was 
protected, as well as at least three downstream sites, including an AP-1-like
sequence. Deletion of the -106 to -77 region caused a substantial loss of
functional promotor activity in all cell types. Site-directed mutagenesis and
EMSA experiments revealed the presence of two regulatory elements in the -106 to 
-77 region. Each of these cis-elements is essential for minimal promoter
activity. The 5'-half of the region contains a sequence with similarities to
NF-kappaB-related sites, however, binding of NF-kappaB could not be confirmed by 
EMSA. The 3'-half contains a canonical E-box sequence. EMSA experiments showed
that the upstream regulatory factor (USF) was binding to the E-box sequence and
that the binding can be supershifted by specific antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Several DNA-protein binding elements contribute to a transcription
of MYOC/TIGR, and USF is critically required for its basal transcription in
trabecular meshwork cells and astrocytes.

PMID: 10947851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):28539-48.

Mitogen-induced expression of the fibroblast growth factor-binding protein is
transcriptionally repressed through a non-canonical E-box element.

Harris VK(1), Coticchia CM, List HJ, Wellstein A, Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, D. C. 20007, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39801.

The fibroblast growth factor-binding protein (FGF-BP) stimulates FGF-2-mediated
angiogenesis and is thought to play an important role in the progression of
squamous cell, colon, and breast carcinomas. 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) induction of the FGF-BP gene occurs through transcriptional mechanisms
involving Sp1, AP-1, and CCAATT/enhancer-binding protein sites in the proximal
FGF-BP gene promoter. The level of TPA induction, however, is limited due to the 
presence of a repressor element that shows similarity to a non-canonical E-box
(AACGTG). Mutation or deletion of the repressor element led to enhanced induction
by TPA or epidermal growth factor in cervical squamous cell and breast carcinoma 
cell lines. Repression was dependent on the adjacent AP-1 site, without
discernible alteration in the binding affinity or composition of AP-1. We
investigated the following two possible mechanisms for E-box-mediated repression:
1) CpG methylation of the core of the E-box element, and 2) binding of a distinct
protein complex to this site. Point mutation of the CpG methylation site in the
E-box showed loss of repressor activity. Conversely, in vitro methylation of this
site significantly reduced TPA induction. In vitro gel shift analysis revealed
distinct and TPA-dependent binding of USF1 and USF2 to the repressor element that
required nucleotides within the E-box. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay showed that USF, c-Myc, and Max proteins were associated with the FGF-BP
promoter in vivo. Overall, these findings suggested that the balance between
trans-activation by AP-1 and repression through the E-box is an important control
mechanism for fine-tuning the angiogenic response to growth factor-activated
pathways.

PMID: 10871606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jun 15;28(12):2333-41.

A unique ISRE, in the TATA-less human Isg20 promoter, confers IRF-1-mediated
responsiveness to both interferon type I and type II.

Gongora C(1), Degols G, Espert L, Hua TD, Mechti N.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité U475, 99 rue Puech Villa, 34197 Montpellier cedex 5, France.

Interferons (IFNs) encode a family of secreted proteins involved in a number of
regulatory functions such as control of cell proliferation, differentiation and
regulation of the immune system. Their diverse biological actions are thought to 
be mediated by the products of specific but usually overlapping sets of cellular 
genes induced in the target cells. We have recently isolated a human cDNA
encoding a new nuclear bodies-associated protein (PML-NBs), which we have termed 
Isg20. In this report, we describe the cloning and functional characterization of
the Isg20 promoter region and the identification of sequence elements and
trans-acting factors implicated in its regulation. In the absence of any
recognizable TATA or CAAT elements, Isg20 promoter basal activity is dependent
upon the positive transcription factors Sp-1 and USF-1. Interestingly, we
demonstrate that a unique interferon stimulated response element (ISRE) mediates 
both IFN type I and type II Isg20 induction in the absence of functional
gamma-activated sequence. These inductions are strictly dependent upon of the IFN
regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1). In addition, we show that the ISRE is also
implicated in the constitutive transcriptional activity of Isg20 gene.

PMCID: PMC102735
PMID: 10871365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Oncogene. 2000 May 25;19(23):2786-90.

The concerted regulatory functions of the transcription factors nuclear factor-1 
and upstream stimulatory factor on a composite element in the promoter of the
hepatocyte growth factor gene.

Jiang JG(1), Gao B, Zarnegar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburth, Pennsylvania, PA 15261, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is an important multifunctional cytokine whose
gene expression is regulated mainly at the transcriptional level. Previous
studies using transgenic mice as well as in vitro analyses showed that a
potential regulatory element(s) exists between -260 to -230 bp in the upstream
region of the HGF gene promoter. In the present study, we have discovered that
this region is a composite site through which members of the nuclear factor 1
(NF1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF) families bind to and regulate HGF
gene transcription. Gel mobility shift and supershift assays revealed that USF
and NF1 have high binding affinity for this region and that the binding sites of 
the two different transcription factor families overlap. Functional studies
showed that NF1 suppresses HGF gene promoter activity and that USF has an
activating function. We found that the NF1/X and NF1/Red1 isoforms strongly
suppressed HGF promoter activity while the NF1/L variant had no obvious effects. 
USF1, but not USF2, of the USF family stimulated HGF gene promoter activity. More
interestingly, during liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, a process
which activates the HGF gene, we noted that the binding activity of USF to the
HGF promoter element increased while that of NF1 decreased. These data provide
insight into the molecular mechanisms that govern HGF gene transcription.
Oncogene (2000).

PMID: 10851080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jun 2;474(2-3):146-50.

Synergistic activation of the mkp-1 gene by protein kinase A signaling and USF,
but not c-Myc.

Sommer A(1), Burkhardt H, Keyse SM, Lüscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 1 (MKP-1) is negatively regulating
mitogen-activated protein kinases and is therefore involved in early signaling
processes. The expression of the mkp-1 gene is induced by growth factors and
stress. The promoters of the human and murine mkp-1 genes contain several
conserved DNA binding elements, including two cAMP response elements and an E
box. We observed that the upstream stimulatory factor (USF), but not c-Myc,
activated mkp-1. USF synergized with protein kinase A, thus providing evidence
for a role of the E box, during signal-regulated stimulation of mkp-1.

PMID: 10838075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biol Reprod. 2000 Mar;62(3):670-9.

Expression of steroidogenic factor 1 in the testis requires an E box and CCAAT
box in its promoter proximal region.

Daggett MA(1), Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), also known as adrenal 4-binding protein, is a
member of the nuclear hormone receptor family that regulates transcription of
genes encoding hormones and steroidogenic enzymes important to the function of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. The mammalian Ftz-F1 gene encodes SF-1
and is required for development of adrenal glands and gonads. To better
understand the mechanisms regulating this gene in the gonads, we have examined
its expression in the testis and characterized the promoter region for SF-1 in
two testicular cell types. SF-1 promoter activity was examined in primary
cultures of Sertoli cells and cell lines representative of Sertoli and Leydig
cells. Deletion mutagenesis of the promoter identified several regions: both 5'
and 3' to the transcriptional start sites that are important for transcriptional 
activity. Two elements, an E box and a CCAAT box, were found to be important for 
SF-1 transcription in the testis. An oligodeoxynucleotide containing both of
these elements bound three specific protein complexes. The binding of one complex
required only sequences within the E box and cross-reacted with antibodies
against the basic helix-loop-helix ZIP proteins USF1 and USF2. A second specific 
complex required sequences within both the E box and CCAAT box for efficient
binding, while a third complex predominantly interacted with sequences within the
CCAAT motif. The presence of multiple protein complexes binding these sites
suggests that regulation through these elements may involve interactions with
different factors that depend on the state of the cell and its environment.

PMCID: PMC1586109
PMID: 10684809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000 Jan 1;59(1):95-104.

Regulation of metallothionein gene expression by oxidative stress and metal ions.

Andrews GK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City 66160-7421, USA. gandrews@kumc.edu

The metallothioneins (MT) are small, cysteine-rich heavy metal-binding proteins
which participate in an array of protective stress responses. Although a single
essential function of MT has not been demonstrated, MT of higher eukaryotes
evolved as a mechanism to regulate zinc levels and distribution within cells and 
organisms. These proteins can also protect against some toxic metals and
oxidative stress-inducing agents. In mice, among the four known MT genes, the
MT-I and -II genes are most widely expressed. Transcription of these genes is
rapidly and dramatically up-regulated in response to zinc and cadmium, as well as
in response to agents which cause oxidative stress and/or inflammation. The six
zinc-finger metal-responsive transcription factor MTF-1 plays a central role in
transcriptional activation of the MT-I gene in response to metals and oxidative
stress. Mutation of the MTF-1 gene abolishes these responses, and MTF-1 is
induced to bind to the metal response elements in proximal MT promoter in cells
treated with zinc or during oxidative stress. The exact molecular mechanisms of
action of MTF-1 are not fully understood. Our studies suggest that the
DNA-binding activity of MTF-1 in vivo and in vitro is reversibly activated by
zinc interactions with the zinc-finger domain. This reflects heterogeneity in the
structure and function of the six zinc fingers. We hypothesize that MTF-1
functions as a sensor of free zinc pools in the cell. Changes in free zinc may
occur in response to chemically diverse inducers. MTF-1 also exerts effects on
MT-I gene transcription which are independent of a large increase in MTF-1
DNA-binding activity. For example, cadmium, which has little effect on the
DNA-binding activity of MTF-1 in vivo or in vitro, is a more potent inducer of MT
gene expression than is zinc. The basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper protein, 
USF (upstream stimulatory factor family), also plays a role in regulating
transcription of the mouse MT-I gene in response to cadmium or H2O2. Expression
of dominant negative USF-1 or deletion of its binding site from the proximal
promoter attenuates induction of the mouse MT-I gene. USF apparently functions in
this context by interacting with as yet unidentified proteins which bind to an
antioxidant response element which overlaps the USF-binding site (USF/ARE).
Interestingly, this composite element does not participate in the induction of
MT-I gene transcription by zinc or redox-cycling quinones. Thus, regulation of
the mouse MT-I gene by metals and oxidative stress involves multiple signaling
pathways which depend on the species of metal ion and the nature of the oxidative
stress.

PMID: 10605938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 2;18(51):7200-11.

DNA binding of USF is required for specific E-box dependent gene activation in
vivo.

Kiermaier A(1), Gawn JM, Desbarats L, Saffrich R, Ansorge W, Farrell PJ, Eilers
M, Packham G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumour Research, University of Marburg,
Emil-Mannkopff-Str 2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Although USF-1 and -2 are the major proteins that bind to Myc-regulated E-box
(CACGTG) elements in many cells, there is no clear role for USF during
Myc-dependent gene regulation. Using dominant negative alleles of USF-1 we now
show that DNA binding by USF at a Myc-regulated E-box limits the ability of
another E-box binding factor, TFE-3, to activate a target gene of Myc in vivo and
to stimulate S phase entry in resting fibroblasts. Similarly, dominant negative
alleles of USF-1 relieve the restriction that prevents activation of the IgH
enhancer by TFE-3 in non B-cells. DNA binding activity of USF complexes is
abundant in primary human B-cells and is significantly downregulated during
B-cell immortalization. Re-expression of USF-1 in immortalized B-cells retards
proliferation. Our data establish an essential role for USF in restricting E-box 
dependent gene activation in vivo and suggest that this control is relaxed during
cellular immortalization.

PMID: 10602473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Dec 15;372(2):321-32.

Differential glucocorticoid responses of CYP3A23 and CYP3A2 are mediated by
selective binding of orphan nuclear receptors.

Huss JM(1), Wang SI, Kasper CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Environmental Toxicology Program, McArdle Laboratory
for Cancer Research, Madison, Wisconsin, 53706, USA.

CYP3A2 and CYP3A23 are two cytochrome P450 genes in rat that are differentially
regulated in both their constitutive activities and their responsiveness to
glucocorticoids, the prototypic CYP3A inducers. CYP3A2 displays 20-25% of the
response to glucocorticoids as CYP3A23 despite extensive sequence homology in
their 5'-regulatory regions. Promoter deletion analyses revealed that the CYP3A2 
-57 to -168 region, homologous to the CYP3A23 dexamethasone-responsive region,
mediated its low level activation. When this region was analyzed by DNase I
footprinting, three binding sites were shown to correspond to the functional
elements described for CYP3A23: DexRE-1, DexRE-2, and Site A (J. M. Huss and C.
B. Kasper (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273: 16155-16162). The CYP3A2 DexRE-2 and Site A 
elements bear two mismatches each from the CYP3A23 elements but displayed similar
binding patterns in footprinting and gel-shift analyses as their CYP3A23
counterparts. The region containing 3A2DexRE-1 has six mismatches and displayed
unique footprinting and gel-shift patterns compared to 3A23DexRE-1. Functional
assays revealed that four mismatches within the DexRE-1 and DexRE-2 elements
accounted for the differential inducibility of the two isoforms. We propose that 
the reduced responsiveness of CYP3A2 is the result of preferential binding of
COUP-TF at the CYP3A2 DexRE-1 site. In contrast, CYP3A23 DexRE-1 associates with 
an accessory factor(s) that acts in concert with downstream sites to mediate the 
strong glucocorticoid induction response observed for CYP3A23. Site A mismatches 
did not influence induction magnitude but were responsible for basal activity
differences. Higher CYP3A23 basal activity appears to be due to an E-box in
3A23SiteA that interacts with USF1, a ubiquitous bHLH/leucine zipper
transcription factor. This site is disrupted in the corresponding 3A2SiteA.
Hence, 4 nucleotide mismatches within two elements account for the difference in 
glucocorticoid induction, and a single mismatch is responsible for the fivefold
difference in the basal activities of CYP3A2 and CYP3A23.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10600171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8393-9.

Coexamination of site-specific transcription factor binding and promoter activity
in living cells.

Boyd KE(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Previously, we have used a chromatin cross-linking and immunoprecipitation
protocol for the analysis of Myc and USF binding to the cad promoter. The
adaptation of this technique for the study of mammalian transcription factors was
a big step forward in the analysis of transcription factor family member
specificity, allowing for the first time a definitive knowledge of which factor
binds to a promoter region under normal physiological conditions. However, due to
limitations of the assay, our previous studies could not definitively prove that 
both Myc and USF bound to the exact same site on the cad promoter, nor could we
directly correlate loss of in vivo binding of a particular factor with loss of
transcriptional activity. Therefore, we have further modified the chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol to alleviate these problems. We have now shown that 
it is possible to coexamine growth-regulated transcriptional activity and
promoter occupancy by using stably integrated promoter constructs. We show that
both Myc and USF bind to the exact same E box on the cad promoter, suggesting
that competition between these two factors for a single site occurs in living
cells. We also find that cad promoter constructs that retain USF binding but lose
Myc binding in vivo no longer display an increase in transcriptional activity in 
mid- to late G(1) phase of the cell cycle. Finally, we propose that cell
cycle-regulated transcriptional activation of the cad promoter may be a
stochastic, rather than a predetermined, process.

PMCID: PMC84934
PMID: 10567564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34020-8.

Transcriptional regulation of the transforming growth factor-beta2 promoter by
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and activating transcription
factor-1 (ATF-1) is modulated by protein kinases and the coactivators p300 and
CREB-binding protein.

Kingsley-Kallesen ML(1), Kelly D, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Transcription of the transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) gene is
dependent on a cAMP-response element/activating transcription factor (CRE/ATF)
site that is bound by CREB and ATF-1 as well as an E-box motif that is bound by
upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2). To identify additional
factors involved in the expression of the TGF-beta2 gene, we employed F9
embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, which express TGF-beta2 only after the cells
differentiate. We show that overexpression of the transcription factors, CREB,
ATF-1, USF1, and USF2 dramatically increases TGF-beta2 promoter activity in
F9-differentiated cells. We further show that the coactivators p300 and CBP
up-regulate the TGF-beta2 promoter when CREB and ATF-1 are expressed in
conjunction with protein kinases that phosphorylate CREB on serine 133 and ATF-1 
on serine 63. Importantly, we identify the presence of serine 133-phosphorylated 
CREB in the nucleus of F9-differentiated cells but not in the nucleus of F9 EC
cells. This phosphorylated form is present in whole cell extracts of both the
parental and differentiated cells, suggesting that nuclear accumulation of serine
133-phosphorylated CREB is regulated during differentiation of F9 EC cells and is
likely to play an important role in the activation of the TGF-beta2 gene.

PMID: 10567368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 28;18(44):6000-12.

Isolation and initial characterization of the BRCA2 promoter.

Davis PL(1), Miron A, Andersen LM, Iglehart JD, Marks JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3873, Durham, North
Carolina, NC 27710, USA.

The hereditary breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA2, is considered to be a
tumor suppressor gene that may be involved in the cellular response to DNA
damage. The transcript for this gene is cell cycle regulated with mRNA levels
reaching a peak just before the onset of DNA synthesis. In order to define the
mechanisms by which BRCA2 is transcriptionally regulated, we have begun to study 
upstream regulatory sequences. In this report, we define a minimal promoter
region that has strong activity in human breast epithelial cells. Deletions of
this sequence narrowed the strong basal activity to a region extending from -66
to +129 with respect to the BRCA2 transcriptional start site. This sequence
demonstrated cell cycle regulated activity with kinetics similar to the
endogenous transcript. Examination of the sequence revealed several consensus
binding sites for transcription factors including an E-box, E2F and Ets
recognition motifs. Electrohoretic mobility shift assays revealed specific
protein binding to two sequences upstream of the start site; the palindromic
E-box and an Ets/E2F site. Site-directed mutagenesis of either of these sites
reduced both the basal activity in log phase cells and the cell cycle regulated
activity of the promoter. Mutational inactivation of both sites within the same
construct effectively eliminated promoter activity. Antibodies to candidate
transcription factors used in super shift experiments revealed specific
interactions between the BRCA2 promoter and the basic region/helix - loop - helix
containing USF-1 and 2 proteins and Elf-1, an Ets domain protein. Binding of
these factors depended upon the presence of intact recognition sequences. The USF
factors were shown to bind predominantly as a heterodimeric complex of USF-1 and 
2 while Elf-1 bound the promoter when it was not occupied by USF. Co-transfection
studies with USF proteins and the varicella zoster IE62 protein provide evidence 
for the involvement of endogenous and exogenous USF in the activation of the
BRCA2 promoter. We propose that interactions between USF-1, USF-2 and Elf-1 play 
an important role in the transcriptional regulation of the BRCA2 gene.

PMID: 10557089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 15;344 Pt 1:145-52.

DNA-binding activity of the transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF-1) is regulated by cyclin-dependent phosphorylation.

Cheung E(1), Mayr P, Coda-Zabetta F, Woodman PG, Boam DS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205 Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, U.K.

The ubiquitous transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 is a
member of the bzHLH (leucine zipper-basic-helix-loop-helix) family, which is
structurally related to the Myc family of proteins. It plays a role in the
regulation of many genes, including the cyclin B1 gene, which is active during
the G2/M and M phases of the cell cycle and may also play a role in the
regulation of cellular proliferation. We show that the affinity of recombinant
USF-1 for DNA is greatly increased by treatment with active cyclin A2-p34(cdc2)
or cyclin B1-p34(cdc2) complexes and that its interaction with DNA is dependent
on p34(cdc2)-mediated phosphorylation. We have localized the phosphorylation
site(s) to a region that lies outside the minimal DNA-binding domain but overlaps
with the previously identified USF-specific region. Deletion studies of USF-1
suggest that amino acids 143-197 regulate DNA-binding activity in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC1220624
PMID: 10548544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov;265(1):170-6.

The E-box of the human glycophorin B promoter is involved in the
erythroid-specific expression of the GPB gene.

Camara-Clayette V(1), Rahuel C, Bertrand O, Cartron JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U76, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 6, rue Alexandre
Cabanel, Paris, 75015, France.

Previous studies performed on the glycophorin B (GPB) expression demonstrated
that this gene is expressed in erythroid cells only and that the ubiquitous
factor Ku70 is involved in the process. Here, we investigated the contribution of
the -70 E-box sequence toward the GPB promoter expression. We found that the
E-box bound two factors, the USF1/USF2 protein and an unidentified ubiquitous
protein which was named factor U. Site-directed mutagenesis performed on the -70 
E-box showed that the USF factor had an activating effect in CAT assays.
Conversely, mutation of the -70 E-box that impaired the binding of factor U led
to a positive CAT activity in nonerythroid cells and thus to the loss of the
erythroid-specific expression of the GPB gene. This indicates that, in addition
to the Ku70 factor, the extinction of the GPB promoter expression in nonerythroid
cells depends also on the repressing effect of the factor U.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10548509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Hepatology. 1999 Nov;30(5):1187-97.

Liver-specific and proliferation-induced deoxyribonuclease I hypersensitive sites
in the mouse insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 gene.

Crissey MA(1), Leu JI, DeAngelis RA, Greenbaum LE, Scearce LM, Kovalovich K, Taub
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene is highly
expressed in fetal, perinatal, and regenerating liver. Up-regulation is
transcriptionally mediated in regenerating liver and occurs in the first few
minutes to hours after partial hepatectomy. In transgenic mice a 970-bp region
from -776 to +151 of the IGFBP-1 promoter was sufficient for tissue-specific and 
induced expression of the gene in fetal and hepatectomized livers. However weak
and/or poorly regulated expression in some transgenic lines suggested the
existence of other regulatory regions. Here, genomic clones containing large
regions 5' of the mouse IGFBP-1 gene sequence were isolated, subcloned, and
sequenced. Deoxyribonuclease I (DNaseI) hypersensitivity analyses identified
clusters of tissue-specific nuclease-sensitive sites in the promoter region, -100
to -300, -2,300, -3,100, and -5,000 along with other weak sites. After partial
hepatectomy, enhanced sensitivity and/or novel sites were detected in the
-100/-300, -5,000, and -3,100 regions, the promoter region remaining the most
hypersensitive. A subset of these sites was present in fetal and perinatal
livers. Novel tissue-specific sites that interacted with C/EBP and hepatic
nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) transcription factors were identified in the -3,100
region. A hepatectomy-induced DNA binding complex containing the transcription
factor USF1 was identified within the -100 to -300 region of the promoter. These 
results suggested that a complex array of tissue-specific and hepatic
proliferation-induced transcription factors combine to regulate both the proximal
promoter and more distal regulatory elements of the IGFBP-1 gene.

PMID: 10534340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Oct 14;264(1):6-13.

Real-time study of interactions between a composite DNA regulatory region (HIV-1 
LTR NRE) and several transcription factors of nuclear extracts.

Galio L(1), Briquet S, Vaquero C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 0415, ICGM, 22 rue Méchain, Paris, 75014, France.

Here we describe the first real-time study of nuclear protein interaction with a 
composite DNA regulatory region. We studied the interplay between the three
target sites of the negative regulatory element (NRE) of HIV-1 LTR, comprising a 
noncanonical GATA site overlapping two negative regulatory regions, USF and
NFIL-6, and their corresponding transcription factors in nuclear extracts. By
bandshift analysis, no GATA binding activity could be detected between LTR NRE
and different nuclear extracts, although evidenced by in vitro footprinting.
Additionally, the LTR NRE and a USF oligonucleotide showed identical retarded
complexes. BIAcore study of these interactions revealed the binding of huGATA-3, 
as well as USF, to the immobilized LTR NRE oligonucleotide. Competition analyses,
performed with GATA, USF, and NFIL-6 oligonucleotides, clearly showed that this
regulatory region could bind both huGATA-3 and USF factors. Finally, the presence
of USF and huGATA-3 proteins in the complexes formed with LTR NRE was ascertained
using specific anti-huGATA-3 and anti-USF2 polyclonal antibodies.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10527831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5582-91.

Loss of USF transcriptional activity in breast cancer cell lines.

Ismail PM(1), Lu T, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, TX 77030, USA.

USF is a family of transcription factors that are structurally related to the Myc
oncoproteins and also share with Myc a common DNA-binding specificity. USF
overexpression can prevent c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation and also
inhibit the proliferation of certain transformed cells. These antiproliferative
activities suggest that USF inactivation could be implicated in carcinogenesis.
To explore this possibility, we compared the activities of the ubiquitous USF1
and USF2 proteins in several cell lines derived from either normal breast
epithelium or breast tumors. The DNA-binding activities of USF1 and USF2 were
present at similar levels in all cell lines. In the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A
cells, USF in general, and USF2 in particular, exhibited strong transcriptional
activities. In contrast, USF1 and USF2 were completely inactive in three out of
six transformed breast cell lines investigated, while the other three transformed
cell lines exhibited loss of USF2 activity. Analyses in cells cultured from
healthy tissue confirmed the transcriptional activity of USF in normal human
mammary epithelial cells. These results demonstrate that a partial or complete
loss of USF function is a common event in breast cancer cell lines, perhaps
because, like Myc overexpression, it favors rapid proliferation.

PMID: 10523835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28385-94.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II, a new partner of the
glucose response element of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene, acts as an inhibitor
of the glucose response.

Lou DQ(1), Tannour M, Selig L, Thomas D, Kahn A, Vasseur-Cognet M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, U129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, 75014 Paris, France.

Transcription of the L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene is induced by glucose in 
the presence of insulin and repressed by glucagon via cyclic AMP. The DNA
regulatory sequence responsible for mediating glucose and cyclic AMP responses,
called glucose response element (GlRE), consists of two degenerated E boxes
spaced by 5 base pairs and is able to bind basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper 
proteins, in particular the upstream stimulatory factors (USFs). From ex vivo and
in vivo experiments, it appears that USFs are required for correct response of
the L-PK gene to glucose, but their expression and binding activity are not known
to be regulated by glucose. A genetic screen in yeast has allowed us to identify 
a novel transcriptional factor binding to the GlRE, i.e. the chicken ovalbumin
upstream promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII). Binding of COUP-TFII to
the GlRE was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and
COUP-TFII-containing complexes were detectable in liver nuclear extracts. Neither
abundance nor binding activity of COUP-TFII appeared to be significantly
regulated by diets. In footprinting experiments, two COUP-TFII-binding sites
overlapping the E boxes were detected. Overexpression of COUP-TFII abrogated the 
USF-dependent transactivation of an artificial GlRE-dependent promoter in COS
cells and the glucose responsiveness of the L-PK promoter in hepatocytes in
primary culture. In addition, a mutated GlRE with increased affinity for USF and 
very low affinity for COUP-TFII conferred a dramatically decreased glucose
responsiveness on the L-PK promoter in hepatocytes in primary culture by
increasing activity of the reporter gene in low glucose condition. We propose
that COUP-TFII could be a negative regulatory component of the glucose sensor
complex assembled on the GlRE of the L-PK gene and most likely of other
glucose-responsive genes as well.

PMID: 10497199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1428-34.

Transactivation of classical and nonclassical HLA class I genes through the
IFN-stimulated response element.

Gobin SJ(1), van Zutphen M, Woltman AM, van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Bank, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. gobin@rullf2.Medfac.LeidenUniv.nl

The IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) is an important conserved cis-acting
regulatory element in the promoter of MHC class I genes, but displays
considerable locus-specific nucleotide variation. In this report, the putative
ISREs of classical and nonclassical HLA class I genes were investigated for their
contribution to MHC class I transactivation. It is shown that IFN-gamma induced
MHC class I transactivation through the ISRE of HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-F.
This is congruent with the binding of IFN regulatory factor-1 to the ISREs of
these loci upon IFN-gamma treatment. Sp1 was shown to bind to the CG-rich
sequences in the ISRE regions of HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-G. The putative E box 5'
of the ISRE in most HLA-B alleles was shown to bind the upstream stimulatory
factors (USF) 1 and 2. The Sp1 and USF binding sites did not influence
IFN-gamma-induced transactivation. However, the USF binding site played a
suppressive role in the constitutive expression of HLA-B. The locus-specific
transcriptional control through the ISRE could be an important mechanism in the
differential regulation of classical and nonclassical MHC class I expression,
which determines adequate Ag presentation upon pathogenic challenge.

PMID: 10415043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Aug 1;250(2):535-47.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 regulates osteopontin expression in smooth muscle
cells.

Malyankar UM(1), Hanson R, Schwartz SM, Ridall AL, Giachelli CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195,
USA.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) undergo a dramatic phenotypic transition in
response to injury and ex vivo culture that includes enhanced proliferation,
migration, matrix deposition, and alterations in gene expression. Osteopontin is 
a good marker for the injury-induced SMC phenotypic state in vivo and in vitro.
To identify transcription factors that might control the regulation of
osteopontin expression, we investigated cultured vascular SMCs that express high 
and low levels of osteopontin. Using nuclear run-on assays, mRNA stability
studies, and deletion analysis, we demonstrate that regulation of osteopontin
steady-state mRNA levels in SMCs occurs at the transcriptional level. Transient
transfection and gel-shift analyses of osteopontin promoter indicated that a
region between -123 and +66 was involved in the expression of osteopontin.
Supershift EMSAs identified the bHLH-leucine zipper transcription factor upstream
stimulatory factor-1 (USF1) as the protein binding to this sequence. Finally, we 
show that USF1 protein is induced in vivo within 24 h of balloon angioplasty of
rat carotids coordinately with osteopontin induction. These data suggest that
USF1 governs expression of osteopontin in cultured vascular SMCs and might
contribute to initial osteopontin expression observed post carotid injury and in 
vascular pathologies in vivo.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10413606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem J. 1999 Jul 15;341 ( Pt 2):315-22.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates Pdx-1 gene expression in differentiated
pancreatic beta-cells.

Qian J(1), Kaytor EN, Towle HC, Olson LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, 214 Giltner Hall, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

The homeobox gene Pdx-1 plays a key role in the development of the pancreas. In
the adult, however, expression of the Pdx-1 gene is restricted to pancreatic
beta-cells and endocrine cells of duodenal epithelium. Recently, the
transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), has been shown to bind
in vitro to a mutationally sensitive E-box motif within the 5'-flanking region of
the Pdx-1 gene [Sharma, Leonard, Lee, Chapman, Leiter and Montminy (1996) J.
Biol. Chem. 271, 2294-2299]. In the present study, we show that USF not only
binds to the Pdx-1 gene promoter but also functionally regulates the expression
of the Pdx-1 gene in differentiated pancreatic beta-cells. Adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of a dominant negative form of USF2 decreased binding of
endogenous USF to the E-box element by approximately 90%. This reduction in
endogenous USF binding led to a greater than 50% decrease in Pdx-1 gene promoter 
activity, which, in turn, resulted in marked reductions in Pdx-1 mRNA and protein
levels. Importantly, the lower Pdx-1 protein levels led to a greater than 50%
reduction in Pdx-1 binding activity to the A3 element on the insulin gene
promoter, and a significant reduction in insulin mRNA levels. Overall, our
results show that USF functionally regulates Pdx-1 gene expression in
differentiated pancreatic beta-cells and provide the first functional data for a 
role of USF in the regulation of a normal cellular gene.

PMCID: PMC1220362
PMID: 10393088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Exp Med. 1999 Jun 21;189(12):1931-8.

Chlamydia inhibits interferon gamma-inducible major histocompatibility complex
class II expression by degradation of upstream stimulatory factor 1.

Zhong G(1), Fan T, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E OW3, Canada. gmzhong@cc.umanitoba.ca

We report that chlamydiae, which are obligate intracellular bacterial pathogens, 
can inhibit interferon (IFN)-gamma-inducible major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class II expression. However, the IFN-gamma-induced IFN regulatory factor-1
(IRF-1) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression is not
affected, suggesting that chlamydia may selectively target the IFN-gamma
signaling pathways required for MHC class II expression. Chlamydial inhibition of
MHC class II expression is correlated with degradation of upstream stimulatory
factor (USF)-1, a constitutively and ubiquitously expressed transcription factor 
required for IFN-gamma induction of class II transactivator (CIITA) but not of
IRF-1 and ICAM-1. CIITA is an obligate mediator of IFN-gamma-inducible MHC class 
II expression. Thus, diminished CIITA expression as a result of USF-1 degradation
may account for the suppression of the IFN-gamma-inducible MHC class II in
chlamydia-infected cells. These results reveal a novel immune evasion strategy
used by the intracellular bacterial pathogen chlamydia that improves our
understanding of the molecular basis of pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2192973
PMID: 10377188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4788-97.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates major histocompatibility complex class I
gene expression: the U2DeltaE4 splice variant abrogates E-box activity.

Howcroft TK(1), Murphy C, Weissman JD, Huber SJ, Sawadogo M, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1360, USA. Howcrofk@Exchange.nih.gov

The tissue-specific expression of major histocompatibility complex class I genes 
is determined by a series of upstream regulatory elements, many of which remain
ill defined. We now report that a distal E-box element, located between bp -309
and -314 upstream of transcription initiation, acts as a cell type-specific
enhancer of class I promoter activity. The class I E box is very active in a
neuroblastoma cell line, CHP-126, but is relatively inactive in the HeLa
epithelial cell line. The basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper proteins upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2 were shown to specifically recognize the
class I E box, resulting in the activation of the downstream promoter. Fine
mapping of USF1 and USF2 amino-terminal functional domains revealed differences
in their abilities to activate the class I E box. Whereas USF1 contained only an 
extended activation domain, USF2 contained both an activation domain and a
negative regulatory region. Surprisingly, the naturally occurring splice variant 
of USF2 lacking the exon 4 domain, U2DeltaE4, acted as a dominant-negative
regulator of USF-mediated activation of the class I promoter. This latter
activity is in sharp contrast to the known ability of U2DeltaE4 to activate the
adenovirus major late promoter. Class I E-box function is correlated with the
relative amount of U2DeltaE4 in a cell, leading to the proposal that U2DeltaE4
modulates class I E-box activity and may represent one mechanism to fine-tune
class I expression in various tissues.

PMCID: PMC84277
PMID: 10373528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 28;274(22):15959-65.

B cell-specific activator protein prevents two activator factors from binding to 
the immunoglobulin J chain promoter until the antigen-driven stages of B cell
development.

Wallin JJ(1), Rinkenberger JL, Rao S, Gackstetter ER, Koshland ME, Zwollo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720, USA.

The immunoglobulin J chain gene is inducibly transcribed in mature B cells upon
antigen recognition and a signal from interleukin-2 (IL-2). B cell-specific
activator protein (BSAP), a transcription factor that silences J chain
transcription, has been identified as a nuclear target of the IL-2 signal. The
levels of BSAP progressively decrease in response to IL-2 and this change
correlates with the differentiation of B cells into antibody secreting plasma
cells. Here we report the binding of the upstream stimulatory factor (USF) to an 
E-box motif immediately upstream from the BSAP site on the J chain promoter.
Mutations in the USF binding motif significantly decrease J chain promoter
activity in J chain expressing B cell lines. We also show that a functional
relationship exists between USF and a second J chain positive-regulating factor, 
B-MEF2, using co-immunoprecipitation assays and transfections. Finally, we
provide evidence that the binding of BSAP prevents USF and B-MEF2 from
interacting with the J chain promoter during the antigen-independent stages of B 
cell development. It is not until the levels of BSAP decrease during the
antigen-driven stages of B cell development that both USF and B-MEF2 are able to 
bind to their respective promoter elements and activate J chain transcription.

PMID: 10336503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 1999 May 15;162(10):5986-92.

USF/c-Myc enhances, while Yin-Yang 1 suppresses, the promoter activity of CXCR4, 
a coreceptor for HIV-1 entry.

Moriuchi M(1), Moriuchi H, Margolis DM, Fauci AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Baltimore, MD
21201, USA.

Transcription factors USF1 and USF2 up-regulate gene expression (i.e. , HIV-1
long terminal repeats) via interaction with an E box on their target promoters,
which is also a binding site for c-Myc. The c-Myc oncoprotein is important in
control of cellular proliferation and differentiation, while Yin-Yang 1 (YY1) has
been shown to control the expression of a number of cellular and viral genes.
These two proteins physically interact with each other and mutually inhibit their
respective biological functions. In this study, we show that USF/c-Myc
up-regulates, while YY1 down-regulates the promoter activity of CXCR4, a
coreceptor for T cell-tropic HIV-1 entry. We have identified an E box around -260
and a YY1 binding site around -300 relative to the transcription start site.
Mutation of the E box abolished USF/c-Myc-mediated up-regulation of CXCR4
promoter activity, and mutation of the YY1 binding site was associated with
unresponsiveness to YY1-mediated inhibition. These data suggest that USF/c-Myc
and YY1 may play an important role in the HIV-1-replicative cycle, by modulating 
both the viral fusion/entry process and viral expression.

PMID: 10229837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Mar;260(3):743-51.

FIRE3 in the promoter of the rat fatty acid synthase (FAS) gene binds the
ubiquitous transcription factors CBF and USF but does not mediate an insulin
response in a rat hepatoma cell line.

Roder K(1), Wolf SS, Sickinger S, Schweizer M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Microbiology Department, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK.

Several putative insulin-responsive elements (IRE) in the fatty acid synthase
(FAS) promoter have been identified and shown to be functional in adipocytes and 
hepatocytes. Here we report on the insulin-responsiveness in the rat hepatoma
cell line H4IIE of four cis-elements in the FAS promoter: the FAS
insulin-responsive elements, FIRE2 and FIRE3; the inverted CCAAT element, ICE;
and the insulin/glucose-binding element, designated hepatic FIRE element, hFIRE, 
originally identified in rat hepatocytes. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) competition experiments together with supershifts and in vitro
transcription/translation we show that FIRE3 (-68/-58) binds not only the
upstream stimulatory factors USF-1/USF-2 but also the CCAAT-binding factor CBF,
also known as the nuclear factor Y, NF-Y. The putative IRE FIRE2, which shows
sequence similarity to FIRE3, is located between -267 and -249. Gel retardation
experiments indicate that USF-1 and USF-2 also bind to this element, which
contains an imperfect E-box motif. Using the same approach we have shown that
hFIRE binds the stimulatory proteins Sp1 and Sp3 in addition to CBF. Transient
transfection experiments using FAS promoter constructs deleted for FIRE2 and
FIRE3 demonstrate that neither of these elements mediates the insulin response of
the FAS promoter in the rat hepatoma cell line H4IIE, however, ICE at -103/-87 is
responsible for mediating the effect of the insulin antagonist cAMP. The hFIRE
element located at -57/-34, in spite of its role in the glucose/insulin response 
in primary rat hepatocytes, is apparently not involved in the insulin regulation 
of the rat FAS promoter in H4IIE cells. The fact that the topology of the
promoters of the FAS genes in rat, human, goose and chicken is conserved
regarding CBF-binding sites and USF-binding sites implies an important role for
these ubiquitously expressed transcription factors in the regulation of the FAS
promoter.

PMID: 10103003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 2;257(1):44-9.

Characterization and purification of carbohydrate response element-binding
protein of the rat L-type pyruvate kinase gene promoter.

Yamada K(1), Tanaka T, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka,
Fukui, 910-1193, Japan.

The L-III transcriptional regulatory element of the rat pyruvate kinase L gene is
located between -170 and -150 base pairs upstream of the hepatocyte-specific
transcription initiation site. As the L-III element is not only necessary for
cell type-specific expression but also for transcriptional stimulation by
carbohydrates, it is also referred to as a carbohydrate-response element.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using rat liver nuclear extract showed that
L-III element-binding protein (L-IIIBP) was observed as multiple bands. These
bands disappeared when the nuclear extract was preincubated at 60 degrees C for 5
min and were competed with unlabeled L-III oligonucleotide but not with unlabeled
adenovirus major late promoter E box oligonucleotide. In addition, these bands
were not affected in the presence of antiserum against upstream stimulating
factor (USF). Thus, we conclude that L-IIIBP is different from USF. Then,
heat-labile L-IIIBP was purified from rat liver nuclear extracts. Purified
L-IIIBP exhibited two bands on sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis by silver staining. Ultraviolet crosslinking experiment showed
that both bands had binding activity to the L-III oligonucleotide.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10092507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):9098-107.

PU.1 and USF are required for macrophage-specific mannose receptor promoter
activity.

Egan BS(1), Lane KB, Shepherd VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37212,
USA.

In the current study we report the isolation of 854 base pairs of the rat mannose
receptor promoter. Analysis of the sequence revealed one Sp1 site, three PU.1
sites, and a potential TATA box (TTTAAA) 33 base pairs 5' of the transcriptional 
start site. The tissue specificity of the promoter was determined using transient
transfections. The promoter was most active in the mature macrophage cell line
NR8383 although the promoter also showed activity in the monocytic cell line RAW.
No activity was observed in pre-monocytic cell lines or epithelial cell lines.
Mutation of the TTTAAA sequence to TTGGAA resulted in a 50% decrease in activity 
in transient transfection assays suggesting that the promoter contains a
functional TATA box. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and mutagenesis 
we established that the transcription factors Sp1, PU.1, and USF bound to the
mannose receptor promoter, but only PU.1 and USF contributed to activation.
Transient transfections using a dominant negative construct of USF resulted in a 
50% decrease in mannose receptor promoter activity, further establishing the role
of USF in activating the rat mannose receptor promoter. Comparison of the rat,
mouse, and human sequence demonstrated that some binding sites are not conserved.
Gel shifts were performed to investigate differences in protein binding between
species. USF bound to the rat and human promoter but not to the mouse promoter,
suggesting that different mechanisms are involved in regulation of mannose
receptor expression in these species. From these results we conclude that,
similar to other myeloid promoters, transcription of the rat mannose receptor is 
regulated by binding of PU.1 and a ubiquitous factor at an adjacent site.
However, unlike other myeloid promoters, we have identified USF as the ubiquitous
factor, and demonstrated that the promoter contains a functional TATA box.

PMID: 10085160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Virol. 1999 Apr;73(4):2983-93.

Silencing of the Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 gene by the
Max-Mad1-mSin3A modulator of chromatin structure.

Sjöblom-Hallén A(1), Yang W, Jansson A, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Göteborg
University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, SE 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
anna.sjoblom@ss.gu.se

The tumor-associated latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) gene in the Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) genome is activated by EBV-encoded proteins and cellular factors that
are part of general signal transduction pathways. As previously demonstrated, the
proximal region of the LMP1 promoter regulatory sequence (LRS) contains a
negative cis element with a major role in EBNA2-mediated regulation of LMP1 gene 
expression in B cells. Here, we show that this silencing activity overlaps with a
transcriptional enhancer in an LRS sequence that contains an E-box-homologous
motif. Mutation of the putative repressor binding site relieved the repression
both in a promoter-proximal context and in a complete LRS context, indicating a
functional role of the repressor. Gel retardation assays showed that members of
the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family, including Max, Mad1, USF,
E12, and E47, and the corepressor mSin3A bound to the E-box-containing sequence. 
The enhancer activity correlated with the binding of USF. Moreover, the activity 
of the LMP1 promoter in reporter constructs was upregulated by overexpression of 
USF1 and USF2a, and the transactivation was inhibited by the concurrent
expression of Max and Mad1. This suggests that Max-Mad1-mediated anchorage of a
multiprotein complex including mSin3A and histone deacetylases to the E-box site 
constitutes the basis for the repression. Removal of acetyl moieties from
histones H3 and H4 should result in a chromatin structure that is inaccessible to
transcription factors. Accordingly, inhibition of deacetylase activity with
trichostatin A induced expression of the endogenous LMP1 gene in EBV-transformed 
cells.

PMCID: PMC104058
PMID: 10074148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Genomics. 1999 Jan 15;55(2):185-93.

Physical delineation of a 700-kb region overlapping the Looptail mutation on
mouse chromosome 1.

Underhill DA(1), Mullick A, Groulx N, Beatty BG, Gros P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1Y6,
Canada.

The mouse looptail (Lp) mutation is an established model for neural tube defects 
with homozygous Lp embryos showing an open neural tube from the caudal midbrain
to the tip of the tail. Heterozygous Lp mice are characterized by a "looped-tail"
and wobbly head movements. The Lp gene has been mapped to a 0.6-cM interval on
mouse chromosome 1 delineated by two clusters of markers,
Fcer1gamma/Usf1/D1Mit113/D1Wsu1 on the proximal side and
Fcer1alpha/Spna1/D1Mit149 distally. In the present study, we have created a
high-resolution physical map of the Lp genetic interval that is based on
long-range restriction mapping by PFGE, fluorescence in situ hybridization
analysis of interphase nuclei and extended chromatid fibers, and the assembly of 
a cloned contig. This contig consists of 25 independent and overlapping BAC
clones and 3 YAC clones. The combined analysis indicates that the 0.6-cM genetic 
interval for Lp corresponds to a minimal physical interval of 700 kb that is
delineated by D1Mit113 proximally (two crossovers) and Fcer1alpha distally (one
crossover). The overall gene order and intergene distances for the region were
determined to be D1Mit113-<150 kb-Nhlh1-250 kb-Atp1alpha2-280 kb-Fcer1alpha.
Partial sequencing of BAC clones from the contig yielded 42 new STS markers for
this region of mouse chromosome 1. Sequence analysis of the BAC clones and
assignment of ESTs from the human transcript map to the cloned contig allowed the
placement of four new transcription units within this region: Pc326, Kiaa0253,
and Pea15 were positioned in the Nhlh1/Atp1alpha2 nonrecombinant interval, while 
Girk3 was located distal to Atp1alpha2.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9933565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1508-17.

Cell-type-dependent activity of the ubiquitous transcription factor USF in
cellular proliferation and transcriptional activation.

Qyang Y(1), Luo X, Lu T, Ismail PM, Krylov D, Vinson C, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

USF1 and USF2 are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors implicated in the 
control of cellular proliferation. In HeLa cells, the USF proteins are
transcriptionally active and their overexpression causes marked growth
inhibition. In contrast, USF overexpression had essentially no effect on the
proliferation of the Saos-2 osteosarcoma cell line. USF1 and USF2 also lacked
transcriptional activity in Saos-2 cells when assayed by transient cotransfection
with USF-dependent reporter genes. Yet, there was no difference in the
expression, subcellular localization, or DNA-binding activity of the USF proteins
in HeLa and Saos-2 cells. Furthermore, Gal4-USF1 and Gal4-USF2 fusion proteins
activated transcription similarly in both cell lines. Mutational analysis and
domain swapping experiments revealed that the small, highly conserved
USF-specific region (USR) was responsible for the inactivity of USF in Saos-2
cells. In HeLa, the USR serves a dual function. It acts as an autonomous
transcriptional activation domain at promoters containing an initiator element
and also induces a conformational change that is required for USF activity at
promoters lacking an initiator. Taken together, these results suggest a model in 
which the transcriptional activity of the USF proteins, and consequently their
antiproliferative activity, is tightly controlled by interaction with a
specialized coactivator that recognizes the conserved USR domain and, in contrast
to USF, is not ubiquitous. The activity of USF is therefore context dependent,
and evidence for USF DNA-binding activity in particular cells is insufficient to 
indicate USF function in transcriptional activation and growth control.

PMCID: PMC116079
PMID: 9891084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2009-13.

Essential role in vivo of upstream stimulatory factors for a normal dietary
response of the fatty acid synthase gene in the liver.

Casado M(1), Vallet VS, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, U.129 INSERM Unité de Recherches en 
Physiologie et Pathologie Génétiques et Moléculaires, 75014 Paris, France.

In the liver, transcription of several genes encoding lipogenic and glycolytic
enzymes, in particular the gene for fatty acid synthase (FAS), is known to be
stimulated by dietary carbohydrates. The molecular dissection of the FAS promoter
pointed out the critical role of an E box motif, located at position -65 with
respect to the start site of transcription, in mediating the glucose- and
insulin-dependent regulation of the gene. Upstream stimulatory factors (USF1 and 
USF2) and sterol response element binding protein 1 (SREBP1) were shown to be
able to interact in vitro with this E box. However, to date, the relative
contributions of USFs and SREBP1 ex vivo remain controversial. To gain insight
into the specific roles of these factors in vivo, we have analyzed the glucose
responsiveness of hepatic FAS gene expression in USF1 and USF2 knock-out mice. In
both types of mouse lines, defective in either USF1 or USF2, induction of the FAS
gene by refeeding a carbohydrate-rich diet was severely delayed, whereas
expression of SREBP1 was almost normal and insulin response unchanged. Therefore,
USF transactivators, and especially USF1/USF2 heterodimers, seem to be essential 
to sustain the dietary induction of the FAS gene in the liver.

PMID: 9890958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1216-25.

Cooperative binding of upstream stimulatory factor and hepatic nuclear factor 4
drives the transcription of the human apolipoprotein A-II gene.

Ribeiro A(1), Pastier D, Kardassis D, Chambaz J, Cardot P.

Author information: 
(1)U505 INSERM, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Institut des Cordeliers, 15 rue
de l'Ecole de Médecine, 75006 Paris, France.

The activity of the human apoA-II promoter is controlled by a synergistic
interaction of the distal enhancer and the proximal promoter. An important role
in apoA-II promoter activity is exerted by a transcription factor, designated
CIIIB1, which binds to the proximal element AB and the distal elements of the
enhancer, K and L. In the present communication we establish that CIIIB1
corresponds to the previously described factor, upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
using the following criteria. (a) Purification of CIIIB1 by affinity
chromatography provided a heat-stable protein with an apparent molecular mass of 
45 kDa that cross-reacted with anti-USF1 and -USF2a antibodies; (b) CIIIB1 bound 
to the elements AB, K, and L was supershifted by these antibodies; (c) the
heterodimer USF1/2a is the predominant form that corresponds to CIIIB1.
Cotransfection experiments in HepG2 cells established the functional significance
of USF in apoA-II transcription. It was found that the minimal promoter AB was
transactivated by USF2a. In addition, all three E-box motifs present in elements 
AB, K and L are necessary for maximum transactivation by USF2a. A dominant
negative form of USF2a inhibits the activity of apoA-II promoter. The USF1/2a
heterodimer, which is naturally expressed in the liver, is as efficient as the
USF2a homodimer in the transactivation of apoA-II promoter/enhancer constructs.
Cotransfection experiments in COS-1 cells showed that hepatic nuclear factor 4
(HNF-4) synergized with USF2a in the transactivation of the apoA-II promoter. In 
addition, we showed that HNF-4 and USF2a bind to the enhancer cooperatively. This
may account for the transcriptional synergism observed between USF and HNF-4 in
the transactivation of the apoA-II promoter.

PMID: 9880489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 8;274(2):595-606.

Mxi1 is a repressor of the c-Myc promoter and reverses activation by USF.

Lee TC(1), Ziff EB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Kaplan Cancer 
Center, New York University Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The basic region/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (B-HLH-LZ) oncoprotein c-Myc is 
abundant in proliferating cells and forms heterodimers with Max protein that bind
to E-box sites in DNA and stimulate genes required for proliferation. A second
B-HLH-LZ protein, Mxi1, is induced during terminal differentiation, and forms
heterodimers with Max that also bind E-boxes but tether the mSin3 transcriptional
repressor protein along with histone deacetylase thereby antagonizing
Myc-dependent activation. We show that Mxi1 also antagonizes Myc by a second
pathway, repression of transcription from the major c-myc promoter, P2.
Repression was independent of Mxi1 binding to mSin3 but dependent on the Mxi1 LZ 
and COOH-terminal sequences, including putative casein kinase II phosphorylation 
sites. Repression targeted elements of the myc P2 promoter core (-35/+10), where 
it reversed transactivation by the constitutive transcription factor, USF. We
show that Zn2+ induction of a stably transfected, metallothionein
promoter-regulated mxi1 gene blocked the ability of serum to induce transcription
of the endogenous c-myc gene and cell entry into S phase. Thus, induction of Mxi1
in terminally differentiating cells may block Myc function by repressing the
c-myc gene P2 promoter, as well as by antagonizing Myc-dependent transactivation 
through E-boxes.

PMID: 9872993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil. 1998;192(5):813-27.

[From the glycogenic function of the liver to gene regulation by glucose].

[Article in French]

Kahn A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique moléculaire, Unité 129 de l'INSERM, CHU Cochin,
Paris.

Glucose, that Claude Bernard has demonstrated in 1850 to be synthesized and
secreted by the liver, is an important regulator of gene transcription in all
types of organisms. In vertebrates, it especially regulates transcription of
metabolic genes in the liver and fat tissue, activating genes encoding enzymes
and regulators of the glycolytic and lipogenic pathways. Working with the L-type 
pyruvate kinase gene we have found that in hepatocytes glucose-dependent gene
regulation requires: Presence of the GLUT2 glucose transporter, necessary to
allow for an effective depletion in glucose 6-phosphate (G-6P) under
gluconeogenic conditions. Phosphorylation of glucose to G-6P assured either by
insulin-dependent glucokinase or by another hexokinase isoform. Most likely,
entry of G-6P in the pentose phosphate pathway. Modulation of a
kinase/phosphatase cascade, in particular inhibition of the 5'AMP-activated
protein kinase. Signalling through a glucose response complex assembled onto a
glucose-response element (GIRE) located in regulatory regions of
glucose-responsive genes. The activators USF belong to the complex, and are
required for a normal gene activation by glucose, as evidenced from the phenotype
of knock-out mice deficient in USF. The study of USF-defective knock-out mice
suggest that USF could be involved in nutritional activation of a whole class of 
genes regulated by glucose, and not by insulin itself. In particular, lipogenic
genes and the ob gene, encoding the leptin satiety hormone, are abnormally
responsive to diet in USF-/- mice. The transactivation potential of USF would be 
modulated by a glucose sensor system implying the COUP-TFII transcription
inhibitor. The main role of insulin in the glucose response of genes like the
L-PK gene is to induce the glucokinase gene. Glucagon, through cyclic AMP,
inhibits L-PK gene transcription mainly through activation of PKA. The PKA
catalytic subunit could act by phosphorylating member(s) of the glucose-response 
complex, or of contiguous transcription factor, e.g. HNF4. In conclusion, through
a pluridisciplinary approach ranging from Claude Bernard-derived biology to
modern molecular biology, important progress have been made during the last years
on the mechanisms of the regulation of gene transcription by glucose in
vertebrates.

PMID: 9871795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Infect Dis. 1998 Nov;178 Suppl 1:S27-33.

Anatomy of the varicella-zoster virus open-reading frame 4 promoter.

Michael EJ(1), Kuck KM, Kinchington PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA.

The regulation of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) gene expression is largely
controlled at the transcriptional level by a few key viral proteins cooperating
with one another and with cellular transcription factors. However, the mechanisms
involved are largely unclear. To identify the sequences important for the
transcriptional regulation of open-reading frame (ORF) 4, itself encoding a
transcriptional regulator, a mutation analysis of the promoter was done. These
studies identified an element between -69 and -59 (relative to the
transcriptional start site), which was critical to the activity of the promoter
upon stimulation by the VZV transactivator IE62 and by VZV infection. DNA-protein
interaction studies revealed that VZV induced the binding of a specific protein
complex to this element, which contained the ubiquitous transcription factor USF.
ORF 4 is the second VZV gene (in addition to VZV ORF 29) in which USF binding
plays a critical role in gene expression.

PMID: 9852969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Nov 10;95(23):13887-92.

c-Myc target gene specificity is determined by a post-DNAbinding mechanism.

Boyd KE(1), Wells J, Gutman J, Bartley SM, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Uncertainty as to which member of a family of DNA-binding transcription factors
regulates a specific promoter in intact cells is a problem common to many
investigators. Determining target gene specificity requires both an analysis of
protein binding to the endogenous promoter as well as a characterization of the
functional consequences of transcription factor binding. By using a formaldehyde 
crosslinking procedure and Gal4 fusion proteins, we have analyzed the timing and 
functional consequences of binding of Myc and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)1 
to endogenous cellular genes. We demonstrate that the endogenous cad promoter can
be immunoprecipitated with antibodies against Myc and USF1. We further
demonstrate that although both Myc and USF1 can bind to cad, the cad promoter can
respond only to the Myc transactivation domain. We also show that the amount of
Myc bound to the cad promoter fluctuates in a growth-dependent manner. Thus, our 
data analyzing both DNA binding and promoter activity in intact cells suggest
that cad is a Myc target gene. In addition, we show that Myc binding can occur at
many sites in vivo but that the position of the binding site determines the
functional consequences of this binding. Our data indicate that a
post-DNA-binding mechanism determines Myc target gene specificity. Importantly,
we have demonstrated the feasibility of analyzing the binding of site-specific
transcription factors in vivo to single copy mammalian genes.

PMCID: PMC24949
PMID: 9811896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Nov 15;26(22):5182-9.

Participation of upstream stimulator factor (USF) in cadmium-induction of the
mouse metallothionein-I gene.

Li Q(1), Hu N, Daggett MA, Chu WA, Bittel D, Johnson JA, Andrews GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160-7421, USA.

The roles of the bHLH-Zip protein, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), in mouse
metallothionein-I (MT-I) gene expression were examined. The promoter contains a
putative USF binding site which overlaps an antioxidant response element (ARE)
located at -101 bp relative to the transcription start point. The USF/ARE
composite element increases basal expression of the mouse MT-I gene, and partly
mediates response to oxidative stress. However, other functions of this composite
element and the in vivo roles for USF in MT-I promoter functions have not been
examined. We report studies which indicate that USF participates via the USF/ARE 
element in cadmium responsiveness of the mouse MT-I promoter. During the course
of these studies a second, higher affinity USF binding site at -223 bp was
identified. Stable and transient transfection assays in mouse hepatoma cells,
using the USF/ARE in the context of a minimal promoter and site-directed and
truncation mutants of the MT-I promoter, revealed that the USF and the ARE sites 
contribute to cadmium (2-30 microM) but not zinc responsiveness, and to basal
promoter activity. Overexpression of dominant-negative (dn)USF in co-transfection
assays significantly attenuated cadmium induction of the USF/ARE in the context
of a minimal promoter, and attenuated cadmium, but not zinc, induction of the
intact MT-I promoter. A consensus E-box (CACATG) at -223 bp in the MT-I promoter 
was also found to bind USF in vitro , and to be constitutively footprinted in
vivo . The interaction of USF with E-box1 was apparently 10-fold stronger than
that with the USF/ARE. However, in contrast, E-box1 was not a strong basal
promoter element nor was it metal ions responsive in mouse Hepa cells. In
conclusion, these studies demonstrate a role for USF in cadmium-specific
induction of the mouse MT-I gene, but bring into question an obligate role for
USF in regulating basal activity of this gene. The data further suggest that USF 
interacts with ARE-binding proteins to influence MT-I gene expression.

PMCID: PMC147950
PMID: 9801317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):28170-7.

A 69-base pair fragment derived from human transcobalamin II promoter is
sufficient for high bidirectional activity in the absence of a TATA box and an
initiator element in transfected cells. Role of an E box in transcriptional
activity.

Li N(1), Seetharam B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Wisconsin and Veterans Medical Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226,
USA.

A 69-base pair (bp) (-581/-513) fragment derived from human transcobalamin II
distal promoter constructed upstream of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene demonstrated high bidirectional promoter activity in transfected
epithelial Caco-2 cells. DNase I footprinting, gel mobility shift, supershift,
and mutagenesis studies with the 69-bp fragment demonstrated that a GC box
(-568/-559) and an E box (-523/-528), which interacted with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2
(where USF is upstream stimulatory factor), respectively, were required for the
full transcriptional activity of this fragment. Whereas mutations in the GC box
reduced the promoter activity by 50%, mutations in the E box alone or in both the
E box and GC box resulted in 90% loss of transcriptional activity. The essential 
role of the E box in the bidirectional promoter activity was further demonstrated
by transient transfection in Caco-2, K-562, and HeLa cells using a 29-bp
(-541/-513) fragment that contained only the E box. Based on these results we
suggest that 1) the E box is essential for both the GC box-dependent and
-independent promoter activity of the 69-bp fragment, 2) cooperative interactions
between Sp1/Sp3 and USFs are required for the full activation of the 69-bp
promoter activity, and 3) the single E box is able to mediate bidirectional
transcription in transfected cells in the absence of an obvious TATA box or a
known initiator element.

PMID: 9774437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Oct;12(10):1499-512.

Multiple promoter elements contribute to activity of the follicle-stimulating
hormone receptor (FSHR) gene in testicular Sertoli cells.

Heckert LL(1), Daggett MA, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

The FSH receptor (FSHR) is expressed only in granulosa cells of the ovary and
Sertoli cells of the testis. This highly specific pattern of gene expression
asserts that transcriptional events unique to these two cell types are
responsible for activation of the FSHR gene. We have characterized the promoter
elements required for activity of the rat FSHR gene in a Sertoli cell line MSC-1,
primary cultures of rat Sertoli cells, and two non-Sertoli cell lines. Transient 
transfection analysis of deletion and block replacement mutants identified
several elements, both 5' and 3' to the transcriptional start sites, that are
essential for full promoter activity in Sertoli cells. These studies confirmed
the use of an important E box element (CACGTG), which had the single greatest
impact on promoter function. Bases within the core CACGTG of the E box, as well
as flanking sequences, were shown to be essential for its function.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified both upstream stimulatory factor
1 (USF1) and USF2 as primary components of the complexes binding the E box.
Sequence requirements for USF binding in vitro modestly diverged from the
sequence requirements for in vivo function of the element. Comparison of the E
box binding proteins in different cell types revealed that similar proteins bind 
the E box in Sertoli and non-Sertoli cell lines. Extracts from primary cultures
of rat and mouse Sertoli cells have a second E box-binding complex that
cross-reacts with USF antibodies that is not present in the cell lines.

PMCID: PMC1496885
PMID: 9773974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 10;17(10):1279-86.

The activation and composition of FiRE (an FGF-inducible response element) differ
in a cell type- and growth factor-specific manner.

Jaakkola P(1), Määttä A, Jalkanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Finland.

The expression of the heparan sulfate proteoglycan, syndecan-1, is induced both
in keratinocytes and in fibroblasts during development and tissue regeneration.
Here we report that in keratinocytes the syndecan-1 gene was stimulated by EGF
but not by FGF-2. In fibroblasts it was stimulated by FGF-2 but not by EGF.
Likewise, the recently discovered FGF-inducible response element (FiRE) on the
gene of syndecan-1 was stimulated by FGF-2 in fibroblasts and by EGF in
keratinocytes, but not vice versa. The FiRE has two binding sites for an
activator protein-1 (AP-1), one for an FGF-inducible nuclear factor (FIN-1) and
one for an upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF-1). The growth factor-stimulated
binding of these transcription factors, as well as their requirement for FiRE
activation, varied between the two cell types. First, although AP-1s were
required for activation of FiRE in both cell types, the binding of AP-1 to FiRE
was increased by growth factor-stimulation only in fibroblasts and not in
keratinocytes. Secondly, FiRE did not bind FIN-1 nor needed the FIN-1 binding
site for EGF-stimulated activation in keratinocytes, in contrast to the
FGF-stimulated activation of FiRE in fibroblasts. Thirdly, EGF, which did not
activate FiRE in fibroblasts, failed to activate FIN-1 in these cells. Finally,
an USF-1 binding site that was necessary for activation of FiRE in keratinocytes 
was not needed in fibroblasts. These data suggest mechanisms by which members of 
the EGF- and FGF-families can differentially stimulate transcription through AP-1
regulated elements in a cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 9771971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Physiol. 1998 Oct;275(4 Pt 1):G778-88.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the murine polymeric IgA receptor
gene.

Martín MG(1), Wang J, Li TW, Lam JT, Gutierrez EM, Solorzano-Vargas RS, Tsai AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095-1752, 
USA.

The regulatory elements that control basal and activated transcriptional
expression of the polymeric IgA receptor gene (pIgR) have not been defined. In
this study, we performed functional analysis of the murine pIgR 5'-upstream
region. Transient transfection studies identified the gene's minimal promoter to 
reside within 110 nucleotides upstream from the start of transcription.
Substitution mutations of this region identified both a putative activator (-78
to -70) and a repressor (-66 to -52) element. DNase I footprint analysis
confirmed an area of protection that spans from nucleotides -85 to -62. Mobility 
shift assays of the putative region confirmed binding of upstream stimulatory
factor 1 (USF1) to an E box element at positions -75 and -70, representing the
putative enhancer. Overexpression studies using various forms of USF suggest that
both USF1 and USF2 enhance activity of the pIgR minimal promoter. We report the
identification and characterization of the murine pIgR minimal promoter, as well 
as the critical role of USF in enhancing its basal level of transcription in
Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 9756509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):26130-7.

Cloning and characterization of the 5'-flanking region for the human
topoisomerase III gene.

Kim JC(1), Yoon JB, Koo HS, Chung IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Bioproducts Research Center, Yonsei
University, Seoul 120-749, Korea.

The human DNA topoisomerase III (hTOP3) gene encodes a topoisomerase homologous
to the Escherichia coli DNA topoisomerase I subfamily. To understand the
mechanisms responsible for regulating hTOP3 expression, we have cloned the
5'-flanking region of the gene coding for the hTOP3 and analyzed its promoter
activity. The presence of a single transcription initiation site was suggested by
primer extension analysis. The hTOP3 gene promoter is moderately high in GC
content and lacks a canonical TATA box, suggesting that hTOP3 promoter has
overall similarity to promoters of a number of housekeeping genes. Examination of
the promoter sequence indicated the presence of four Sp-1 consensus binding
sequences and a putative initiator element surrounding the transcription
initiation site. Transient expression of a luciferase reporter gene under the
control of serially deleted 5'-flanking sequences revealed that the 52-base pair 
region from -326 to -275 upstream of the transcription initiation site includes a
positive cis-acting element(s) for the efficient expression of hTOP3 gene. On the
basis of gel mobility shift and supershift assays, we demonstrated that both YY1 
and USF1 transcription factors can bind to the 52-base pair region. When HeLa
cells were transiently transfected with a mutant construct which had disabled
both YY1- and USF1-binding sites, the luciferase activity was greatly reduced,
suggesting that these binding elements play a functional role in the basal
activation of the hTOP3 promoter. Transfection studies with mutations that
selectively impaired YY1 or USF1 binding suggested that both YY1 and USF1
function as activators in the hTOP3 promoter.

PMID: 9748294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Immunol. 1998 Sep 15;161(6):2881-7.

Nuclear translocation of upstream stimulating factor 2 (USF2) in activated mast
cells: a possible role in their survival.

Frenkel S(1), Kay G, Nechushtan H, Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Multiple transcription factors are activated in the cytoplasm and translocated to
the nucleus where they exert positive or negative control over cellular genes.
Such subcellular traffic of transcription factors usually requires the presence
of a positively charged nuclear localization sequence (NLS). Upstream stimulating
factor 2 (USF2) is one of the few transcription factors that contain two
potential domains for nuclear localization. In addition to the conventional basic
NLS, USF2 contains a highly conserved USF-specific region that is involved in its
nuclear translocation. In the present work, the induction of translocation of
USF2 into the mast cell nucleus was observed and found to be dependent on
activation of the cells either by IL-3 or IgE-Ag. It was also observed that the
prevention of the translocation of USF2 to the nucleus, using a peptide derived
from the specific USF-NLS region, significantly inhibited their IL-3-mediated
survival. Thus, our findings show a direct connection between mast cell surface
receptor-mediated USF2 nuclear translocation and cell viability.

PMID: 9743349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Sep;12(9):1310-21.

Upstream stimulatory factors mediate estrogen receptor activation of the
cathepsin D promoter.

Xing W(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of Western Ontario,
London Regional Cancer Centre, Canada.

Overexpression of cathepsin D (CD), a ubiquitous lysosomal protease, is closely
associated with a poor clinical outcome for patients with breast cancer. Estrogen
greatly induces transcription of the CD gene in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer cells. In this report, we transiently introduced a human CD
promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene into human MCF-7 breast 
cancer cells to study the mechanisms by which the ER activates the promoter.
Using an in vivo Exonuclease III footprinting assay, we found that estrogen
stimulation of MCF-7 cells induced loading of a transcription factor(s) to a
portion of the promoter (-124 to -104) that is homologous to the adenovirus major
late promoter element. Subsequent gel mobility shift assays with a 21-bp CD
-124/-104 probe and nuclear extracts prepared from naive and estrogen-stimulated 
cells detected a single sequence-specific protein-DNA complex. Southwestern and
UV cross-linking experiments detected two proteins of 44 kDa and 43 kDa that were
specifically bound to the 21-bp fragment of the promoter. Gel super-shift assays 
with upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) and USF-2 antibodies demonstrated that
USF-1 and USF-2 bound to the E box probe. Sequence specific binding was abolished
by a 2-bp change shown previously to prevent the binding of USF to the E box.
Incorporation of a mutant E box into the wild-type CD promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene abolished USF binding and reduced the levels of both basal
and estrogen-stimulated transcription. These results suggest that the ER
targeting of USF-1 and USF-2 is a critical step in hormone activation of CD gene 
transcription in human breast cancer cells.

PMID: 9731700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Gene. 1998 Aug 17;216(1):155-62.

Promoter analysis of mouse estrogen-responsive finger protein (efp) gene: mouse
efp promoter contains an E-box that is also conserved in human.

Ikeda K(1), Inoue S, Orimo A, Tsutsumi K, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Saitama 350-04, 
Japan.

The estrogen-responsive finger protein (efp) containing a RING finger motif has
been identified as an estrogen-responsive gene in human and mouse. Here, we have 
characterized the basal promoter region of the mouse efp gene. The promoter lacks
the TATA motif, and transcription initiation sites are found at positions -38T,
-64A and -73C from the translation initiation site. Deletion analysis of the
5'-flanking region using Jyg-Mc(B) mouse breast cancer cells indicates that the
sequence encompassing from -139 to -1 has a basal transcription activity. This
region is GC-rich in both mouse and human promoters, and the E-box is precisely
matched on the sequence alignment. A mutation experiment with E-box shows that
the E-box is functionally active. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay using
Jyg-Mc(B) nuclear extracts shows that a transcription factor, USF-1 binds to the 
E-box in the mouse efp promoter. It has been shown that the E-box in the human
efp promoter is indispensable for basal transcriptional activity and binds USF-1.
These findings suggest that the mouse efp promoter is regulated by a similar
mechanism to that of the human. In mouse, however, we have not found a negative
regulatory region that is present in human promoter.

PMID: 9714786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20175-9.

Differential roles of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 in the transcriptional
response of liver genes to glucose.

Vallet VS(1), Casado M, Henrion AA, Bucchini D, Raymondjean M, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques,
75014 Paris, France.

USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitous transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix 
leucine zipper family. They form homo- and heterodimers and recognize a CACGTG
motif termed E box. In the liver, USF binding activity is mainly accounted for by
the USF1/USF2 heterodimer, which binds in vitro the glucose/carbohydrate response
elements (GlRE/ChoRE) of glucose-responsive genes. To assign a physiological role
of USFs in vivo, we have undertaken the disruption of USF1 and USF2 genes in
mice. We present here the generation of USF1-deficient mice. In the liver of
these mice, we demonstrate that USF2 remaining dimers can compensate for glucose 
responsiveness, even though the level of total USF binding activity is reduced by
half as compared with wild type mice. The residual USF1 binding activity was
similarly reduced in the previously reported USF2 -/- mice in which an impaired
glucose responsiveness was observed (Vallet, V. S., Henrion, A. A., Bucchini, D.,
Casado, M. , Raymondjean, M., Kahn, A., and Vaulont, S. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.
272, 21944-21949). Taken together, these results clearly suggest differential
transactivating efficiencies of USF1 and USF2 in promoting the glucose response. 
Furthermore, they support the view that USF2 is the functional transactivator of 
the glucose-responsive complex.

PMID: 9685363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem J. 1998 Aug 1;333 ( Pt 3):705-12.

Identification of upstream stimulatory factor as transcriptional activator of the
liver promoter of the glucokinase gene.

Iynedjian PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry and Diabetes Research, University of Geneva 
School of Medicine, 1, rue Michel-Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
iynedjian@medecine.unige.ch

A functionally important cis-acting element termed P2 was identified in the liver
promoter of the glucokinase gene. Element P2 was delineated by footprinting in
vitro with nuclear proteins from rat liver and spleen. Its core sequence in the
rat gene is a canonical CACGTG E-box. In the electrophoretic mobility-shift assay
with nuclear proteins from rat liver, hepatocytes and hepatoma cells, an
oligonucleotide with P2 in the context of the glucokinase promoter sequence gave 
rise to a DNA-protein complex shown to contain the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) by specific competition experiments and by reactivity with anti-USF
antibodies. Transient transfection of hepatoma HepG2 cells, combined with
site-directed mutagenesis, demonstrated that the P2 element was important for
liver glucokinase promoter activity. Co-transfection of an expression plasmid
coding for USF1 activated reporter gene expression in a manner dependent on an
intact P2 element, whereas an expression plasmid for c-Myc was ineffective.
Expression of a truncated form of USF1 lacking the transcription activation
domain and the basic region decreased reporter activity by a dominant-negative
effect. The functional significance of the P2 element was also demonstrated in
transient transfection of primary hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC1219635
PMID: 9677331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Eur J Biochem. 1998 May 1;253(3):778-86.

Transcriptional regulation of the non-specific cross-reacting antigen gene, a
member of the carcinoembryonic antigen gene family up-regulated in colorectal
carcinomas.

Koops MD(1), Thompson J, Zimmermann W, Stanners CP.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Human non-specific cross-reacting antigen (NCA), a close relative of the tumor
marker human carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), is also an in vitro homotypic
intercellular adhesion molecule capable of inhibiting differentiation when
expressed ectopically by myoblasts. Moreover, NCA appears to be overexpressed at 
the transcriptional level to a greater extent and more frequently in colorectal
carcinomas than CEA. This study examines the transcriptional control mechanisms
responsible for orchestrating NCA expression. The region within 284 bp upstream
of the translational start site of the NCA gene was found to be capable of
directing high levels of expression in functional promoter assays. Footprinting
experiments identified three cis-acting elements and mobility-shift assays
revealed that the first of these elements is bound by the upstream stimulating
factors USF1 and USF2 while the other two are bound by the stimulatory proteins
Sp1 and Sp3. No cis-acting elements corresponding to CEA footprint FP4 or the
silencer CEA FP5 were detected in the NCA promoter, which may contribute to the
differential expression of NCA versus CEA in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9654079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Oncogene. 1998 May;16(20):2629-37.

Lack of transcriptional repression by max homodimers.

Yin X(1), Grove L, Prochownik EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA.

Max, a basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) protein, plays a central 
role in the transcriptional regulation of myc oncoprotein-responsive genes.
Myc-max heterodimers bind to consensus E-box motifs near or within the promoters 
of these genes and activate gene expression, whereas heterodimers between max and
members of the mad family of bHLH-ZIP proteins promote transcriptional
repression. In contrast to all other members of the myc network, max readily
homodimerizes and binds to identical E-box sites in vitro. However, the role for 
max homodimers in transcriptional repression in vivo is unclear. Upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) is a bHLH-ZIP protein which does not interact with
members of the myc-max-mad family. By replacing the HLH-ZIP domain of max with
that from USF, we created a chimeric protein, max(USF), which was
indistinguishable from max with respect to its ability to homodimerize and bind
DNA. As expected, however, max(USF) was unable to heterodimerize with any of the 
tested max partner proteins and was incapable of suppressing c-myc target genes. 
Thus, transcriptional repression is an exclusive property of max-mad heterodimers
and cannot be achieved by max homodimers alone.

PMID: 9632139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 May 11;1397(3):241-6.

Analysis of the promoter region of the murine complement factor H gene.

Kain SJ(1), Maldonado MJ, Vik DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New Mexico
School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM 87131-5276, USA.

We have used the luciferase system to assay basal promoter activity of the murine
factor H gene. Based on the results from luciferase assays with clones of 13
nested deletions, a 242-bp region that appeared to contain an enhancer element
was subcloned upstream of a heterologous promoter and was shown to enhance
transcription. A 26-bp fragment from this region was shifted in electrophoretic
mobility assays, and this fragment contains a consensus sequence for the
adenovirus major late transcription factor/upstream stimulatory factor
(MLTF/USF). This fragment had enhancing activity in a minimal factor H promoter
construct, demonstrating that it is a major enhancer of the factor H gene in
murine liver cells.

PMID: 9582427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 May;12(5):714-26.

The basic helix-loop-helix, leucine zipper transcription factor, USF (upstream
stimulatory factor), is a key regulator of SF-1 (steroidogenic factor-1) gene
expression in pituitary gonadotrope and steroidogenic cells.

Harris AN(1), Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0674, USA.

Tissue-specific expression of the mammalian FTZ-F1 gene is essential for adrenal 
and gonadal development and sexual differentiation. The FTZ-F1 gene encodes an
orphan nuclear receptor, termed SF-1 (steroidogenic factor-1) or Ad4BP, which is 
a primary transcriptional regulator of several hormone and steroidogenic enzyme
genes that are critical for normal physiological function of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in reproduction. The objective of the current
study is to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying transcriptional
regulation of SF-1 gene expression in the pituitary. We have studied a series of 
deletion and point mutations in the SF-1 promoter region for transcriptional
activity in alphaT3-1 and L/betaT2 (pituitary gonadotrope), CV-1, JEG-3, and Y1
(adrenocortical) cell lines. Our results indicate that maximal expression of the 
SF-1 promoter in all cell types requires an E box element at -82/-77. This E box 
sequence (CACGTG) is identical to the binding element for USF (upstream
stimulatory factor), a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors. Studies of the SF-1 gene E box element using gel mobility shift and
antibody supershift assays indicate that USF may be a key transcriptional
regulator of SF-1 gene expression.

PMID: 9605934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 1;26(11):2813-20.

Multiple domains for initiator binding proteins TFII-I and YY-1 are present in
the initiator and upstream regions of the rat XDH/XO TATA-less promoter.

Clark MP(1), Chow CW, Rinaldo JE, Chalkley R.

Author information: 
(1)Nashville VA Medical Center, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37237, USA.

We previously reported that the TATA-less rat xanthine dehydrogenase/oxidase
(XDH/XO) promoter is organized with multiple initiator elements (Inr 1, 2, 3 and 
4). Additionally, we identified six factor binding footprints in the upstream
region of this promoter (FP 1-FP 6), two of which (FP 2 and FP 4) we showed to be
C/EBP binding sites. In this report we continue our characterization of the
XDH/XO promoter, detailing other cis elements which comprise the Inr and upstream
binding factors. Interestingly, multiple binding domains for known initiator
binding proteins, YY-1 and USF-related factor/TFII-I, have been identified which 
potentially play an important role in transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC147594
PMID: 9592172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9168-78.

Transcriptional regulation of the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain-A gene.
Identification of three clustered cis-elements in intron-1 which modulate
transcription in a cell type- and differentiation state-dependent manner.

Beohar N(1), Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In an attempt to identify cis-acting elements for transcriptional regulation of
the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain (MHC)-A gene, the region extending 20
kilobases (kb) upstream and 40 kb downstream from the transcription start sites, 
which includes the entire 37-kb intron 1, was examined. Using transient
transfection analysis of luciferase reporter constructs, a 100-base pair (bp)
region (N2d) in intron 1, located 23 kb downstream from the transcriptional start
sites, has been found to activate transcription in a cell type- and
differentiation state-dependent manner. Maximum activity (approximately 20-fold) 
is seen in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and intermediate activity (7-fold) in
proliferating and undifferentiated C2C12 myoblasts. In contrast, this region is
almost inactive in terminally differentiated C2C12 myotubes, in which endogenous 
nonmuscle MHC-A expression is down-regulated. Gel mobility shift assays and
methylation interference analyses were performed using NIH 3T3 nuclear extracts
to determine the protein-binding elements for transcription factors. Three
binding elements have been identified within the N2d region. Antibody-supershift 
experiments, as well as competition experiments using consensus binding sequences
for specific transcription factors, revealed that the most 5'-element, C
(GGGAGGGGCC) is recognized specifically and exclusively by Sp1 and Sp3
transcriptional factors. Element C is immediately followed by a novel element, A 
(GTGACCC). A third element, F (GTGTCAGGTG), which contains an E-box, is located
50 bp 3' to element A. Element F can be recognized partially by upstream
stimulatory factors, USF1 and/or USF2. Transfection studies with luciferase
reporter constructs which include mutations in all three elements in various
combinations demonstrate that the A and C binding factors cooperatively activate 
transcriptional activity in NIH 3T3 cells. The F binding factor shows an additive
effect on transcription.

PMID: 9535907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3758-63.

Overlapping roles and asymmetrical cross-regulation of the USF proteins in mice.

Sirito M(1), Lin Q, Deng JM, Behringer RR, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitously expressed transcription factors implicated as
antagonists of the c-Myc protooncoprotein in the control of cellular
proliferation. To determine the biological role of the USF proteins, mutant mice 
were generated by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. USF1-null
mice were viable and fertile, with only slight behavioral abnormalities. However,
these mice contained elevated levels of USF2, which may compensate for the
absence of USF1. In contrast, USF2-null mice contained reduced levels of USF1 and
displayed an obvious growth defect: they were 20-40% smaller at birth than their 
wild-type or heterozygous littermates and maintained a smaller size with
proportionate features throughout postnatal development. Some of the
USF-deficient mice, especially among the females, were prone to spontaneous
epileptic seizures, suggesting that USF is important in normal brain function.
Among the double mutants, an embryonic lethal phenotype was observed for mice
that were homozygous for the Usf2 mutation and either heterozygous or homozygous 
for the Usf1 mutation, demonstrating that the USF proteins are essential in
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC19910
PMID: 9520440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Feb 16;1390(2):225-36.

The potent lipid mitogen sphingosylphosphocholine activates the DNA binding
activity of upstream stimulating factor (USF), a basic helix-loop-helix-zipper
protein.

Berger A(1), Cultaro CM, Segal S, Spiegel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

We previously demonstrated that the sphingolipid, sphingosylphosphocholine (SPC) 
increased DNA binding activity of AP-1 proteins accompanying cellular
proliferation. Herein, the effects of SPC on DNA binding activity and
transcription of the basic, helix-loop-helix, leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) proteins 
Myc, Max, and USF were investigated because they regulate genes involved in
mitogenesis. E-box (CACGTG) DNA binding proteins were detected by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays in nuclear extracts from Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts. The slowest
migrating complex (complex I) increased within 1-3 min after treatment with SPC, 
remained elevated for 10 min, and increased again after 12 h. Complexes I and II 
contained USF-1 and USF-2 proteins, and complex I migrated similarly to
recombinant USF-1 protein/DNA complex. Treatment of nuclear extracts with
alkaline phosphatase decreased these complexes suggesting USF might be a
phosphoprotein, post-translationally modified by SPC. max and usf-1 mRNA levels
were unaffected by SPC treatment. In contrast, c-myc mRNA was rapidly elevated,
reached maximum levels at 0.5-1 h, and showed an additional increase after 12 h, 
just preceding S phase. Thus, certain bHLH-ZIP transcription factors may be
involved in cell growth regulation by SPC.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9507145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1728-39.

Cooperative interaction of ets-1 with USF-1 required for HIV-1 enhancer activity 
in T cells.

Sieweke MH(1), Tekotte H, Jarosch U, Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The distal enhancer region of the human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) long
terminal repeat (LTR) is known to be essential for HIV replication and to contain
immediately adjacent E-box and Ets binding sites. Based on a yeast one-hybrid
screen we have identified the E-box binding protein USF-1 as a direct interaction
partner of Ets-1 and found that the complex acts on this enhancer element. The
binding surfaces of USF-1 and Ets-1 map to their DNA-binding domains and although
these domains are highly conserved, the interaction is very selective within the 
respective protein family. USF-1 and Ets-1 synergize in specific DNA binding as
well as in the transactivation of reporter constructs containing the enhancer
element, and mutations of the individual binding sites dramatically reduce
reporter activity in T cells. In addition, a dominant negative Ets-1 mutant
inhibits both USF-1-mediated transactivation and the activity of the HIV-1 LTR in
T cells. The inhibition is independent of Ets DNA-binding sites but requires the 
Ets binding surface on USF-1, highlighting the importance of the direct
protein-protein interaction. Together these results indicate that the interaction
between Ets-1 and USF-1 is required for full transcriptional activity of the
HIV-1 LTR in T cells.

PMCID: PMC1170520
PMID: 9501094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Immunol. 1997 Dec 15;159(12):6176-83.

Recognition of the E-C4 element from the C4 complement gene promoter by the
upstream stimulatory factor-1 transcription factor.

Galibert MD(1), Boucontet L, Goding CR, Meo T.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunogénétique, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Medical, U276, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. M.D.Galibert@mcri.ac.uk

Activation of complement gene expression plays a major role in the response to
antigenic challenge. The induction of complement synthesis occurs primarily in
liver and in macrophages and is mediated, at least in part, by increased
transcription of the complement genes. For example, transcription of the C4
complement gene, which plays a crucial role in the complement pathway, is induced
in response to acute inflammation or tissue injury. Previous work has defined the
elements present in the C4 complement gene promoter that are required for its
expression. Particularly important is an E-box motif, E-C4, that is conserved
between the mouse, human, and rat promoters and that directed up to 90% of
transcription from the mouse C4 promoter. Here we have purified the E-C4-binding 
factor to homogeneity using a novel and rapid affinity purification procedure.
Following N-terminal microsequencing and subsequent isolation of the
corresponding cDNA, the factor binding the E-C4 element was identified as
upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF-1), a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
transcription factor. We also show for the first time that in vivo USF-1 is a
phosphoprotein, but that phosphorylation of USF-1 is severely reduced in cells in
culture. Moreover, the phosphorylated form of USF-1 binds DNA preferentially,
indicating that phosphorylation may enhance the ability of USF-1 to bind DNA. The
implications of USF-1 phosphorylation for C4 complement gene expression and
transcription regulation are discussed.

PMID: 9550420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7668-74.

A role for Sp and helix-loop-helix transcription factors in the regulation of the
human Id4 gene promoter activity.

Pagliuca A(1), Cannada-Bartoli P, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Id family helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are involved in the regulation of
proliferation and differentiation of several cell types. To identify cis- and
trans-acting factors that regulate Id4 gene expression, we have analyzed the
promoter regulatory sequences of the human Id4 gene in transient transfections
and gel mobility shift assays. We have identified two functional elements, both
located downstream from the TATA motif, that control Id4 promoter activity. One
element contains a consensus E-box, and we demonstrated that the protein complex 
binding to the E-box contains the bHLH-zip upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
transcription factor. Enforced expression of USF1 leads to E-box-mediated
stimulation of promoter activity. The E-box also mediated stimulatory effects of 
several bHLH transcription factors, and co-expression of Id4 blocked the
stimulatory effect mediated by the bHLH factors. A second element is a GA motif, 
located downstream from the transcriptional start sites, mutation of which
resulted in a 20-fold increase in transcriptional activity. Gel-shift analysis
and transfections into Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells showed that the repressor
element is recognized by both Sp1 and Sp3 factors. These data suggest that Id4
transcription control is highly complex, involving both negative and positive
regulatory elements, including a novel inhibitory function exerted by Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors.

PMID: 9516472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1998 Jan;30(1):87-95.

Regulation of cardiac alpha-myosin heavy chain gene transcription by a
contractile-responsive E-box binding protein.

Xiao Q(1), Ojamaa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, North Shore University Hospital/NYU School of
Medicine, Manhasset 11030, USA.

The hemodynamic workload imposed on the heart modulates the expression of the
cardiac-specific alpha-myosin heavy chain (MHC) gene. A hemodynamic responsive
element (HME) has been mapped to an E box motif (CACGTG) located at position -47 
of the promoter. The present studies showed that the HME is sufficient to confer 
contractile responsiveness to a heterologous promoter, the simian virus thymidine
kinase gene, when expressed in cultured neonatal rat ventricular myocytes.
Proximity of the HME to the TATA box of the alpha-MHC promoter appear necessary
for high levels of basal transcription and for the four-fold induction in
response to the contractile stimulus. An HME binding protein, approximately 43
kDa, was isolated from a neonatal rat ventricular myocyte cDNA library with
sequence homology to the human upstream stimulatory factor-1 (hUSF1).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that the in vitro translation product
of the rat USF1 cDNA bound to the alpha-MHC HME motif and was recognized by an
antibody to hUSF1. Overexpression of recombinant rat USF1 in spontaneously
contracting cultured cardiomyocytes significantly increased activity of a
cotransfected alpha-MHC promoter/luciferase reporter plasmid containing the HME
motif plus core promoter elements (-40/+32), suggesting a role of rat USF1 in the
contractile-mediated activation of the gene.

PMID: 9500867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Immunity. 1998 Feb;8(2):157-66.

Activation of the MHC class II transactivator CIITA by interferon-gamma requires 
cooperative interaction between Stat1 and USF-1.

Muhlethaler-Mottet A(1), Di Berardino W, Otten LA, Mach B.

Author information: 
(1)Louis Jeantet Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, Switzerland.

CIITA is the mediator of MHC class II gene induction by interferon-gamma
(IFNgamma). The CIITA gene is itself selectively activated via one of its four
promoters (PIV). We show here that three cis-acting elements, the GAS, the E box,
and the IRF-1-binding site, as well as the transacting factors Stat1 and IRF-1,
are essential for activation of CIITA promoter IV by IFNgamma. Stat1 binds to the
GAS site only in the presence of the ubiquitous factor USF-1, which binds to the 
adjacent E box. Indeed, Stat1 and USF-1 bind to the GAS/E box motif in a
cooperative manner. The specificity for CIITA activation by IFNgamma is thus
dictated by the GAS/E box motif and by the selective interaction of
IFNgamma-activated Stat1 and USF-1. This clarifies the missing link in the
overall pathway of IFNgamma activation of MHC-II expression.

PMID: 9491997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 1998 Feb 12;16(6):763-9.

Growth-dependent and PKC-mediated translational regulation of the upstream
stimulating factor-2 (USF2) mRNA in hematopoietic cells.

Zhang ZC(1), Nechushtan H, Jacob-Hirsch J, Avni D, Meyuhas O, Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Upstream stimulating factor (USF2) is a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
transcription factor, which is found in most tissues. A critical role for USF2 in
cellular proliferation has been proposed based on its importance in the
regulation of various cyclins and P53 and its capability to antagonize c-myc. In 
this paper we report that IL-3, which is a major growth factor for mast cells,
induces USF2 protein synthesis in murine mast cells (MC-9). Surprisingly, it does
not significantly affect the level of USF2 mRNA in these cells at any of the time
points tested. Using polysomal fractionation and RNA analysis we then
demonstrated that this translational regulation is mostly the result of increased
USF2 translational efficiency. Moreover, protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors
prevented both the induction of USF2 protein synthesis and the increase in USF2
translational efficiency in IL-3-activated mast cells. Two other hematopoietic
cell lines were used to determine whether the translational regulation of USF2 is
of a more general nature: mouse lymphosarcoma cells whose proliferation is
inhibited by dexamethasone; and mouse erythroleukemia cells that differentiate
upon exposure to hexamethylen bisacetamide. In both cell types, USF2 translation 
was repressed in the non-dividing cells. This strongly implies that USF2 is
translationally repressed in quiescent hematopoietic cells. Considering the
proposed role of USF in proliferation it seems that translational regulation of
USF2 might have an important role in cellular growth.

PMID: 9488040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jan 21;1395(2):228-36.

Enhancement of transcription factor, USF, binding to the adenovirus major late
promoter: effect of dithiothreitol and high mobility group protein-1.

Marmillot P(1), Scovell W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bowling Green State University, OH 43403, USA.

Up-stream stimulatory factor (USF)1 is a human transcription factor which binds
specifically to the E-box in the Ad MLP located at - 58 from the start site. The 
nature of USF binding on a Ad MLP DNA fragment was investigated in the presence
of DTT and also in the presence of purified HMG-1 using electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. We show that the binding capacity of USF for the E-box increases
significantly with increasing DTT concentrations. At the higher DTT levels, a
second USF-DNA complex is formed in which there is co-occupation of both the
E-box and the initiator sequence. The stability of the second complex is largely 
refractory to an excess of unlabeled oligonucleotide which contains the initiator
sequence. These findings indicate a cooperative binding interaction between USF
ligands bound simultaneously at the E-box and the Inr sequence. Two models are
proposed which are consistent with these data. Furthermore, experiments indicate 
that the presence of HMG-1, a nuclear protein known to influence transcriptional 
activity, increases USF binding activity at the E-box by as much as 100%. These
findings indicate that both reducing conditions and HMG-1 may act as modulators
of USF-regulated transcription.

PMID: 9473681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. EMBO J. 1997 Dec 1;16(23):7091-104.

Cloning of an inr- and E-box-binding protein, TFII-I, that interacts physically
and functionally with USF1.

Roy AL(1), Du H, Gregor PD, Novina CD, Martinez E, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The transcription factor TFII-I has been shown to bind independently to two
distinct promoter elements, a pyrimidine-rich initiator (Inr) and a recognition
site (E-box) for upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1), and to stimulate USF1
binding to both of these sites. Here we describe the isolation of a cDNA encoding
TFII-I and demonstrate that the corresponding 120 kDa polypeptide, when expressed
ectopically, is capable of binding to both Inr and E-box elements. The primary
structure of TFII-I reveals novel features that include six directly repeated 90 
residue motifs that each possess a potential helix-loop/span-helix homology.
These unique structural features suggest that TFII-I may have the capacity for
multiple protein-protein and, potentially, multiple protein-DNA interactions.
Consistent with this hypothesis and with previous in vitro studies, we further
demonstrate that ectopic TFII-I and USF1 can act synergistically, and in some
cases independently, to activate transcription in vivo through both Inr and the
E-box elements of the adenovirus major late promoter. We also describe domains of
USF1 that are necessary for its independent and synergistic activation functions.

PMCID: PMC1170311
PMID: 9384587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 28;272(48):30558-62.

Molecular variation of the human angiotensinogen core promoter element located
between the TATA box and transcription initiation site affects its
transcriptional activity.

Yanai K(1), Saito T, Hirota K, Kobayashi H, Murakami K, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan.
akif@sakura.cc.tsukuba.ac.jp

Recent genetic studies indicate that several molecular variants discovered in
angiotensinogen (AG), the precursor of vasoactive octapeptide angiotensin II,
could potentially be responsible for inherited predisposition to human blood
pressure variation. We have previously shown that a ubiquitously expressed
nuclear factor, AGCF1, bound to AGCE1 (AG core promoter element 1 including the
core nucleotides, CTCGTG, CTC-type) located between the TATA box and
transcription initiation site (positions -25 to -1) is an authentic regulator of 
human AG transcription. In the present study, we showed that AGCF1 has
biologically and immunologically similar properties to those of a
helix-loop-helix nuclear factor USF1 and examined the effects of two other
naturally occurring molecular variants (ATCGTG, ATC-type and ATTGTG, ATT-type)
found in the AGCE1 position on the human AG transcriptional activity. Competitive
gel-shift and transfection experiments demonstrated that the transcriptional
activity for the CTC- and ATC-type promoters was 2.5 times higher than that for
the ATT-type through the alteration of AGCF1-binding affinity. These results
suggest the possible involvement of USF1 as a component in AGCF1 formation and
the potential importance of AGCE1 variation in blood pressure regulation through 
human AG expression.

PMID: 9374551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 28;272(48):30025-31.

Inhibition of the transcription of CYP1A1 gene by the upstream stimulatory factor
1 in rabbits. Competitive binding of USF1 with AhR.Arnt complex.

Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama K, Itoh S, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060, Japan.
kamataki@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp

A xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE)-binding factor(s) other than the AhR.Arnt
complex was found to inhibit the transcription of CYP1A1 gene in the liver from
adult rabbits, known to be nonresponsive to CYP1A1 inducers. The constitutive
factor(s) in liver nuclear extracts bound to the core sequence of XRE. The
binding was eliminated by the presence of an excess amount of the AhR.Arnt
complex synthesized in vitro. To identify the constitutive factor(s), a sequence 
similar to rabbit XRE was sought. It was found that the sequence of rabbit XRE
overlapped with that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)-binding site in 
the mouse metallothionein I promoter. In fact, a super shift assay using a
specific antibody against human USF1 indicated that USF1 was capable of binding
to rabbit XRE. Additionally, the AhR.Arnt-mediated activation of XRE-TK/Luc
reporter gene in RK13 cells was blocked by the transfection with a USF1
expression vector with the amounts of the expression vector transfected. These
results indicate that the XRE of the rabbit CYP1A1 gene is recognized by the
basic helix-loop-helix proteins to regulate the expression of CYP1A1 in both an
agonistic (AhR.Arnt) and an antagonistic (USF1) manner.

PMID: 9374477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 17;240(2):293-7.

Upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) suppresses induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by
3-methylcholanthrene (MC) in HepG2 cells.

Takahashi Y(1), Nakayama K, Itoh S, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Japan.

In this study, an endogenous factor(s) involved in the suppression of the
induction of CYP1A1 was studied. Analyzing the sequences, we found that the
sequence of xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) in the upstream region of the
human CYP1A1 gene was overlapped with that of the upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1)-binding site in mouse metallothionein I promoter. In fact, a gel shift
assay using a specific competitor or mutant probes showed that the core sequence 
of human XRE was specifically recognized by USF1. The amount of USF1 in the
nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells was smaller than that from rat and rabbit
livers as assayed by the binding to XRE. To determine whether or not USF1 could
inhibit the interaction of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)/AhR nuclear
translocator (Arnt) complex with XRE, we transfected USF1-SR alpha expression
vector into HepG2 cells. The results showed that no interaction of AhR/Arnt
complex with XRE occurred even when the cells were treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF). Furthermore, the S1 nuclease protection
assay showed that the induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by 3-methylcholanthrene (MC) was
depressed by the transfection of USF1-SR alpha into HepG2 cells. Thus, it is
highly possible that USF1 negatively regulates the induction of CYP1A1 in humans.

PMID: 9388470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 7;240(1):136-41.

Transcriptional regulation of the mBMP-4 gene through an E-box in the 5'-flanking
promoter region involving USF.

Ebara S(1), Kawasaki S, Nakamura I, Tsutsumimoto T, Nakayama K, Nikaido T,
Takaoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. soebara@gipac.shinshu-u.ac.jp

We analyzed the promoter activity of murine bone morphogenetic protein-4 (mBMP-4)
and determined that the 5'-flanking region of exon I plays a critical role for
transcription and position -265 to -246 of 5'-flanking region of mBMP-4 gene acts
as a cis-element important for the regulation of BMP4 transcription in MC3T3E1
cells. By use of site-directed mutagenesis, we have established that the E-box,
CACGTG, located within this short region of promoter, is essential for
transcriptional activation of the mBMP-4 gene. Upstream stimulatory factor (USF),
a member of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) group of regulatory proteins, was found to
bind to this E-box using supershift gel mobility analysis. It is proposed that
the HLH transcription regulatory proteins play an important role in mBMP-4 gene
transcription in this osteoblastic cell line.

PMID: 9367898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26367-74.

Upstream stimulatory factor binding to the E-box at -65 is required for insulin
regulation of the fatty acid synthase promoter.

Wang D(1), Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-3104, USA.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) plays a central role in de novo lipogenesis in mammals.
We have shown that FAS transcription rate is induced dramatically when fasted
animals are refed with a high carbohydrate diet or when streptozotocin-diabetic
mice are given insulin. We also reported that FAS gene transcription was
up-regulated by insulin through the proximal promoter region from -71 to -50 and 
that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs), including USF1 and USF2, interact with 
this region in vitro. In the present study, by using site-directed mutagenesis of
the -71/-50 region and correlating functional assays of the mutated promoter with
USF binding activities, we demonstrate that the -65/-60 E-box motif
(5'-CATGTG-3') is functionally required for insulin regulation and that USFs are 
in vivo components of the insulin response complex. Mutation of the -65/-60 E-box
sequence abolished insulin response in both transiently and stably transfected
3T3-L1 adipocytes in the -2. 1 kb promoter context, which contains all the
necessary regulatory elements of the promoter based on our previous transgenic
mice studies, and in the minimal -67 promoter context. Gel mobility shift assays 
demonstrated that USFs can no longer bind to the -71/-50 promoter region when the
E-box is mutated. Cotransfection of USF1 and USF2 expression vectors with the FAS
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs increased insulin-stimulated FAS promoter
activity. Moreover, cotransfection of dominant negative USF1 and USF2 mutants
lacking the DNA binding domain inhibited the insulin stimulation of the FAS
promoter activity. On the other hand, site-directed mutagenesis of the -65/-60
E-box surrounding sequences within the overlapped tandem copies of sterol
regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) binding sites prevented SREBP from
binding to -71/-50 promoter region in vitro but had no effect on insulin
regulation of the FAS promoter in vivo. When rat liver nuclear extracts were used
in gel mobility shift assays, only USF-containing protein-DNA complexes that can 
be supershifted by specific USF antibodies were observed. These results
demonstrate that upstream stimulatory factor binding to the E-box at -65 is
required for insulin regulation of the fatty acid synthase promoter.

PMID: 9334210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 12;272(37):23398-406.

The basic helix-loop-helix-zipper transcription factor USF1 regulates expression 
of the surfactant protein-A gene.

Gao E(1), Wang Y, Alcorn JL, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75235-9038, USA.

Expression of the rabbit pulmonary surfactant protein A (SP-A) gene is
lung-specific, occurs primarily in type II cells, and is developmentally
regulated. We previously identified two E-box-like enhancers, termed the distal
binding element (DBE) and proximal binding element (PBE), in the 5'-flanking
region of the rabbit SP-A gene. In the present study, the PBE was used to screen 
a rabbit fetal lung cDNA expression library; a cDNA insert was isolated which is 
highly similar in sequence to human upstream stimulatory factor 1 (hUSF1). By use
of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, two isoforms of rabbit USF1
(rUSF1) mRNAs were identified in fetal rabbit lung and other tissues. The levels 
of rUSF1 mRNAs reach a peak in fetal rabbit lung at 23 days gestation, in concert
with the time of initiation of SP-A gene transcription. Binding complexes of
nuclear proteins obtained from fetal rabbit lung tissue and isolated type II
cells with the DBE and PBE were supershifted by the addition of anti-rUSF1 IgG.
Binding activity was enriched in type II cells compared with lung fibroblasts.
Overexpression of rUSF1s in A549 adenocarcinoma cells positively regulated SP-A
promoter activity of cotransfected reporter gene constructs. It is suggested that
rUSF1s, which bind to two E-box elements in the SP-A gene 5'-flanking region, may
serve a key role in the regulation of SP-A gene expression in pulmonary type II
cells.

PMID: 9287355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):21944-9.

Glucose-dependent liver gene expression in upstream stimulatory factor 2 -/-
mice.

Vallet VS(1), Henrion AA, Bucchini D, Casado M, Raymondjean M, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Université René Descartes, 24 rue du
Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2 belong to the Myc family of
transcription factors characterized by a basic/helix loop helix/leucine zipper
domain responsible for dimerization and DNA binding. These ubiquitous factors
form homo- and heterodimers and recognize in vitro a CACGTG core sequence termed 
E box. Through binding to E boxes of target genes, USF factors have been
demonstrated to activate gene transcription and to enhance expression of some
genes in response to various stimuli. In particular, in the liver USF1 and USF2
have been shown to bind in vitro glucose/carbohydrate response elements of
glycolytic and lipogenic genes and have been proposed, from ex vivo experiments, 
to be involved in their transcriptional activation by glucose. However, the
direct involvement of these factors in gene expression and nutrient gene
regulation in vivo has not yet been demonstrated. Therefore, to gain insight into
the specific role of USF1 and USF2 in vivo, and in particular to determine
whether the USF products are required for the response of genes to glucose, we
have created, by homologous recombination, USF2 -/- mice. In this paper, we
provide the first evidence that USF2 proteins are required in vivo for a normal
transcriptional response of L-type pyruvate kinase and Spot 14 genes to glucose
in the liver.

PMID: 9268329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jul 30;236(3):765-71.

Multiple regulatory elements and binding proteins of the 5'-flanking region of
the human estrogen-responsive finger protein (efp) gene.

Ikeda K(1), Inoue S, Orimo A, Sano M, Watanabe T, Tsutsumi K, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, Moroyama, Japan.

The efp, a member of the RING finger family, was previously identified as an
estrogen responsive gene. Here, we characterized basal promoter of the human efp 
gene. Transcription initiation site was found at position -60 G relative to the
site for translation initiation, and TATA motif was absent. Deletion and mutation
analyses of the 5'-flanking region using MCF-7 breast cancer cells indicated that
the sequences located at -137 to -72 had the promoter activity for which an E-box
(CACGTG) element at -110 to -105 was essential. EMSA showed that USF-1 bound to
the E-box and that a protein-DNA complex was formed at the positive regulatory
region (-137 to -110). Moreover, a strong negative regulatory region was present 
in -235 to -174. These findings suggest that the human efp promoter is regulated 
by multiple elements and their interacting factors, and the E-box near the
transcription initiation site is essential for the basal promoter activity.

PMID: 9245730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. EMBO J. 1997 May 1;16(9):2463-72.

Stable co-occupancy of transcription factors and histones at the HIV-1 enhancer.

Steger DJ(1), Workman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Center for Gene
Regulation, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park 16802-4500, USA.

To investigate mechanisms yielding DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs) at gene
regulatory regions, we have initiated a biochemical analysis of transcription
factor binding and nucleosome remodeling with a region of the human
immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) 5' long terminal repeat (LTR) that harbors
constitutive DHSs in vivo. In vitro reconstitution of an HIV-1 5' LTR fragment
into nucleosome core particles demonstrates that Sp1, NF-kappaB1, LEF-1, ETS-1
and USF can gain access to their binding sites in HIV-1 nucleosomal DNA. The
factor-bound mononucleosomes resist histone displacement from the DNA by the
chromatin remodeling activity, SW1-SNF, or the histone chaperone, nucleoplasmin, 
suggesting that the binding of these factors to nucleosomal HIV-1 sequences forms
a stable complex that includes the underlying histones. However, when the HIV-1
5' LTR fragment is incorporated into a nucleosomal array, Sp1 and NF-kappaB1
binding produce regions of enhanced DNase I sensitivity specifically at the HIV-1
nucleosome. These regions resemble the observed in vivo DHSs, yet the HIV-1
nucleosome remains intact even in the presence of nucleoplasmin. Thus, the
constitutive DHSs identified at the HIV-1 enhancer in native chromatin may
reflect the presence of a ternary complex composed of transcriptional activators,
histones and DNA.

PMCID: PMC1169846
PMID: 9171359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Oncogene. 1997 May 1;14(17):2091-8.

Cross-family interaction between the bHLHZip USF and bZip Fra1 proteins results
in down-regulation of AP1 activity.

Pognonec P(1), Boulukos KE, Aperlo C, Fujimoto M, Ariga H, Nomoto A, Kato H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, Universite de Nice, France.

Heterodimerization among the basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins or among the
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHZip) proteins confers a multitude of
combinational activities to these transcription factors. To further examine the
function of the bHLHZip protein, USF, we screened for cellular proteins which
could directly interact with USF using the yeast two-hybrid system. A bZip
protein, Fra1, was found to efficiently interact with USF. USF specifically
interacts with Fra1 but not with other closely related family members, c-Fos,
Fra2, FosB, or with c-Jun. Both the bHLHZip and the N-terminal regions of Fra1
are required for efficient interaction with USF. In vivo association between USF 
and Fra1 has been demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation. Expression of exogenous
USF led to a decrease in AP1-dependent transcription in F9 cells. Co-expression
of exogenous Fra1 restored the AP1 activity in a dose-dependent manner. These
data show that USF and Fra1 physically and functionally interact demonstrating
that cross-talk occurs between factors of distantly related transcription
families.

PMID: 9160889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2529-37.

Myc versus USF: discrimination at the cad gene is determined by core promoter
elements.

Boyd KE(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

Carbamoyl-phosphate synthase/aspartate carbamoyltransferase/dihydroorotase, which
is encoded by the cad gene, is required for the first three rate-limiting steps
of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis. It has been previously demonstrated that cad 
transcription increases at the G1/S-phase boundary, as quiescent cells reenter
the proliferative cell cycle. The growth-responsive element has been mapped to an
E box at +65 in the hamster cad promoter. Using an in vivo UV cross-linking and
immunoprecipitation assay, we show that Myc, Max, and upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) bind to the chromosomal cad promoter. To determine whether binding of
Myc-Max or USF is critical for cad growth regulation, we analyzed promoter
constructs which contain mutations in the nucleotides flanking the E box. We
demonstrate that altering nucleotides which flank the cad E box to sequences
which decrease Myc-Max binding in vitro correlates with a loss of cad G1/S-phase 
transcriptional activation. This result supports the conclusion that binding of
Myc-Max, but not USF, is essential for cad regulation. Our investigations
demonstrate that the endogenous cad E box can be bound by more than one
transcription factor, but growth-induced cad expression is achieved only by Myc.

PMCID: PMC232102
PMID: 9111322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10538-42.

Regulation of the nuclear gene that encodes the alpha-subunit of the
mitochondrial F0F1-ATP synthase complex. Activation by upstream stimulatory
factor 2.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

We have previously identified several positive cis-acting regulatory regions in
the promoters of the bovine and human nuclear-encoded mitochondrial F0F1-ATP
synthase alpha-subunit genes (ATPA). One of these cis-acting regions contains the
sequence 5'-CACGTG-3' (an E-box), to which a number of transcription factors
containing a basic helix-loop-helix motif can bind. This E-box element is
required for maximum activity of the ATPA promoter in HeLa cells. The present
study identifies the human transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor 2
(USF2), as a nuclear factor that binds to the ATPA E-box and demonstrates that
USF2 plays a critical role in the activation of the ATPA gene in vivo. Evidence
includes the following. Antiserum directed against USF2 recognized factors
present in HeLa nuclear extracts that interact with the ATPA promoter in mobility
shift assays. Wild-type USF2 proteins synthesized from expression vectors
trans-activated the ATPA promoter through the E-box, whereas truncated USF2
proteins devoid of the amino-terminal activation domains did not. Importantly,
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of USF2 lacking the basic DNA binding
domain but able to dimerize with endogenous USF proteins significantly reduced
the level of activation of the ATPA promoter caused by ectopically coexpressed
USF2, demonstrating the importance of endogenous USF2 in activation of the ATPA
gene.

PMID: 9099698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Virology. 1997 Apr 14;230(2):381-91.

Upstream stimulatory factor family binds to the herpes simplex virus type 1
latency-associated transcript promoter.

Kenny JJ(1), Millhouse S, Wotring M, Wigdahl B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University,
College of Medicine, Hershey 17033, USA.

The herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) latency-associated transcript (LAT)
promoter 1 (LP1) is the only viral promoter that exhibits detectable
transcriptional activity during a latent HSV infection. The LAT promoter-binding 
factor (LPBF) regulatory sequence (nucleotides -65 to -72 relative to the
transcriptional start site of the 8.3-kb primary transcript) closely resembles
the core recognition sequence required for binding members of the upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)/major late transcription factor (MLTF) family. In this
analysis, we demonstrate that oligonucleotides containing either the LPBF
recognition sequence or the USF/MLTF recognition sequences from previously
described promoters bind cellular factors which exhibit very similar mobilities
in electrophoretic mobility shift (EMS) analyses. We also observe a high degree
of similarity in competition profiles obtained in competition EMS analyses
utilizing oligonucleotides containing recognition sequences for either LPBF or
USF/MLTF. Furthermore, antibody supershift EMS analyses have demonstrated that
the factors binding the LPBF or USF/MLTF recognition sites in these
oligonucleotides are antigenically related, if not identical, and that greater
than 90% of the LPBF-binding activity is antigenically related to USF. In
addition, we demonstrate that both forms of in vitro translated USF proteins (43 
and 44 kDa) bind to the LPBF recognition sequence within HSV-1 LP1. Taken
together, these data indicate that USF is capable of binding to the HSV-1 LPBF
recognition sequence and that USF is a major LPBF-binding activity in cells of
neuronal and nonneuronal lineage. These data further support the hypothesis that 
USF may indeed play a significant role in the transcriptional activity of HSV-1
LP1.

PMID: 9143295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Genes Funct. 1997 Apr;1(2):87-97.

An auxiliary peptide required for the function of two activation domains in
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) transcription factor.

Gourdon L(1), Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Viollet B, Martinez A, Kahn A, Raymondjean 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches en Physiologie et Pathologie Génétiques et Moléculaires,
Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, Université René Descartes,
Paris, France.

Ubiquitous upstream stimulatory factors (USF1, USF2a and USF2b) are members of
the basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper family of transcription factors that
have been shown to be involved in the transcriptional response of the L-type
pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene to glucose. To understand the mechanisms of action of
the USF2 isoforms, we initiated a series of co-transfection assays with deletion 
mutants and Ga14-USF2 fusions. The transactivating efficiency of the different
native and mutant factors was determined at similar DNA binding activity. We
found that: (i) exons 3- and 5-encoded regions are activation domains, (ii) a
modulator domain encoded by exon 4 could be necessary to their additive action,
(iii) a hexapeptide encoded by the first 5' codons of exon 6 is indispensable for
transmitting activation due to both exon 3- and exon 5-encoded domains to the
transcriptional machinery. Therefore, USF2 presents a modular structure and
mediates transcriptional activation thanks to two non-autonomous activation
domains dependent on an auxiliary peptide for expressing their activating
potential.

PMID: 9680311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 14;272(11):7525-31.

Carbohydrate regulation of hepatic gene expression. Evidence against a role for
the upstream stimulatory factor.

Kaytor EN(1), Shih H, Towle HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Institute of Human Genetics, Medical School,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Hepatic expression of the genes encoding L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) and S14 is
induced in rats upon feeding them a high carbohydrate, low fat diet. A
carbohydrate response element (ChoRE) containing two CACGTG-type E boxes has been
mapped in the 5'-flanking region of both of these genes. The nature of the ChoRE 
suggests that a member of the basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper family of
proteins may be responsible for mediating the response to carbohydrate. Indeed,
the upstream stimulatory factor (USF), a ubiquitous
basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper protein, is present in hepatic nuclear
extracts and binds to the ChoREs of L-PK and S14 in vitro. We have conducted
experiments to determine whether USF is involved in the carbohydrate-mediated
regulation of L-PK and S14. For this purpose, dominant negative forms of USF that
are capable of heterodimerizing with endogenous USF but not of binding to DNA
were expressed in primary hepatocytes. Expression of these forms did not block
either S14 or L-PK induction by glucose. In addition, we have constructed mutant 
ChoREs that retain their carbohydrate responsiveness but have lost the ability to
bind USF. Together, these data suggest that USF is not the
carbohydrate-responsive factor that stimulates S14 and L-PK expression and that a
distinct hepatic factor is likely to be responsible for the transcriptional
response.

PMID: 9054457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Gene. 1997 Feb 7;185(2):209-16.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse alpha A-crystallin gene: binding of USF
to the -7/+5 region.

Sax CM(1), Cvekl A, Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. sax@helix.nih.gov

Lens preferred-expression of the mouse alpha A-crystallin gene (alpha A-cry) is
regulated at the transcriptional level by multiple elements located in the 5'
flanking region of the gene. Here we present the first analysis of the functional
role of the mouse alpha A-cry +1 region and the protein(s) which bind to it. The 
-7/+5 region of this promoter exhibits sequence similarity with the consensus
upstream stimulating factor (USF) transcription factor binding site. A wild type 
oligodeoxyribonucleotide (oligo) spanning the mouse alpha A-cry -15/+15 region
specifically inhibited the activity of a mouse alpha A-cry promoter-cat gene
fusion (p alpha A 111aCAT) in competitive co-transfection studies in the mouse
alpha TN4-1 lens cell line, as did an oligo containing the adenovirus 2 major
late promoter strong USF binding site. In contrast, an alpha A-cry oligo mutated 
(-3/+3) within the USF-like binding site did not inhibit p alpha A111aCAT
activity. Western blot analysis indicated that alpha TN4-1 cells express USF1.
Co-transfection of p alpha A111aCAT and a USF1 cDNA expression vector into alpha 
TN4-1 cells resulted in a repression of mouse alpha A-cry promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses (EMSA) demonstrated that proteins in an
alpha TN4-1 nuclear extract form a single major complex on synthetic oligos
spanning the mouse alpha A-cry -15/+15 region. The formation of this complex was 
inhibited by the presence of unlabeled -15/+15 oligos or an anti-USF1 antibody.
In addition, purified USF1 bound to this region, producing a complex similar in
size to that observed with alpha TN4-1 nuclear extracts. Taken together, our
findings show that USF can bind to the mouse alpha A-cry +1 site, and support the
possibility that USF plays a role in promoter activity of this gene. Sequence
similarities surrounding the +1 region of the alpha A-cry gene of the mouse, mole
rat, hamster, and human, as well as the previously observed utilization of USF by
different cry promoters suggest that USF contributes to the high expression of
many crys in the ocular lens of diverse species.

PMID: 9055817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 6;14(5):589-94.

The dual role of helix-loop--helix-zipper protein USF in ribosomal RNA gene
transcription in vivo.

Ghosh AK(1), Datta PK, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, The Chicago Medical School, 
North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the core promoter of rat ribosomal RNA gene 
(rDNA) contains an E-box-like sequence to which the core promoter binding factor 
CPBF binds and that the 44 kDa subunit of this protein is immunologically related
to USF1, the helix--loop--helix-zipper DNA binding protein. Further, we showed
that RNA polymerase I (pol I) transcription in vitro is competed by
oligonucleotides containing USF-binding site, which suggested a key role for USF 
in rDNA transcription. To prove the potential role of USF in pol I transcription 
in vivo, USF1 and USF2 homodimers and USF1/USF2 heterodimer were overexpressed in
CHO cells by transfection of the respective cDNAs. Co-transfection of a plasmid
containing rDNA followed by primer extension analysis showed that overexpression 
of USF1 and USF2 as homodimers resulted in inhibition of rDNA transcription by as
much as 85-90% whereas overexpression of USF1/USF2 in the heterodimeric form
activated transcription approximately 3.5-fold. Transfection of mutant USF2 cDNA 
that is devoid of the basic DNA-binding domain produced only minimal inhibition
of rDNA transcription. These data show that USF can modulate transcription of
rRNA gene in vivo by functioning as a repressor (homodimer) or activator
(heterodimer) of pol I transcription in vivo and suggest that inhibition of rDNA 
transcription may be responsible for the antiproliferative action of USF
homodimers.

PMID: 9053857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biochimie. 1997 Feb-Mar;79(2-3):113-8.

Transcriptional regulation by glucose in the liver.

Kahn A(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICGM, INSERM U129, CHU Cochin-Port-Royal, Paris, France.

Numerous hepatic and adipocytic genes are transcriptionally controlled by glucose
and insulin. It is the case, for example, of the pyruvate kinase L (L-PK) gene in
the liver and of the spot 14 gene in adipocytes, coding for proteic factors of
glycolysis and lipogenesis, respectively. At the hepatic level, the role of
insulin is mainly to stimulate the synthesis of glucokinase, needed for
phosphorylation of glucose to glucose 6-phosphate. An efficient regulation of the
L-PK gene by glucose also needs the synthesis of the glucose transporter (Glut2):
in its absence, transcription of the gene is independent of the presence of
glucose in the medium. The role of Glut2 can be to enhance the depletion of
gluconeogenic cells into glucose-6-phosphate (G6-P) when cultivated without
glucose. G6-P seems to act by one of its metabolites in the pentose phosphate
pathway, probably a pentose phosphate, maybe xylulose 5-phosphate. The active
metabolites of this pathway could control the activity of protein kinase and
protein phosphatase cascades, leading to a modification of the phosphorylation
state of the glucose response complex. This complex is assembled by so-called
glucose/carbohydrate response elements (GIRE, ChoRE) that are composed of E boxes
of the CACGTG type, more or less modified, forming a palindrome whose both parts 
are separated by five bases. These sequences are able to bind USF1 and USF2
proteins, which seem to be necessary to the glucose response. However, the
binding of USF proteins to the GIRE of the L-PK gene, appreciated by in vivo
footprints, is not modulated by nutritional conditions. Therefore, these USF
proteins could interact with different partners which are targets of regulating
cues: transcription factors bound in the immediate vicinity of the glucose
response complex, notably the HNF4 factor, and, maybe, other proteins interacting
with the USF factors assembled to the GIRE. The actually ongoing experiments try 
to appreciate the nature and the role of these partners, and to evaluate the
metabolic response of mice whose USF genes were disabled by homologous
recombination.

PMID: 9209706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 17;272(3):1753-60.

Binding of upstream stimulatory factor to an E-box in the 3'-flanking region
stimulates alpha1(I) collagen gene transcription.

Rippe RA(1), Umezawa A, Kimball JP, Breindl M, Brenner DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7038, USA.

Since several lines of evidence implicate the 3'-flanking region in regulating
alpha1(I) collagen gene transcription, we analyzed 12. 4-kilobase pairs of
3'-flanking sequence of the murine alpha1(I) collagen gene for transcriptional
elements. A region of the 3'-flanking region stimulated expression of the
heterologous beta-globin gene promoter in an enhancer trap plasmid and of the
alpha1(I) collagen gene promoter in a collagen-luciferase reporter gene construct
when located 3' to the luciferase reporter gene. DNase I footprinting analysis
demonstrated the presence of three regions where DNA binding proteins
specifically interact within this 3'-stimulatory region. Inspection of the DNA
sequence revealed a consensus E-box, a binding site for basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, in one of the protein binding sites. Mobility shift assays demonstrated
that upstream stimulatory factors (USF) USF-1 and USF-2 bind to this E-box.
Mutating the E-box in the context of the 3'-flanking region confirmed that it
contributes to the enhancement of transcriptional activity of the alpha1(I)
collagen gene promoter. Mutations in all three protein binding sites abolished
transcriptional activation by the 3'-flanking region, suggesting a complex
interaction among the trans-acting factors in enhancing transcriptional activity.
Thus, a region of the 3'-flanking region of the alpha1(I) collagen gene
stimulates transcription of the alpha1(I) collagen gene promoter, and USF-1 and
USF-2 contribute to this transcriptional stimulation.

PMID: 8999857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jan 3;230(1):159-63.

Activation of the metallothionein-I gene promoter in response to cadmium and USF 
in vitro.

Datta PK(1), Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, The Chicago Medical School, 
North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

To elucidate the molecular mechanism of metallothionein (MT) gene activation in
response to various inducers, we constructed a G-less mouse MT-I promoter and
transcribed in HeLa nuclear extract. The MT-I gene was transcribed efficiently in
this extract and initiation of transcription occurred at the correct site (+1).
Transcription of the MT-I gene was stimulated three- to fivefold in the nuclear
extract from the cadmium-treated cells relative to the extract from the untreated
cells. The MT-I promoter was also activated three- to fourfold by recombinant
USF1, a helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper DNA binding transcription factor that
recognizes the major late transcription factor (MLTF) binding site on the MT-I
promoter. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the activation of MT-I
promoter in vitro by a toxic metal and by the transcription factor USF.

PMID: 9020035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 3;272(1):369-78.

Conserved E boxes function as part of the enhancer in hypersensitive site 2 of
the beta-globin locus control region. Role of basic helix-loop-helix proteins.

Elnitski L(1), Miller W, Hardison R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park
16802, USA.

The human beta-globin gene cluster is regulated in part by a distal locus control
region that is required for opening a chromatin domain in erythroid cells and
enhancing expression of the beta-like globin genes at the correct developmental
stages. One part of the locus control region, called hypersensitive site 2 (HS2),
functions as a strong enhancer. Matches to the consensus binding sites for basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins (E boxes) are well conserved within the HS2
core. We show that mutations of the HS2 core that alter an invariant E box cause 
a 3.5-fold reduction in enhancement of expression of an epsilon-globin reporter
gene in transiently transfected K562 cells, both before and after induction.
Mutations of the HS2 core that alter a less-highly conserved E box cause a more
modest reduction in enhancement. Footprint analysis shows binding of erythroid
nuclear proteins in vitro to the invariant E box as well as an adjacent CAC/GTG
box. Probes containing the E box regions form sequence-specific complexes with
proteins from both K562 and MEL nuclear extracts; these are disrupted by the same
mutations that decrease enhancement. Some of these latter complexes contain known
bHLH proteins, as revealed by specific loss of individual complexes when treated 
with antibodies against TAL1 and USF. Interaction between the E boxes and the
bHLH proteins, as well as other binding proteins, could account for the role of
these sites in enhancement by HS2.

PMID: 8995271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):18-23.

Selective utilization of basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper proteins at the
immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer.

Carter RS(1), Ordentlich P, Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6145, USA.

The microE3 E box within the immunoglobulin heavy-chain (IgH) enhancer binds
several proteins of the basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHzip) class,
including TFE3, USF1, and Max. Both TFE3 and USF have been described as
transcriptional activators, and so we investigated their possible roles in
activating the IgH enhancer in vivo. Although TFE3 activated various
enhancer-based reporters, both USF1 and Max effectively inhibited transcription. 
Inhibition by USF correlated with the lack of a strong activation domain and was 
the result of the protein neutralizing the microE3 site. The effects of
dominant-negative derivatives of TFE3 and USF1 confirmed that TFE3, or a
TFE3-like protein, is the primary cellular bHLHzip protein that activates the IgH
enhancer. In addition to providing a physiological role for TFE3, our results
call into question the traditional view of USF1 as an obligate transcriptional
activator.

PMCID: PMC231725
PMID: 8972181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32375-80.

Transcription of the transforming growth factor-beta2 gene is dependent on an
E-box located between an essential cAMP response element/activating transcription
factor motif and the TATA box of the gene.

Scholtz B(1), Kingsley-Kallesen M, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA. arizzino@unmc.edu

Transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) is an important regulator of cell
proliferation and differentiation; however, its transcriptional regulation is not
well understood. Here we report characterization of an essential E-box motif,
positioned at -50/-45 between a previously described functional cAMP response
element/activating transcription factor site and the TATA box of the human
TGF-beta2 promoter. By site-directed mutagenesis, we demonstrate that this E-box 
motif is necessary for the promoter activity, not only in differentiated cells
derived from embryonal carcinoma cells, but also in choriocarcinoma cells and in 
MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells. We also demonstrate that the transcription factors 
USF1 and USF2 bind to this E-box motif in vitro when nuclear extracts from each
of these cell lines are examined by gel retardation assays. Moreover, using a
dominant-negative USF2 protein, we show that USF proteins are critical for
TGF-beta2 promoter activity in vivo. The importance of the E-box motif described 
in this study is supported by the presence of an E-box motif in the same position
in the chicken TGF-beta2 gene promoter.

PMID: 8943301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Genomics. 1996 Nov 1;37(3):337-44.

Complete sequencing of the murine USF gene and comparison of its genomic
organization to that of mFIP/USF2.

Aperlo C(1), Boulukos KE, Sage J, Cuzin F, Pognonec P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 273, Laboratoire de Biochimie, Université de Nice, France.

USF is a transcription factor able to stimulate promoter activity upon binding to
an upstream sequence identical to that recognized by the protooncogene Myc.
However, despite extensive biochemical characterization, nothing is known
concerning its physiological function. A USF-related protein able to interact
with Fos and known as FIP/USF2 has been reported. Its genomic structure in mouse 
has been recently characterized. We present here the cloning and characterization
of the murine USF gene. It consists of 10 exons, the first of which is noncoding,
and the gene spans 8 kb of DNA. We show that the murine USF protein is almost
identical to its human counterpart, but that an intron not conserved between
human and murine USF genes curiously has been conserved between human USF and
murine FIP/USF2. Otherwise, the splicing pattern of murine USF and FIP/USF2 is
exactly conserved. We also demonstrate that the murine USF promoter is located
more than 2.5 kb upstream of the first coding ATG, in a region displaying
divergent promoter activity. Finally, we show that an Mx1-related sequence is
present less than 3 kb downstream of the murine USF gene, in a tail-to-tail
position. Taken together, these data indicate that the murine USF gene is very
similar to the murine FIP/USF2 gene and is potentially bracketed by two other
transcription units on the other DNA strand.

PMID: 8938446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mamm Genome. 1996 Nov;7(11):803-9.

Mouse USF1 gene cloning: comparative organization within the c-myc gene family.

Henrion AA(1), Vaulont S, Raymondjean M, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Nationale de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 129,
Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF/MLTF) belong to the c-myc family of
transcription factors. Through binding to target DNA as dimers, the ubiquitous
USF proteins regulate a variety of genes. USF proteins are encoded by two genes, 
USF1 and USF2. Protein sequences of USF1 and 2 are highly homologous across
species, suggesting functional conservation. To determine whether the genomic
organization was conserved between USF1 and USF2, we isolated the murine USF1
gene and characterized its genomic structure. Both genes are similarly organized 
in 10 exons spanning over 10 kbp. By the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends and 
S1 nuclease mapping methods, exon 1 was defined and the transcription initiation 
sites were mapped. The sequence of 8 kb of the gene, including 1.75 kb of
5'-flanking DNA, was determined. The promoter region is GC rich and lacks a
typical TATA or CCAAT element. Strikingly, a comparison of the murine and human
untranslated sequences reveals regions that exhibit greater than 73% sequence
identity. A genomic alignment of the dimerization and DNA binding domains is
presented for five genes of the c-myc family, suggesting a hypothetical common
ancestor gene.

PMID: 8875887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1996 Oct 14;123(1):37-44.

Identification of a carbohydrate response element in rat S14 gene.

Harmon JS(1), Mariash CN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis 55455, USA.

To characterize the mechanism by which carbohydrate feeding regulates S14 gene
transcription, we created mutations within footprinted sequences of the
carbohydrate response region of the S14 gene and either transiently transfected
these mutations into rat primary hepatocytes or end-labeled them for gel mobility
shift assays. The wild type DNA gave a 2.9 +/- 1.0-fold response to raising the
media glucose concentration. Mutations within the 3' footprint eliminated the
glucose response and also eliminated hepatic nuclear factor binding. However,
mutations within the 5' footprint did not inhibit the glucose responsiveness and 
had no effect on hepatic nuclear binding. The gel mobility shift assays were
confirmed by appropriate competition gel assays. The 3' footprint contains a
sequence similar to the USF (upstream stimulating factor) binding site (CACGTG)
that has been suggested to play a role in carbohydrate regulation. However, the
gel shift pattern with purified USF1 is distinctly different from that of rat
hepatic nuclear extract. These studies demonstrate that the sequence GGCACCCGTGT 
is required for the carbohydrate response in the S14 gene.

PMID: 8912809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Oct 1;241(1):249-53.

The basic region/helix-loop-helix/leucine repeat transcription factor USF
interferes with Ras transformation.

Aperlo C(1), Boulukos KE, Pognonec P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie, INSERM U273, Université de Nice, France.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a transcription factor of the basic
region/helix-loop-helix/leucine repeat family. It shares the same DNA-binding
sequence as the myc oncogene. Based on the three-dimensional structures, its
DNA-binding domain is structurally related to that of Max, the partner of Myc. In
addition, USF can form heterodimers with a related factor, Fos-interacting
protein/upstream stimulatory factor 2 (FIP/USF2), which has been shown to
directly interact with Fos. In view of the provocative relationship of USF with
other factors involved in cell proliferation, we investigated whether USF could
also play a role in cellular growth control. In this study, we report that USF is
not an oncogene, but interferes with Ras-driven transformation. This inhibitory
effect is independent of USF transactivating domains, but requires its
DNA-binding activity. However, the minimal USF DNA-binding domain does not
display this inhibitory effect, and even slightly enhances Ras transformation. On
the basis of these data, we propose that USF may play an important role in the
control of cell growth and proliferation, through both binding to promoter
sequences and specific protein/protein interactions.

PMID: 8898913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Reprod Dev. 1996 Sep;45(1):1-9.

Two distinct forms of USF in the Lytechinus sea urchin embryo do not play a role 
in LpS1 gene inactivation upon disruption of the extracellular matrix.

George JM(1), Seid CA, Lee H, Tomlinson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Houston, Texas 77204-5513, USA.

Recent studies in our laboratory indicated that the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) in the sea urchin embryo of Lytechinus acts as a transcriptional repressor 
for the aboral ectoderm-specific expression of the LpS1 genes. Disruption of the 
extracellular matrix (ECM) arrests development prior to gastrulation and
inactivates the LpS1 genes. We wanted to determine whether the inactivation of
the LpS1 genes by ECM disruption may be due to an increase in USF expression. In 
the course of the investigation, a second L, variegatus USF cDNA clone (LvUSF2)
was isolated and sequenced. The deduced amino acid sequence of LvUSF2 is nearly
identical to LvUSF1 except at the amino end, where they are sharply divergent.
Like LvUSF1, LvUSF2 has a USF-specific, a basic/hefixloop-helix, and a leucine
zipper domain. Genomic DNA blots indicated that the two cDNA clones are derived
from one gene, which suggested that the Lytechinus USF1 and USF2 mRNAs, of
approximately 6.0 and 4.0 kb, respectively, are the result of differential RNA
splicing. ECM disruption in Lytechinus embryos caused a relative drop in USF RNA 
accumulation levels to approximately 60% of control embryos, while LpS1 RNA
accumulation levels dropped to less than 5%. USF protein levels and DNA binding
activities in ECM-disrupted embryos also dropped to approximately 60% to that of 
control embryos. A mutation at the USF binding site in an LpS1
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) fusion DNA construct did not
cause a relative increase in CAT activity in ECM disrupted embryos. These results
suggest that the induced drop in LpS1 gene expression by ECM disruption is not
due to an increase in the repressive activity of USF.

PMID: 8873063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):4754-64.

An essential E box in the promoter of the gene encoding the mRNA cap-binding
protein (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E) is a target for activation by c-myc.

Jones RM(1), Branda J, Johnston KA, Polymenis M, Gadd M, Rustgi A, Callanan L,
Schmidt EV.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, 02129, USA.

The mRNA cap-binding protein (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E [eIF4E]) binds the 
m7 GpppN cap on mRNA, thereby initiating translation. eIF4E is essential and rate
limiting for protein synthesis. Overexpression of eIF4E transforms cells, and
mutations in eIF4E arrest cells in G, in cdc33 mutants. In this work, we
identified the promoter region of the gene encoding eIF4E, because we previously 
identified eIF4E as a potential myc-regulated gene. In support of our previous
data, a minimal, functional, 403-nucleotide promoter region of eIF4E was found to
contain CACGTG E box repeats, and this core eIF4E promoter was myc responsive in 
cotransfections with c-myc. A direct role for myc in activating the eIF4E
promoter was demonstrated by cotransfections with two dominant negative mutants
of c-myc (MycdeltaTAD and MycdeltaBR) which equally suppressed promoter function.
Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated quantitative
binding to the E box motifs that correlated with myc levels in the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay extracts; supershift assays demonstrated max
and USF binding to the same motif. cis mutations in the core or flank of the
eIF4E E box simultaneously altered myc-max and USF binding and inactivated the
promoter. Indeed, mutations of this E box inactivated the promoter in all cells
tested, suggesting it is essential for expression of eIF4E. Furthermore, the
GGCCACGTG(A/T)C(C/G) sequence is shared with other in vivo targets for c-myc, but
unlike other targets, it is located in the immediate promoter region. Its
critical function in the eIF4E promoter coupled with the known functional
significance of eIF4E in growth regulation makes it a particularly interesting
target for c-myc regulation.

PMCID: PMC231476
PMID: 8756633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2959-65.

Participation of altered upstream stimulatory factor in the induction of rat heme
oxygenase-1 by cadmium.

Maeshima H(1), Sato M, Ishikawa K, Katagata Y, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Central Laboratory for Research and Education,
Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

We have reported that an upstream stimulatory factor (USF) binding site is
functional in transcription of the heme oxygenase-1 gene. In this study, we
examined the role of USF in the induced state. By transient expression analyses
with the chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase gene, we found that the USF binding
site plays an important role in the induction of rat heme oxygenase-1 by cadmium,
but not by hemin. To elucidate the role of USF, we prepared USF-rich nuclear
extracts from control and cadmium-treated rat liver. On electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay using control nuclear proteins, one slowly migrating band was
detected, whereas using nuclear proteins of cadmium-treated rat liver, two fast
migrating bands were detected. The molecular masses of the two subunits of USF
prepared from cadmium-treated rat liver were approximately 34 kDa as determined
by UV cross-linking and subsequent SDS-PAGE, while the two subunits of native USF
were 43 kDa and 44 kDa. DNase I footprinting analysis revealed that both the
nuclear proteins bound to the same region including the USF binding site. We
therefore suppose that cadmium causes some structural changes in the two proteins
of USF and that the altered USF participates in the effective initiation of
transcription of the rat heme oxygenase-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC146041
PMID: 8760880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. EMBO J. 1996 May 15;15(10):2508-18.

Acetylation of histone H4 plays a primary role in enhancing transcription factor 
binding to nucleosomal DNA in vitro.

Vettese-Dadey M(1), Grant PA, Hebbes TR, Crane- Robinson C, Allis CD, Workman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State
University, PA 16802-4500, USA.

Core histones isolated from normal and butyrate-treated HeLa cells have been
reconstituted into nucleosome cores in order to analyze the role of histone
acetylation in enhancing transcription factor binding to recognition sites in
nucleosomal DNA. Moderate stimulation of nucleosome binding was observed for the 
basic helix-loop-helix factor USF and the Zn cluster DNA binding domain factor
GAL4-AH using heterogeneously acetylated histones. However, by coupling novel
immunoblotting techniques to a gel retardation assay, we observed that nucleosome
cores containing the most highly acetylated forms of histone H4 have the highest 
affinity for these two transcription factors. Western analysis of gel-purified
USF-nucleosome and GAL4-AH-nucleosome complexes demonstrated the predominant
presence of acetylated histone H4 relative to acetylated histone H3.
Immunoprecipitation of USF-nucleosome complexes with anti-USF antibodies also
demonstrated that these complexes were enriched preferentially in acetylated
histone H4. These data show that USF and GAL4-AH preferentially interact with
nucleosome cores containing highly acetylated histone H4. Acetylation of histone 
H4 thus appears to play a primary role in the structural changes that mediate
enhanced binding of transcription factors to their recognition sites within
nucleosomes.

PMCID: PMC450183
PMID: 8665858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1367-75.

Functional domains of the transcription factor USF2: atypical nuclear
localization signals and context-dependent transcriptional activation domains.

Luo X(1), Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

USF is a family of basic helix-loop transcriptional factors that recognizes
DNA-binding sites similar to those of the Myc oncoproteins. Here, various
functional domains in the mouse USF2 protein were identified and characterized.
Indirect immunofluorescence studies with transiently transfected cells revealed
that both the basic region and the highly conserved USF-specific region (USR) are
involved in the nuclear localization of USF2. Cotransfection assays with deletion
mutants containing the DNA-binding domain of either USF2 or GAL4 identified two
distinct transcriptional activation domains in USF2, the USR and the exon
5-encoded region. Activity of the exon 5 activation domain was detectable in both
assay systems. Within USF2, however, its potency varied with the conformation
induced by the surrounding regions, especially that encoded by alternatively
spliced exon 4. In contrast, the USR activated transcription only in its natural 
context upstream of the USF2 basic region and only with reporter constructs
containing the adenovirus major late minimal promoter but not the E1b minimal
promoter. However, insertion of an initiator element downstream of the TATA box
rescued the activity of the USR on the E1b-driven reporters. The USR therefore
represents a new type of activation domain whose function depends very strongly
on the core promoter context.

PMCID: PMC231121
PMID: 8657110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Virol. 1996 Apr;70(4):2545-55.

Activation of the Epstein-Barr virus DNA polymerase promoter by the BRLF1
immediate-early protein is mediated through USF and E2F.

Liu C(1), Sista ND, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA polymerase (pol) is essential for the
replication of viral genomes during productive EBV infection. We have previously 
reported that the EBV DNA pol promoter, which is TATA-less and constitutively
inactive, is activated by a genomic clone expressing both immediate-early viral
transactivators, BZLF1Z and BRLF1 (R), in EBV-infected lymphoid cells. Here we
demonstrate that R alone is sufficient to activate the pol promoter in
EBV-negative B cells. Unlike other early promoters to which the R protein binds
directly, its effect on the pol promoter does not appear to involve a direct
DNA-binding mechanism. Instead, we found that two cellular transcription factors,
an upstream stimulatory factor USF, and a member of the E2F family of proteins,
bind directly to the pol promoter at positions -795 to -786 and -186 to -170,
respectively, regions previously identified as important for activation of the
pol promoter. These two sites contribute to or are essential for transactivation 
of the pol promoter by R in EBV-noninfected B cells. These data suggest that the 
R immediate-early protein may activate a key early EBV promoter (pol) through
both USF and E2F.

PMCID: PMC190100
PMID: 8642684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Genes Dev. 1996 Feb 15;10(4):447-60.

Discrimination between different E-box-binding proteins at an endogenous target
gene of c-myc.

Desbarats L(1), Gaubatz S, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

c-myc plans a key role in regulating mammalian cell proliferation and apoptosis. 
The gene codes for a transcription factor, Myc, that belongs to the
helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (HLH/LZ) family of proteins. Myc heterodimerizes 
with a partner protein termed Max; the heterodimeric complex binds to CAC(G/A)TG 
(E-box) sequences and activates transcription from these sites. However, several 
other HLH/LZ proteins, including USF and TFE-3, bind to and trans-activate from
the same element, yet have no documented effect on cell proliferation or
apoptosis. Therefore, it is likely that mechanisms exist that discriminate
between these proteins for activation of natural target genes of Myc. We now show
that trans-activation from the E-box in the rat prothymosin-alpha intron enhancer
is indeed specific for Myc, and identify both the distance from the start site of
transcription and a second E-box element adjacent to that recognized by Myc as
critical determinants of specificity. Surprisingly, transcription activation
domains required for Myc to activate from this distal enhancer position differ
from previously mapped domains and closely correlate with those domains essential
for transformation. As observed in transformation assays, Myc and Max strongly
synergize in activation from a distal enhancer position. Our data suggest that
trans-activation from the prothymosin intron enhancer is a faithful reflection of
the transforming properties of the Myc protein.

PMID: 8600028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Feb 6;93(3):1308-13.

Antiproliferative properties of the USF family of helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors.

Luo X(1), Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

USF is a family of transcription factors characterized by a highly conserved
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-zip) DNA-binding domain. Two
different USF genes, termed USF1 and USF2, are ubiquitously expressed in both
humans and mice. The USF1 and USF2 proteins contain highly divergent
transcriptional activation domains but share extensive homologies in the bHLH-zip
region and recognize the same CACGTG DNA motifs. Although the DNA-binding and
transcriptional activities of these proteins have been characterized, the
biological function of USF is not well understood. Here, focus- and
colony-formation assays were used to investigate the potential involvement of USF
in the regulation of cellular transformation and proliferation. Both USF1 and
USF2 inhibited the transformation of rat embryo fibroblasts mediated by Ras and
c-Myc, a bHLH-zip transcription factor that also binds CACGTG motifs. DNA binding
was required but not fully sufficient for inhibition of Myc-dependent
transformation by USF, since deletion mutants containing only the DNA-binding
domains of USF1 or USF2 produced partial inhibition. While the effect of USF1 was
selective for Myc-dependent transformation, wild-type USF2 exerted in addition a 
strong inhibition of E1A-mediated transformation and a strong suppression of HeLa
cell colony formation. These results suggest that members of the USF family may
serve as negative regulators of cellular proliferation in two ways, one by
antagonizing the transforming function of Myc, the other through a more general
growth-inhibitory effect.

PMCID: PMC40076
PMID: 8577760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 26;271(4):2294-9.

Pancreatic islet expression of the homeobox factor STF-1 relies on an E-box motif
that binds USF.

Sharma S(1), Leonard J, Lee S, Chapman HD, Leiter EH, Montminy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The commitment of cells to specific lineages during development is determined in 
large part by the relative expression of various homeodomain (HOX) selector
proteins, which mediate the activation of distinct genetic programs. But the
mechanisms by which individual HOX genes are themselves targeted for expression
in different cell types remain largely uncharacterized. Here, we demonstrate that
STF-1, a homeodomain protein that functions in pancreatic morphogenesis and in
glucose homeostasis is encoded by an "orphan" homeobox gene on mouse chromosome
5. When fused to a beta-galactosidase reporter gene, a 6.5-kilobase genomic
fragment of 5'-flanking sequence from the STF-1 gene shows pancreatic islet
specific activity in transgenic mice. Two distinct elements within the STF-1
promoter are required for islet-restricted expression: a distal enhancer sequence
located between -3 and -6.5 kilobases and a proximal E-box sequence located at
-104, which is recognized primarily by the helix loop helix/leucine zipper
nuclear factor USF. As point mutation within the -104 E-box that disrupt USF
binding correspondingly impair STF-1 promoter activity, our results demonstrate
that USF is an important component of the regulatory apparatus which directs
STF-1 expression to pancreatic islet cells.

PMID: 8567692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1405-15.

Immunochemical characterization and transacting properties of upstream
stimulatory factor isoforms.

Viollet B(1), Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Henrion A, Kahn A, Raymondjean M, Martinez 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, U129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The ubiquitous upstream stimulatory factor (USF) transcription factors encoded by
two distinct genes (USF1 and USF2) exist under the form of various dimers able to
bind E-boxes. We report the molecular cloning and functional characterization of 
USF2 isoforms, corresponding to a 44-kDa subunit, USF2a, and a new 38-kDa
subunit, USF2b, generated by differential splicing. Using specific anti-USF
antibodies, we define the different binding complexes in various nuclear
extracts. In vivo, the USF1/USF2a heterodimer represents over 66% of the USF
binding activity whereas the USF1 and USF2a homodimers represent less than 10%,
which strongly suggests an in vivo preferential association in heterodimers. In
particular, an USF1/USF2b heterodimer accounted for almost 15% of the USF species
in some cells. The preferential heterodimerization of USF subunits was reproduced
ex vivo, while the in vitro association of cotranslated subunits, or recombinant 
USF proteins, appeared to be random. In transiently transfected HeLa or hepatoma 
cells, USF2a and USF1 homodimers transactivated a minimal promoter with similar
efficiency, whereas USF2b, which lacks an internal 67-amino acid domain, was a
poor transactivator. Additionally, USF2b was an efficient as USF1 and USF2a
homodimers in transactivating the liver-specific pyruvate kinase gene promoter.

PMID: 8576131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996;8(1):28-37.

Excitotoxic brain lesion modifies binding to a USF binding site acting as a
negative regulatory element in the Protease nexin-1 promoter.

Ernø H(1), Küry P, Nitsch C, Jost JP, Monard D.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, Basel, Switzerland.

The expression of the serine protease inhibitor Protease nexin-1 (PN-1) is
upregulated in glial cells following different types of lesion in the nervous
system. A strong negative regulatory element has been shown by the missing
nucleoside technique to be a CACGTG site (E-box) in the proximal part of the PN-1
promoter. The factor binding to this site is specifically recognized by
antibodies directed against the human upstream stimulatory factor (USF). Point
mutations in the E-box binding site which abolish USF binding in vitro increase
the transcriptional activity of the PN-1 promoter. Cotransfection of a PN-1
promoter/reporter construct together with an expression vector for human USF1
confirms the negative regulatory function of this site. Finally, we show that the
binding to this USF site changed after ibotenic acid-induced lesion of the
caudate putamen in the rat brain.

PMID: 8923453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1996 Jan;35(1-2):304-8.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor USF interacts with the basal promoter
of human amyloid precursor protein.

Bourbonnière M(1), Nalbantoglu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill University, Montreal, Que,
Canada.

Nuclear factors from HeLa, PC12, NG108-15 and SK-N-SH cell lines recognized an
oligonucleotide (-56 to -37: APP-E1) containing an E box (CANNTG) which had
previously been characterized as a DNase I-protected sequence in the basal
promoter of the human amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene. Binding to APP-E1 was
competed with an oligonucleotide encompassing the recognition site of the
transcription factor USF. Antibodies directed against USF interacted with the
APP-E1-protein complex and in vitro synthesized USF could bind APP-E1.
Co-expression of USF cDNA transactivated a human APP-reporter gene construct.
These results suggest that USF may play a role in the expression of the APP gene.

PMID: 8717367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Immunol. 1995 Dec;32(17-18):1369-75.

Aberrant regulation of the IgH 3' enhancer by c-myc in plasmacytoma cells.

Arulampalam V(1), Grant P, Poellinger L, Pettersson S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

The identification of enhancers at the 3' end of the IgH locus has prompted a
re-evaluation of the regulation of Ig gene expression. Moreover, these elements
may provide a possible explanation as to how the c-myc oncogene becomes
dysregulated upon translocation into the IgH locus with the IgH intragenic
enhancer on the reciprocal chromosome. These 3' enhancers have also been shown to
redirect promoter utilization on c-myc reporter gene constructs in transient
transfection experiments. This region of the locus also contains the B cell
specific IgH 3' enhancer. This temporally regulated enhancer has been implicated 
in the mechanisms that control class switch recombination. Here we demonstrate
that overexpression of the c-myc protein in mouse plasmacytoma cells (MPC-11) and
HeLa cells can transcriptionally upregulate a reporter gene construct driven by a
subregion (domain C) of the IgH 3' enhancer. Domain C contains a functional dual 
symmetry E-box motif, CACGTG. The DNA binding experiments demonstrate that USF
was the major factor interacting with this motif. Based on these observations, we
speculate that the c-myc protein may upregulate expression of translocated c-myc 
in mouse plasmacytomas possibly via an USF-binding E-box motif in the IgH 3'
enhancer.

PMID: 8643106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Neurology. 1995 Dec;45(12 Suppl 8):S30-2.

Interactions between varicella-zoster virus IE62 and cellular transcription
factor USF in the coordinate activation of genes 28 and 29.

Meier JL(1), Straus SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1888, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) gene 28 encodes the viral DNA polymerase, while 29
encodes the major DNA-binding protein. Because of the central importance of these
proteins to productive replication of VZV and because, of these, only gene 29
seems to be expressed in latency, we sought to understand how their expression is
controlled. We recently reported that the divergent gene 28 and gene 29
transcripts are coordinately upregulated by IE62. Deletions in the 221-bp
promoter domain shared by genes 28 and 29 comparably diminish the expression of
both genes. By a variety of transient expression, competition gel shift, and
super-shift assays, we now show that cellular transcription factor USF binds to a
palindromic recognition sequence lying equidistant from transcription start sites
for both genes 28 and 29. In the presence of IE62, USF fully activates
transcription of genes 28 and 29. Site-specific mutation of three bases in the
USF core binding hexamer abrogates activation of the gene 28 and 29 promoters by 
IE62. USF is important for expression of genes 28 and 29 in productive VZV
infection.

PMID: 8545014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 1;270(48):28716-22.

Upstream stimulatory factors bind to insulin response sequence of the fatty acid 
synthase promoter. USF1 is regulated.

Wang D(1), Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
94720-3104, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7873.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) plays a central role in de novo lipogenesis in mammals.
The concentration or activity of FAS in liver and adipose tissue changes
dramatically when animals are subjected to nutritional and hormonal
manipulations. We previously reported that due to changes in transcription, FAS
synthesis declines and increases in an insulin-dependent manner during fasting
and refeeding, respectively, and that insulin administration of
streptozotocin-diabetic mice stimulates FAS transcription. We previously mapped
the FAS insulin response sequence (IRS) to the proximal promoter region from
position -71 to position -50, which contains an E-box DNA binding motif. Here,
using competition gel shift assays and specific upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
antibodies, we identified USF1 and USF2 as major components of complexes that
bind to the FAS IRS. UV-cross-linking experiments further supported that USFs
bind the FAS IRS. We also found that the amount of the 43-kDa USF1 was
dramatically increased in liver of refed rats. In contrast, the amount of USF2
remained the same in liver of fasted or refed rats. Moreover, a 17-kDa protein in
both fasted and refed rat liver was recognized by anti-USF1 antibodies, and this 
17-kDa USF1-related protein was expressed in a manner opposite to that of the
43-kDa USF1, i.e. high in liver of fasted rats and decreased in liver of refed
rats. These data suggest that the regulation of USF expression may play an
important role in the regulation of FAS transcription.

PMID: 7499393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 8;270(36):21307-11.

Activation of transcription by recombinant upstream stimulatory factor 1 is
mediated by a novel positive cofactor.

Halle JP(1), Stelzer G, Goppelt A, Meisterernst M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium für Molekulare Biologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 
Germany.

The transcription factor USF1 belongs to the family of basic helix-loop-helix
proteins that are involved in the regulation of various important cellular
processes. Here we characterized the factors involved in the activation of
transcription by upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) in a reconstituted class II
gene transcription system. Activation of transcription by both wild type USF1 and
a GAL-USF (amino acids 1-94 of the yeast activator protein GAL4 fused to amino
acids 17-196 of USF) fusion protein required the presence of at least one
positive cofactor. A novel positive cofactor (PC5) that functions specifically
through the activation domain of USF1 was partially purified and biochemicaly
distinguished from previously described positive cofactors. The mechanism by
which PC5 mediates activation of transcription through USF1 was investigated in
order-of-addition experiments. PC5 had to be present during binding of
transcription factor (TF) IID to the TATA box to observe transcriptional
activation. However, this event alone did not result in transcriptional
activation, which also required the presence of the activator and of PC5 after
binding of TFIID. Hence, PC5 may enter transcription during binding of TFIID to
function in concert with the activator during subsequent steps in transcription.

PMID: 7673166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Sep;4(9):1527-33.

The upstream stimulatory factor functionally interacts with the Alzheimer amyloid
beta-protein precursor gene.

Kovacs DM(1), Wasco W, Witherby J, Felsenstein KM, Brunel F, Roeder RG, Tanzi RE.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Aging Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston 02129, USA.

The amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) gives rise to the A beta peptide, which 
is deposited in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease and Down's
syndrome. Overexpression of APP due to a third copy of the gene appears to
correlate with very early onset of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology in the
brains of Down's syndrome patients. Thus, the identification of the factors
involved with transcriptional regulation of the APP gene could provide critical
clues regarding the events leading to the formation of amyloid deposits. An
overlapping AP-1/AP-4 site in the proximal promoter region (-39 to -49) of the
human APP gene has previously been shown to increase transcription 4-fold. Here
we identify the factor binding specifically to this element as the upstream
stimulatory factor USF, unrelated to the c-fos/c-jun complex or the AP-4 factor. 
In vitro transcription and co-transfection studies show that USF activates
transcription from the APP promoter and that the AP-1/AP-4 element participates
in this activation. Modulation of APP expression via regulation of USF could
potentially ameliorate the production of Alzheimer-augmented beta-amyloid.

PMID: 8541835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochem J. 1995 Sep 1;310 ( Pt 2):401-6.

An upstream stimulatory factor (USF) binding motif is critical for rat
preprotachykinin-A promoter activity in PC12 cells.

Paterson JM(1), Morrison CF, Mendelson SC, McAllister J, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Brain Metabolism Unit, Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Scotland, U.K.

We demonstrate the presence of a functional E box motif in the proximal rat
preprotachykinin-A (rPPT) promoter. This element (spanning nucleotides -67 to
-47) exhibits the sequence 5'-CACGTG-3' which is recognized and bound by the
basic helix-loop-helix family of regulatory proteins. We also show that at least 
one of the factors bound to this rPPT promoter element in both HeLa and PC12
nuclear extract is the ubiquitously expressed transcription factor, the upstream 
stimulatory factor (USF). Mutation of this element by insertion of a 10 bp linker
into the E box motif, in an rPPT promoter fragment spanning -865 to +92, destroys
the ability of this promoter fragment to support reporter gene expression in a
PC12 cell model of rPPT promoter activity. The data indicate that this rPPT E box
element is likely to function as an important cis-regulatory domain in the rPPT
promoter.

PMCID: PMC1135909
PMID: 7654175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jul 25;23(14):2734-41.

USF binds to the APB alpha sequence in the promoter of the amyloid beta-protein
precursor gene.

Vostrov AA(1), Quitschke WW, Vidal F, Schwarzman AL, Goldgaber D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New York 
at Stony Brook 11794-8101, USA.

The APB alpha domain in the amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP) promoter
contains a nuclear factor binding domain with the core recognition sequence
TCAGCT-GAC. Proteins in nuclear extracts from brain and numerous cell lines bind 
to this domain and it contributes approximately 10-30% to the basal APP promoter 
activity. Included in this domain is the CANNTG motif, which is recognized by
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. The same motif is also present in
the CDEI element of the yeast centromere and in the adenovirus major late
promoter (AdMLP). Here we present evidence based on thermostability, relative
binding affinity, eletrophoretic mobility and antibody recognition that the
cellular proteins that bind to the APB alpha and CDEI motifs are USF. However,
the relative binding affinity for the motifs is different. The affinity of USF
for AdMLP is approximately 20-fold higher than for the APB alpha sequence and
5-fold higher than for the CDEI sequence. Mutational analysis suggested that the 
primary determinant for USF binding affinity resides within the octamer CAGCTGAC,
which is composed of the E-box consensus sequence CANNTG followed by the
dinucleotide AC. The human homolog of the mouse CDEI binding protein did not bind
to either the CDEI sequence or APB alpha.

PMCID: PMC307099
PMID: 7651835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):179-83.

Murine chromosomal location of five bHLH-Zip transcription factor genes.

Steingrímsson E(1), Sawadogo M, Gilbert DJ, Zervos AS, Brent R, Blanar MA, Fisher
DE, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

The genes for the bHLH-Zip transcription factors Tfap4, Mxi1, Tcfeb, Usf1, and
Usf2 have been mapped in mouse by interspecific backcross analysis. Mxi1, Usf1,
and Usf2 have been mapped previously by in situ hybridization, but their
positions on the meiotic linkage map had not been determined. The other two genes
have not previously been mapped in mouse. These transcription factors belong to a
growing family of transcriptional regulators, some of which are known to form a
complex network of interacting proteins that control cell proliferation and
apoptosis. As expected, based on mapping studies of other bHLH-Zip genes, these
loci were well distributed among mouse chromosomes. In addition, some of the
probes used in this study detected multiple, independently segregating loci,
suggesting the possible existence of additional family members or
species-specific pseudogenes.

PMID: 8530024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Jun 25;23(12):2229-35.

DNA binding and regulatory effects of transcription factors SP1 and USF at the
rat amyloid precursor protein gene promoter.

Hoffman PW(1), Chernak JM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Physiology and Genetics Section, National Institute on Aging,
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Two DNA elements which we have termed SAA and GAG have been shown to control
expression of the rat amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene, and the region
containing the SAA element has been shown to interact with nuclear proteins
[Hoffman and Chernak (1994) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 201, 610-617]. In this
report we study DNA sequences and proteins which influence the activity of the
SAA element. An oligonucleotide containing the SAA element is specifically bound 
by nuclear proteins derived from rat PC12 cells, consistently forming four
complexes designated C25, C30, C35 and C40 in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSAs). We demonstrate that the C25, C30 and C40 complexes involve the
binding of nuclear proteins to an SP1 consensus sequence located within the SAA
element and that the C25 complex contains a protein antigenically related to the 
human SP1 protein. We establish further that the C35 complex requires a USF
recognition site located within the SAA element and contains a protein
antigenically related to the human upstream stimulatory factor (USF) protein.
Using APP promoter/luciferase reporter gene constructs, we demonstrate that both 
the SP1 and the USF sites can play a role in the transcriptional activity of the 
SAA element. Finally, we show that complexes similar to the C25, C30 and C35
complexes are formed by rat cortex nuclear extracts and the SAA element in EMSA
experiments, suggesting the relevance of our in vitro observations to the in vivo
functioning of the rat APP promoter.

PMCID: PMC307012
PMID: 7610052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2782-90.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates expression of the cell cycle-dependent
cyclin B1 gene promoter.

Cogswell JP(1), Godlevski MM, Bonham M, Bisi J, Babiss L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Glaxo Research Institute, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Progression through the somatic cell cycle requires the temporal regulation of
cyclin gene expression and cyclin protein turnover. One of the best-characterized
examples of this regulation is seen for the B-type cyclins. These cyclins and
their catalytic component, cdc2, have been shown to mediate both the entry into
and maintenance of mitosis. The cyclin B1 gene has been shown to be expressed
between the late S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, while the protein is degraded
specifically at interphase via ubiquitination. To understand the molecular basis 
for transcriptional regulation of the cyclin B1 gene, we cloned the human cyclin 
B1 gene promoter region. Using a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter
system and both stable and transient assays, we have shown that the cyclin B1
gene promoter (extending to -3800 bp relative to the cap site) can confer
G2-enhanced promoter activity. Further analysis revealed that an upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)-binding site and its cognate transcription factor(s) are
critical for expression from the cyclin B1 promoter in cycling HeLa cells.
Interestingly, USF DNA-binding activity appears to be regulated in a G2-specific 
fashion, supporting the idea that USF may play some role in cyclin B1 gene
activation. These studies suggest an important link between USF and the cyclin B1
gene, which in part explains how maturation promoting factor complex formation is
regulated.

PMCID: PMC230509
PMID: 7739559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Virol. 1995 May;69(5):2765-75.

Molecular and functional interactions of transcription factor USF with the long
terminal repeat of human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

d'Adda di Fagagna F(1), Marzio G, Gutierrez MI, Kang LY, Falaschi A, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste,
Italy.

The human transcription factor USF, purified from HeLa cells, and its recombinant
43-kDa component bind to the long terminal repeat (LTR) of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1. The proteins footprint over nucleotides from position -173 to -157 
upstream of the transcription start site, generating strong DNAse I
hypersensitivity sites at the 3' sides on both strands. As detected by
methylation protection studies, the factor forms symmetric contacts with the
guanines of the palindromic CACGTG core of the recognized sequence. Its binding
ability is abolished by the mutation of this core sequence and is strongly
reduced by the cytosine methylation of the central CpG dinucleotide. Upon
binding, both recombinant and purified USFs bend the LTR DNA template. The role
of USF in the control of transcription initiation from the LTR was tested by in
vitro transcription assays. Upon addition of the protein, transcription from
constructs containing an intact binding site is increased, while the
responsiveness in constructs with a mutated sequence is abolished. Furthermore,
the addition of a decoy plasmid which contains multiple repeats of the target
sequence results in downregulation of transcription from the LTR. These results
suggest that USF is a positive regulator of LTR-mediated transcriptional
activation.

PMCID: PMC188970
PMID: 7707499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 14;270(15):8637-41.

The RNA polymerase I promoter-activating factor CPBF is functionally and
immunologically related to the basic helix-loop-helix-zipper DNA-binding protein 
USF.

Datta PK(1), Ghosh AK, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School,
Illinois 60064, USA.

Analysis of the core promoter sequence of the mammalian ribosomal RNA genes
revealed an E-box-like sequence (CACGCTG) to which the upstream stimulatory
factor (USF) binds. Because the core promoter binding factor (CPBF) binds
specifically to the core promoter sequence of the ribosomal RNA gene (Liu, Z.,
and Jacob, S. T. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 16618-16626) and resembles USF in
some respects, we explored the potential relationship between USF and CPBF.
Competition electrophoretic mobility shift assay using labeled core promoter
probe and several unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides showed that USF can
indeed bind to the core promoter and that only those oligonucleotides with an
E-box sequence could compete in the promoter-protein complex formation
characteristic of CPBF. This complex formation was thermostable, a unique
property of USF. Furthermore, antibodies raised against USF cross-reacted with
the 44-kDa component of rat CPBF. To prove further the relationship between CPBF 
and USF, we examined the effects of the unlabeled USF and ribosomal gene core
promoter oligonucleotides on polymerase (pol) I and pol II transcription. Both
oligonucleotides inhibited rDNA transcription as well as transcription from the
adenovirus major late promoter. Only the oligonucleotides that contain the E-box 
sequence competed in the transcription. These data indicate that the promoter
sequence of mammalian ribosomal RNA gene contains an USF-binding site, that the
44-kDa polypeptide of CPBF is related to the 44/43-kDa polypeptide of human USF, 
and that USF or USF-related protein can transactivate both pol I and pol II
promoters.

PMID: 7721765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 25;23(4):663-9.

Identification of an upstream region of the mouse p53 promoter critical for
transcriptional expression.

Hale TK(1), Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University,
Canberra.

We have investigated the transcription factor requirements for basal expression
of the mouse p53 promoter by using a combination of reporter and electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSAs). We have found that only four regions of the
promoter bind transcription factors in EMSAs, suggesting that these are the only 
important factors for basal transcription. These factors are NF1, USF, ETF-like
and a novel factor which we have called PF2. Construction of promoter deletion
mutants has shown that the absence of the PF2 site completely inactivates the
promoter, whereas deletion of other sites, whilst reducing promoter activity,
does not. We suggest that this novel transcription factor (PF2) is critical for
expression of the mouse p53 promoter.

PMCID: PMC306735
PMID: 7899088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3602-10.

Transcriptional regulation of the carcinoembryonic antigen gene. Identification
of regulatory elements and multiple nuclear factors.

Hauck W(1), Stanners CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Human carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) belongs to a family of membrane
glycoproteins that are overexpressed in many carcinomas; CEA functions in vitro
as a homotypic intercellular adhesion molecule and can inhibit differentiation
when expressed ectopically in myoblasts. The regulation of expression of CEA is
therefore of considerable interest. The CEA gene promoter region between -403 and
-124 base pairs upstream of the translation initiation site directed high levels 
of expression in CEA-expression SW403 cells and was 3 times more active in
differentiated than in undifferentiated Caco-2 cells, correlating exactly with
the 3-fold increase in CEA mRNA seen in differentiated Caco-2 cells. Inclusion of
additional upstream sequences between -1098 and -403 base pairs repressed all
activity. By in vitro footprinting and deletion analyses, four cis-acting
elements were mapped within the positive regulatory region, and one element
within the silencing region. Several nuclear factors binding to these domains
were identified: USF, Sp1, and an Sp1-like factor. By co-transfection, USF
directly activated the CEA gene promoter in vivo in both SW403 and Caco-2 cells. 
In addition, the levels of factors binding to each positively acting element
increased dramatically with differentiation in Caco-2 cells. Thus the
transcriptional control of the CEA gene depends on the interaction of several
regulatory elements that bind multiple specific factors.

PMID: 7876096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 10;270(6):2640-3.

Upstream stimulatory factor proteins are major components of the glucose response
complex of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene promoter.

Lefrançois-Martinez AM(1), Martinez A, Antoine B, Raymondjean M, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de génétique Moléculaire, U.129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene transcription is induced by glucose through
its glucose response element (GlRE) composed of two degenerated E boxes able to
bind in vitro ubiquitous upstream stimulator factor (USF) proteins. Here we
demonstrate in vivo, by transient transfections in hepatoma cells, that (i)
native USF proteins synthesized from expression vectors can act as
transactivators of the L-PK promoter via the GlRE, stimulating transcription
without glucose and, therefore, decreasing the glucose responsiveness of the
promoter; (ii) expression of the truncated USF proteins, able to bind the GlRE
but devoid of the NH2-terminal activation domain, represses the activation of the
L-PK promoter by glucose; and (iii) a similar repression of the glucose effect is
observed upon expression of mutant USF proteins devoid of the basic DNA binding
domain, able to dimerize with endogenous USF but not to bind the GlRE. We
conclude that USF proteins are components of the transcriptional glucose response
complex assembled on the L-PK gene promoter.

PMID: 7852331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Science. 1995 Jan 27;267(5197):531-6.

Cloning of an intrinsic human TFIID subunit that interacts with multiple
transcriptional activators.

Chiang CM(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10021.

TFIID is a multisubunit protein complex comprised of the TATA-binding protein
(TBP) and multiple TBP-associated factors (TAFs). The TAFs in TFIID are essential
for activator-dependent transcription. The cloning of a complementary DNA
encoding a human TFIID TAF, TAFII55, that has no known homolog in Drosophila
TFIID is now described. TAFII55 is shown to interact with the largest subunit
(TAFII230) of human TFIID through its central region and with multiple
activators--including Sp1, YY1, USF, CTF, adenoviral E1A, and human
immunodeficiency virus-type 1 Tat proteins--through a distinct amino-terminal
domain. The TAFII55-interacting region of Sp1 was localized to its DNA-binding
domain, which is distinct from the glutamine-rich activation domains previously
shown to interact with Drosophila TAFII110. Thus, this human TFIID TAF may be a
co-activator that mediates a response to multiple activators through a distinct
mechanism.

PMID: 7824954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Virol. 1995 Jan;69(1):239-46.

NF-Y controls transcription of the minute virus of mice P4 promoter through
interaction with an unusual binding site.

Gu Z(1), Plaza S, Perros M, Cziepluch C, Rommelaere J, Cornelis JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Abteilung 0610,
Institut Nationale de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unité 375, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Electrophoretic mobility shift assays performed with nuclear extracts from human 
fibroblasts revealed the formation of two major protein complexes with an
oligonucleotide (nucleotides 78 to 107) from the palindromic region located
upstream from the minute virus of mice (MVM) P4 promoter. It was shown that this 
oligonucleotide bound USF at the enhancer E box CACATG. The second complex
contained the transcription factor NF-Y, whose association was surprising because
its target sequence lacks the canonical CCAAT motif present in all mammalian NF-Y
binding sites identified so far. The MVM NF-Y recognition element instead
contains the CCAAC sequence. USF and NF-Y had distinct but overlapping sequence
requirements for binding, suggesting that their associations with MVM DNA were
mutually exclusive. Because of the palindromic nature of MVM DNA terminal
sequences, NF-Y associated with the three nucleotide configurations corresponding
to the hairpin structure and to the external and internal arms of the extended
duplex replication form, respectively. However, owing to the imperfection of the 
palindrome, the binding of USF was restricted to the internal arm. Point
mutations that suppressed the in vitro binding of NF-Y to the internal
palindromic arm reduced the activity of the resident P4 promoter, while those
preventing complex formation with USF did not, as determined by transient
expression assays using the luciferase reporter gene. The data led to the
identification of a novel P4 upstream regulatory region capable of interacting
with two transcription factors, from which one (NF-Y) appeared to upmodulate the 
activity of the promoter.

PMCID: PMC188569
PMID: 7983715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Genomics. 1995 Jan 1;25(1):36-43.

Structure, sequence, and chromosomal location of the gene for USF2 transcription 
factors in mouse.

Henrion AA(1), Martinez A, Mattei MG, Kahn A, Raymondjean M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Unité 129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The ubiquitously expressed upstream stimulatory factor (USF) involved in the
transcription of a wide variety of cellular genes is defined as dimers of
c-myc-related proteins, composed of a basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
region. The USF family consists of different members that split into two groups: 
MLTF or USF1 and USF2 or FIP. We present here evidence that USF1 and USF2 are
distinct closely related genes in human, rat, and mouse. Based on the recent
cloning of rat and human new cDNAs, we have isolated genomic clones encompassing 
the murine USF2 gene, which consists of at least 10 exons spanning a minimum of
10 kb of genomic DNA. Unexpectedly, the organization of USF2 appears very split
up by introns (0.08 to over 6 kb in size), compared to the myc gene structure.
The entire gene (but the larger intron) and 1.6 kb of the 5' flanking region were
sequenced. This 5' flanking region is GC-rich, contains several putative
transcription binding sites, and has no apparent TATA box. Gene mapping of murine
USF2 and USF1 has been determined by in situ hybridization, indicating the
localization of USF2 on chromosome 7 and of USF1 on chromosomes 1 and 11.

PMID: 7774954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 15;13(24):6031-40.

Differential repression of transcription factor binding by histone H1 is
regulated by the core histone amino termini.

Juan LJ(1), Utley RT, Adams CC, Vettese-Dadey M, Workman JL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation, Pennsylvania State University, University Park
16802-4500.

In order to investigate the interrelated roles of nucleosome cores and histone H1
in transcription repression, we have employed a purified system to analyze the
function of H1 in the repression of transcription factor binding to nucleosomes. 
H1 binding to nucleosome cores resulted in the repression of USF binding to
nucleosomes. By contrast, H1 only slightly inhibited the binding of GAL4-AH,
indicating that H1 differentially represses the binding of factors with different
DNA-binding domains. H1-mediated repression of factor binding was dependent on
the core histone amino-terminal tails. Removal of these domains alleviated
H1-mediated repression and increased acetylation of these domains partly
alleviated repression by H1. H1 binding assays suggest a less stable interaction 
of histone H1 with the core particle in the absence of the amino termini.

PMCID: PMC395580
PMID: 7813441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 2;269(48):30694-700.

Role of the leucine zipper in the kinetics of DNA binding by transcription factor
USF.

Lu T(1), Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

USF is a transcription factor characterized by a helix-loop-helix (HLH)
DNA-binding domain that has been highly conserved through evolution. Vertebrate
USFs contain an additional C-terminal leucine zipper (LZ) immediately adjacent to
the HLH domain. This LZ is essential for efficient DNA binding by human USF.
However, sea urchin has a USF family member that lacks a LZ and yet binds DNA
efficiently. To clarify the role of the LZ in DNA binding by USF, we compared the
properties of human and sea urchin USFs and found that the two proteins
interacted with their specific sites on the DNA with identical affinities but
very different kinetics. Association and dissociation rate constants of sea
urchin USF were about 10-fold those of human USF. Domain-swapping experiments
revealed that the LZ was responsible for the slower kinetics of human USF. USF
heterodimers containing a single LZ displayed rates intermediate between those of
dimers containing either two or no LZ, indicating that zipper-zipper interactions
within USF dimers were not important for DNA binding. Temperature effects on
DNA-binding parameters revealed a very high energy barrier for binding of human
USF to DNA. Presence of a LZ increased the activation energy of the reaction.

PMID: 7982989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8058-70.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor as a regulator for
melanocyte-specific transcription of the human tyrosinase gene.

Yasumoto K(1), Yokoyama K, Shibata K, Tomita Y, Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Molecular Biology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Miyagi, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1833.

Tyrosinase is a rate-limiting enzyme in melanin biosynthesis and is specifically 
expressed in differentiated melanocytes. We have identified the enhancer element 
in the 5'-flanking region of the human tyrosinase gene that is responsible for
its pigment cell-specific transcription and have termed it tyrosinase distal
element (TDE) (positions -1861 to -1842). Transient expression assays showed that
TDE confers efficient expression of a firefly luciferase reporter gene linked to 
the tyrosinase gene promoter in MeWo pigmented melanoma cells but not in HeLa
cells, which do not express tyrosinase. TDE was specifically bound by nuclear
proteins of MeWo and HeLa cells, the binding properties of which were
indistinguishable in gel mobility shift assays. TDE contains the CATGTG motif in 
its center, and mutation analysis indicates that the CA dinucleotides of this
motif are crucial for protein binding and pigment cell-specific enhancer
function. The CATGTG motif is consistent with the consensus sequence recognized
by a large family of transcription factors with a basic helix-loop-helix
structure, which prompted us to examine the possible involvement of a ubiquitous 
transcription factor, USF, and a novel factor, microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor (MITF), recently cloned as the human homolog of the mouse
microphthalmia (mi) gene product. The mi phenotype is associated with a mutant mi
locus and characterized by small eyes and loss of melanin pigments. Both USF and 
MITF are predicted to contain a basic helix-loop-helix structure and a leucine
zipper structure. We provide evidence that USF binds to TDE, whereas we were
unable to detect the DNA-binding activity of MITF. Transient coexpression assays 
showed that MITF specifically transactivates the promoter activity of the
tyrosinase gene through the CATGTG motif of TDE but not the promoter of the
ubiquitously expressed heme oxygenase gene, while USF is able to activate both
promoters. These results indicate that MITF is a cell-type-specific factor that
is capable of activating transcription of the tyrosinase gene.

PMCID: PMC359344
PMID: 7969144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7331-9.

The basic helix-loop-helix protein upstream stimulating factor regulates the
cardiac ventricular myosin light-chain 2 gene via independent cis regulatory
elements.

Navankasattusas S(1), Sawadogo M, van Bilsen M, Dang CV, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Science Program, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla
92093.

Previous studies have documented that 250 bp of the rat cardiac ventricular
myosin light-chain 2 (MLC-2v) promoter is sufficient to confer cardiac
muscle-specific expression on a luciferase reporter gene in both transgenic mice 
and primary cultured neonatal rat myocardial cells. Utilizing ligation-mediated
PCR to perform in vivo dimethyl sulfate footprinting, the present study has
identified protein-DNA interaction within the position from -176 to -165. This
region, identified as MLE1, contains a core sequence, CACGTG, which conforms to
the consensus E-box site and is identical to the upstream stimulating factor
(USF)-binding site of the adenovirus major late promoter. Transient assays of
luciferase reporter genes containing point mutations of the site demonstrate the 
importance of this cis regulatory element in the transcriptional activation of
this cardiac muscle gene in ventricular muscle cells. The protein complex that
occupies this site is capable of binding to HF-1a and PRE B sites which are known
to be required for cardiac muscle-specific expression of rat MLC-2v and
alpha-myosin heavy-chain genes, respectively. This study provides direct evidence
that USF, a member of the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper family, binds to 
MLE1, HF-1a, and PRE B sites and suggests that it is a component of protein
complexes that may coordinately control the expression of MLC-2v and alpha-myosin
heavy-chain genes. The current study also provides evidence that USF can
positively and negatively regulate the MLC-2v gene via independent cis regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC359268
PMID: 7935447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 21;269(42):26525-30.

The helix-loop-helix containing transcription factor USF activates the promoter
of the CD2 gene.

Outram SV(1), Owen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United Kingdom.

T cell development within the thymus involves the ordered expression of a number 
of tissue-specific components such as the CD2 gene. Control of expression of this
gene is regulated by a well characterized 3' enhancer together with a promoter
and upstream elements. The CD2 promoter is typical of a group of T cell-specific 
promoters that lack a TATA box and use multiple sites for initiation of
transcription. An "E box" motif CACGTG, located just upstream from the most 5'
initiation start site, was found to contribute a major effect to the level of
basal transcription of a reporter gene. Analysis of the proteins in T cell
extracts that bound to this site revealed that the bHLH-LZ protein USF was the
major component. A functional role for USF was established in transient
transfection experiments. Thus, this protein restored full promoter activity
following repression caused by cotransfection with the E box binding bHLH-LZ
protein Max. Taken together, these results indicate that an E box motif is
critical to expression of the CD2 gene during T cell development and that the HLH
protein USF acts as a transcriptional activator of the CD2 promoter.

PMID: 7929376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;14(10):6896-906.

The cellular transcription factor USF cooperates with varicella-zoster virus
immediate-early protein 62 to symmetrically activate a bidirectional viral
promoter.

Meier JL(1), Luo X, Sawadogo M, Straus SE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Virology Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The mechanisms governing the function of cellular USF and herpesvirus
immediate-early transcription factors are subjects of considerable interest. In
this regard, we identified a novel form of coordinate gene regulation involving a
cooperative interplay between cellular USF and the varicella-zoster virus
immediate-early protein 62 (IE 62). A single USF-binding site defines the
potential level of IE 62-dependent activation of a bidirectional viral early
promoter of the DNA polymerase and major DNA-binding protein genes. We also
report a dominant negative USF-2 mutant lacking the DNA-binding domain that
permits the delineation of the biological role of both USF-1 and USF-2 in this
activation process. The symmetrical stimulation of the bidirectional viral
promoter by IE 62 is achieved at concentrations of USF-1 (43 kDa) or USF-2 (44
kDa) already existing in cells. Our observations support the notion that cellular
USF can intervene in and possibly target promoters for activation by a
herpesvirus immediate-early protein.

PMCID: PMC359220
PMID: 7935407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):23894-903.

Archaic structure of the gene encoding transcription factor USF.

Lin Q(1), Luo X, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

The upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
that interacts with specific sites on the DNA that are also recognized by the MYC
oncoproteins. We isolated genomic clones to the murine 44-kDa form of USF (USF2
gene). This unique gene spans 13 kilobases of DNA and is composed of 10 exons.
The gene seems to have maintained its archaic structure, since many of the exons 
encode discrete functional domains of the transcription factor originally
identified by protein sequence comparisons. A particularly striking HpaII tiny
fragment island, extending over nearly 2,000 base pairs, surrounds the USF2
translation initiation site. This region, which includes the USF2 promoter and
the first four exons, is characterized by an overall GC content greater than 74%.
Analysis by S1 mapping and transient transfection assays revealed that the USF2
transcripts originate from an initiator element located within a highly GC-rich
region that is surrounded by two long polyadenylate stretches and functions as a 
bidirectional promoter. Different forms of USF2 messages result from the presence
or absence of the fourth exon in the processed USF2 mRNA. Alternative splicing
correlates with the lack of a consensus lariat branch point in the third intron. 
Transient cotransfection assays revealed that the presence or absence of the
amino acid sequences encoded by exon 4 affects considerably the transcription
activation properties of the USF2 protein.

PMID: 7523363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. EMBO J. 1994 Sep 1;13(17):4070-9.

c-Myc represses transcription in vivo by a novel mechanism dependent on the
initiator element and Myc box II.

Li LH(1), Nerlov C, Prendergast G, MacGregor D, Ziff EB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, New York
University Medical Center 10016.

We show that c-Myc, in addition to activating transcription through E-box Myc
binding sites (Ems), also represses transcription by a mechanism dependent on
initiator (Inr) elements of the basal promoters of susceptible genes. Repression 
was first observed as a component of c-Myc biphasic regulation of the
adenovirus-2 major late promoter (MLP), which contains both Inr and Ems
sequences. Two differentiation-specific genes containing Inr, the C/EBP alpha and
albumin genes, are repressed through their basal promoters by c-Myc, but are
activated by the related B-HLH-LZ factor, USF. Repression requires both the
B-HLH-LZ and Myc box II (MBII) domains. Significantly, a MBII deletion mutant
which is deficient in repression, but transactivates normally, fails to cooperate
with an activated ras gene to transform primary fibroblasts. Thus Myc-dependent
transactivation is insufficient for Ras cooperation and the novel transcription
repression function is implicated in Ras cooperation as well as the suppression
of Inr-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC395328
PMID: 8076602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Sep;8(9):1163-74.

Association of USF and c-Myc with a helix-loop-helix-consensus motif in the core 
promoter of the murine type II beta regulatory subunit gene of cyclic adenosine
3', 5'-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase.

Singh IS(1), Luo Z, Kozlowski MT, Erlichman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461.

Previous studies showed that the core promoter of the mouse cAMP-dependent
protein kinase regulatory subunit type II beta (RII beta) gene was composed of
two functional elements. One element was GC rich and bound the Sp1 transcription 
factor. The second element contained a helix-loop-helix (HLH)-motif. Each element
conferred transcriptional activity when inserted upstream of a reporter gene,
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase and transfected into mouse NB2a neuroblastoma
cells and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. The core promoter was further
characterized by mutational analysis using electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
and by transfection into CHO and NB2a cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that the HLH-consensus motif, CACGTG, present in the RII beta gene 
bound nuclear factors present in NB2a and CHO cells. Mutations in the HLH-core
motif decreased the binding of these factors and reduced the transcriptional
activity of constructs containing the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter 
when transfected into these cells. The results showed that the central
nucleotides as well as the adjacent bases were important for the interaction with
the nuclear binding factors. UV cross-linking, Southwestern blot analysis, and
interference of the mobility shift patterns by specific antisera directed against
USF and c-Myc indicated that both of these transcription factors were forming
complexes with the HLH-consensus motif. The results suggest that RII beta
transcription may be regulated, in part, by USF and c-Myc in NB2a and CHO cells.

PMID: 7838149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 1994 Aug 19;269(33):21110-6.

The leucine zipper is necessary for stabilizing a dimer of the helix-loop-helix
transcription factor USF but not for maintenance of an elongated conformation.

Bresnick EH(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor USF43 binds to E box motifs on
certain promoters and enhancers, as well as the beta-globin locus control region.
We have used gel filtration chromatography, velocity centrifugation, and chemical
cross-linking methods to investigate the stoichiometry and shape of USF43 in
solution and when bound to DNA. USF43 has a very large Stokes' radius (44 A) and 
a high frictional ratio (1.64), consistent with an asymmetric elongated oligomer.
Under a variety of conditions, the only detectable USF43 species in solution and 
bound to DNA is a dimer. The carboxyl-terminal leucine zipper is absolutely
essential for a stable dimer but not for the elongated conformation. We used a
protease footprinting assay to demonstrate that, when USF43 binds to DNA, a
approximately 15-kDa USF43 domain becomes resistant to cleavage with trypsin.
This domain includes sequences that are not expected to interact with the DNA
helix, suggesting that trypsin cleavage sites are masked by a conformational
change. Our results show that the oligomerization state of USF43 does not change 
upon binding to DNA, and the helix-loop-helix oligomerization motif of USF43 is
not itself sufficient to form a high affinity dimerization interface.

PMID: 8063730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Aug 2;1218(3):308-14.

Sp1, USF, and GAL4 activate transcription independently of TFIID-downstream
promoter interactions.

Wang JC(1), Van Dyke MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston 77030.

One way specific transcription factors are thought to activate transcription
initiation is by facilitating interactions between the general transcription
factor TFIID and DNA sequences downstream of the TATA element. Examples
supporting this model include transcription activation from the core adenovirus
E4 promoter by either the human gene-specific transcription factor ATF or the
acidic-domain fusion protein GAL4-AH. In these cases, appearance of downstream
promoter binding by TFIID correlated directly with transcription activation by
these proteins. Previously we had shown that downstream promoter binding by TFIID
involved recognition of the initiator DNA control element and that the extent of 
this binding correlated directly with initiator-dependent transcription
activation in vitro. We now report our use of DNase I footprinting and in vitro
transcription to investigate the effects of various stimulatory transcription
factors on TFIID binding and transcription efficiency from different
initiator-containing promoters. Transcription factors investigated included Sp1, 
USF, and several GAL4-acidic domain fusion proteins. We found that none of these 
transcription factors appreciably affected downstream promoter binding by TFIID, 
whether qualitatively or quantitatively. In fact, all of these transcription
factors stimulated transcription in vitro regardless of the strength of the
initiator element present. When both elements were present, transcription
stimulation mediated by proximally bound transcription factors and by
TFIID-initiator interaction seemed to be synergistic. Taken together, our data
would suggest that transcription activation by these two means occurs through
different steps within the transcriptional process.

PMID: 8049256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Jul 25;22(14):2801-10.

Base preferences for DNA binding by the bHLH-Zip protein USF: effects of MgCl2 on
specificity and comparison with binding of Myc family members.

Bendall AJ(1), Molloy PL.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Division of Biomolecular Engineering, North Ryde, NSW, Australia.

Studies of the DNA binding specificity of transcription factors belonging to the 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family have identified the so-called E-box, CACGTG,
as being a high affinity specific binding sequence for this class of DNA binding 
proteins. Binding sequences for HeLa USF were selected from an initially random
population of 20 bp sequences, defining the optimum USF binding sequence as
R-5Y-4C-3A-2C-1G+1T+2G+3R+4Y+5. The significance of the flanking bases was
further demonstrated by showing that USF and the related proteins c-Myc and Max
discriminate between CACGTG-type E-boxes and that the primary means of
discrimination appears to be the identity of the nucleotide at +/- 4, the
presence of a T at -4 being inhibitory to binding by Myc but not by USF or Max.
This suggests one mechanism by which bHLH factors are partitioned between
multiple potential binding sequences in the promoters and enhancers of viral and 
cellular genes. It was also demonstrated that MgCl2 has a significant influence
on USF DNA binding specificity. A broader range of USF binding sites was selected
in the absence of MgCl2, conforming to the altered half-site consensus gTGaY.
Binding studies with specific oligonucleotides demonstrated significantly
improved tolerance to sequence variation at positions 1, 4, and to a lesser
extent 5, of the GTGRY consensus in the absence of MgCl2. The results indicate
that Mg2+ ions have an integral role in the formation of the USF-DNA complex.

PMCID: PMC308250
PMID: 8052536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Jul 15;223(2):529-41.

Transcriptional control of the human biliary glycoprotein gene, a CEA gene family
member down-regulated in colorectal carcinomas.

Hauck W(1), Nédellec P, Turbide C, Stanners CP, Barnett TR, Beauchemin N.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Biliary glycoprotein (BGP) isoantigens are derived by alternative splicing from a
single gene and are the human homologs of rat C-CAM and the mouse Bgp species.
These glycoproteins represent a family of cell-adhesion molecules. The mouse Bgp 
isoforms also act as receptors for the hepatitis viral capsid-protein. BGP is a
member of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family, which belongs to the
immunoglobulin supergene family, yet it displays restricted expression patterns
and unique functions. Since the loss or reduced expression of BGP is associated
with human colorectal carcinomas, the elements in its upstream regulatory region 
were analyzed. A cluster of transcriptional initiation sites and the minimal
promoter, located within 150 bp upstream of the major transcriptional start site,
were active in human colon carcinoma and hepatoma cells. Unlike the CEA gene, BGP
gene transcription was not modulated by a silencer region; repetitive elements in
the BGP upstream region were not involved in activation or repression.
Footprinting experiments identified two cis-acting elements and mobility-shift
assays demonstrated that these elements bound several transcription factors,
among them, USF, HNF-4 and an AP-2-like factor. In cotransfection experiments,
both the USF and HNF-4 transcription factors transactivate the BGP gene promoter 
and compete for the same regulatory element. The Sp1 transcription factor, shown 
to be involved in CEA gene transcriptional regulation, does not bind to the BGP
gene promoter. We, therefore, propose that the relative distributions and
interactions of these transcription factors mediate distinct transcriptional
regulation of the BGP gene in colon and liver; this regulation could be distorted
during the oncogenic process.

PMID: 8055923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 25;22(6):1006-11.

Multiple elements in human beta-globin locus control region 5' HS 2 are involved 
in enhancer activity and position-independent, transgene expression.

Caterina JJ(1), Ciavatta DJ, Donze D, Behringer RR, Townes TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294.

The human beta-globin Locus Control Region (LCR) has two important activities.
First, the LCR opens a 200 kb chromosomal domain containing the human epsilon-,
gamma- and beta-globin genes and, secondly, these sequences function as a
powerful enhancer of epsilon-, gamma- and beta-globin gene expression.
Erythroid-specific, DNase I hypersensitive sites (HS) mark sequences that are
critical for LCR activity. Previous experiments demonstrated that a 1.9 kb
fragment containing the 5' HS 2 site confers position-independent expression in
transgenic mice and enhances human beta-globin gene expression 100-fold. Further 
analysis of this region demonstrates that multiple sequences are required for
maximal enhancer activity; deletion of SP1, NF-E2, GATA-1 or USF binding sites
significantly decrease beta-globin gene expression. In contrast, no single site
is required for position-independent transgene expression; all mice with
site-specific mutations in 5' HS 2 express human beta-globin mRNA regardless of
the site of transgene integration. Apparently, multiple combinations of protein
binding sites in 5' HS 2 are sufficient to prevent chromosomal position effects
that inhibit transgene expression.

PMCID: PMC307922
PMID: 8152905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Feb 11;22(3):427-33.

Ubiquitous expression of the 43- and 44-kDa forms of transcription factor USF in 
mammalian cells.

Sirito M(1), Lin Q, Maity T, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

USF is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor that, like Myc, recognizes the DNA
binding motif CACGTG. Two different forms of USF, characterized by apparent
molecular weights of 43,000 and 44,000, were originally identified in HeLa cells 
by biochemical analysis. Clones for the 43-kDa USF were first characterized, but 
only partial clones for the human 44-kDa USF (USF2, or FIP) have been reported.
Here we describe a complete cDNA for the 44-kDa USF from murine cells. Analysis
of this clone has revealed that the various USF family members are quite
divergent in their N-terminal amino acid sequences, while a high degree of
conservation characterizes their dimerization and DNA-binding domains.
Interestingly, the 3' noncoding region of the 44-kDa USF cDNAs displayed an
unusual degree of conservation between human and mouse. In vitro
transcription/translation experiments indicated a possible role for this region
in translation regulation. Alternative splicing forms of the 44-kDa USF messages 
exist in both mouse and human. Examination of the tissue and cell-type
distribution of USF by Northern blot and gel retardation assays revealed that
while expression of both the 43- and 44-kDa USF species is ubiquitous, different 
ratios of USF homo- and heterodimers are found in different cells.

PMCID: PMC523599
PMID: 8127680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. EMBO J. 1994 Jan 1;13(1):180-9.

Structure and function of the b/HLH/Z domain of USF.

Ferré-D'Amaré AR(1), Pognonec P, Roeder RG, Burley SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

The basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (b/HLH/Z) transcription factor upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) and its isolated DNA binding domain undergo a random
coil to alpha-helix folding transition on recognizing their cognate DNA. The USF 
b/HLH cocrystal structure resembles the structure of the b/HLH/Z domain of the
homologous protein Max and reveals (i) that the truncated, b/HLH DNA binding
domain homodimerizes, forming a parallel, left-handed four-helix bundle, and (ii)
that the basic region becomes alpha-helical on binding to the major groove of the
DNA sequence CACGTG. Hydrodynamic measurements show that the b/HLH/Z DNA binding 
domain of USF exists as a bivalent homotetramer. This tetramer forms at the USF
physiological intranuclear concentration, and depends on the integrity of the
leucine zipper motif. The ability to bind simultaneously to two independent sites
suggests a role in DNA looping for the b/HLH/Z and Myc-related families of
eukaryotic transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC394791
PMID: 8306960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7725-33.

Functional characterization of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene glucose response
complex.

Diaz Guerra MJ(1), Bergot MO, Martinez A, Cuif MH, Kahn A, Raymondjean M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherches en Génétique et Pathologie Moléculaire, Institut
Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U-129, CHU Cochin, Paris, France.

L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene expression is modulated by hormonal and
nutritional conditions. We have previously shown that the glucose/insulin
response element (GlRE) of the L-PK gene is built around two noncanonical E boxes
(element L4) that cooperate closely with a contiguous binding site (element L3). 
We present in this report the identification of proteins that interact with both 
elements. The L3 site binds hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4)- and
COUP/TF-related proteins. In fibroblasts, the overexpression of HNF4
transactivates the L-PK promoter. On the contrary, COUP/TF strongly inhibits the 
active promoter in hepatocytes. The L4 site binds the major late transcription
factor (MLTF) in vitro and ex vivo; mutations that suppress this binding activity
also inactivated the GlRE function. Mutations transforming one or two
noncanonical E boxes of element L4 into consensus MLTF/USF binding sites strongly
increase the affinity for MLTF/USF and do not impair the glucose responsiveness. 
However, merely the ability to bind MLTF/USF does not seem to be sufficient to
confer a GlRE activity: those elements in which one E box has been destroyed and 
the other has been transformed into a consensus MLTF/USF sequence bind MLTF/USF
efficiently but do not confer a high glucose responsiveness on the L-PK gene
promoter. Consequently, the full activity of the L-PK GlRE seems to require the
cooperation between two putative MLTF/USF binding sites located in the vicinity
of an HNF4 binding site.

PMCID: PMC364844
PMID: 8246989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Nov 11;21(22):5092-100.

Specific cleavage of transcription factors by the thiol protease, m-calpain.

Watt F(1), Molloy PL.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Division of Biomolecular Engineering, Sydney Laboratory, North Ryde,
NSW, Australia.

The intracellular nonlysosomal calcium-dependent cysteine protease, m-calpain, is
shown to specifically cleave the bHLHzip transcription factor USF leaving the
binding and dimerisation domains intact. The resultant protein is capable of
efficient DNA binding but is no longer able to activate transcription. A
surprisingly high proportion of other transcription factors tested, AP1
(c-Fos/c-Jun), Pit-1, Oct-1, CP1a and b, c-Myc, ATF/CREB, AP2 and AP3 but not
Sp1, were similarly cleaved by m-calpain to produce specific partial digestion
products. These properties make m-calpain a particularly useful protease for
proteolytic studies of transcription factors and also raise the possibility that 
m-calpain may be involved in vivo in regulation of turnover or transcriptional
activity of a number of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC310622
PMID: 8255762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem J. 1993 Oct 1;295 ( Pt 1):233-7.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factor USF (upstream stimulating factor) binds
to a regulatory sequence of the human insulin gene enhancer.

Read ML(1), Clark AR, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital,
U.K.

Two important sequence elements, designated insulin enhancer binding site 1
(IEB1) or NIR and IEB2 or FAR, are involved in regulating expression of the rat
insulin I gene. These elements bind a helix-loop-helix transcription factor,
insulin enhancer factor 1 (IEF1). The IEB1 site is highly conserved among insulin
genes but the IEB2 site is not conserved. To investigate the factors binding at
the equivalent IEB1 and IEB2 sites in the human insulin gene enhancer,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed using a variety of cell
extracts and probes specific for the homologous IEB1 and IEB2 sites. The results 
indicate that a factor with similar tissue distribution and binding
characteristics to those of IEF1 binds to the IEB1 site in the human insulin
gene, but that a separate factor, identified as the adenovirus major late
transcription factor [MLTF, or upstream stimulating factor (USF)] binds to the
IEB2 site.

PMCID: PMC1134844
PMID: 8216223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 1993 Sep 5;268(25):18824-34.

Evidence that the transcription factor USF is a component of the human
beta-globin locus control region heteromeric protein complex.

Bresnick EH(1), Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institutes of Health, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

The human locus control region (LCR) consists of four DNase I hypersensitive
sites upstream of the epsilon-globin gene and is intimately involved in globin
gene transcription. We have used DNase I footprinting with K562 erythroleukemia
cell extracts to identify protein components of the minimal LCR element,
hypersensitive site 2. Six major regions of protection were observed, and the
occupation of two regions (sites II and V) was strongly temperature-dependent.
Fractionation of K562 nuclear proteins revealed a single major protein that bound
tightly to site II. An E-box was necessary for high affinity binding to DNA. We
used antibodies and recombinant USF protein to prove that the helix-loop-helix
transcription factor USF is the only detectable component in K562 cells that
binds to this site. Despite significant differences between site II and a
canonical USF-binding site, the USF binding affinity was comparable for the two
sites. In both cases the interaction with the E-box of either wild-type USF or a 
approximately 15-kDa minimal USF DNA binding polypeptide displays an unusual
positive temperature dependence, consistent with the observed footprinting
behavior. The results show that a relatively ubiquitous factor, not confined to
erythroid cells, is an important part of the complex of proteins bound at
hypersensitive site 2 of the LCR in K562 cells.

PMID: 8360172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 1993 Aug 15;268(23):17554-8.

Identification of TFIID components required for transcriptional activation by
upstream stimulatory factor.

Kokubo T(1), Takada R, Yamashita S, Gong DW, Roeder RG, Horikoshi M, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

A TATA box-binding initiation factor, TFIID, plays a central role in the
transcriptional regulation by activators. Using anti-TFIID tau (a TATA
box-binding component of native TFIID) immunoaffinity chromatography, nine
polypeptides (230, 110, 85, 62, 58, 42, 28, 22, and 21 kDa) were identified as
native Drosophila TFIID components that are tightly associated with TFIID tau. To
verify the functional activity of the purified TFIID complex, template DNA and
other transcription factors were reconstituted with purified TFIID bound to the
antibody-Sepharose matrix. Immobilized TFIID mediated not only basal
transcription but transcriptional activation by upstream stimulatory factor
(USF). On the other hand, recombinant TFIID tau immobilized on the same
antibody-Sepharose matrix could not mediate activation by USF. These results
suggest that one or more of these additional polypeptides are required as
functional TFIID subunits for activator-dependent transcription in conjunction
with TFIID tau. As further evidence of the relevance of the Drosophila TFIID
components identified in this analysis, including the previously unrecognized
p230 (Dynlacht, B. D., Hoey, T., and Tjian, R. (1991) Cell 66, 563-576), protein 
blot analysis showed that TFIID tau interacts specifically and exclusively with
p230. This suggests that p230 is an integral subunit of TFIID and that it may
play a major role in tethering other subunits to TFIID tau.

PMID: 8349634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jul 11;21(14):3257-63.

Interactions of USF and Ku antigen with a human DNA region containing a
replication origin.

Tóth EC(1), Marusic L, Ochem A, Patthy A, Pongor S, Giacca M, Falaschi A.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), AREA
Science Park, Trieste, Italy.

By means of a combination of ion-exchange and sequence-specific affinity
chromatography techniques, we have purified to homogeneity two protein complexes 
binding in a human DNA region (B48) previously recognized to contain a DNA
replication origin. The DNA sequence used for the protein purification (B48
binding site) contains a binding site for basic-helix-loop-helix DNA binding
proteins. The first complex is composed of two polypeptides of 42- and 44-kDa;
its size, heat stability, and target DNA sequence suggest that it corresponds to 
transcription factor USF; furthermore, the 42-kDa polypeptide is recognized by
antibodies raised against 43-kDa-USF. The second complex is represented by
equimolar amounts of two proteins of 72 and 87 kDa; microsequencing of the two
species indicated that they correspond to the human Ku antigen. In analogy with
Ku, they produce a regular pattern of footprints without an apparent
sequence-specificity, and their binding can be competed by unspecific DNA
provided that it contains free ends. The potential role of B48 binding site and
of these cognate proteins in origin activation is discussed.

PMCID: PMC309764
PMID: 8341600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Apr 25;21(8):1735-42.

High level activity of the mouse CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP alpha)
gene promoter involves autoregulation and several ubiquitous transcription
factors.

Legraverend C(1), Antonson P, Flodby P, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Huddinge,
Sweden.

The promoter region of the mouse CCAAT-Enhancer Binding Protein (C/EBP alpha)
gene is capable of directing high levels of expression of reporter constructs in 
various cell lines, albeit even in cells that do not express their endogenous
C/EBP alpha gene. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying this
ubiquitous expression, we have characterized the promoter region of the mouse
C/EBP alpha gene by a variety of in vitro and in vivo methods. We show that three
sites related in sequence to USF, BTE and C/EBP binding sites and present in
promoter region -350/+3, are recognized by proteins from rat liver nuclear
extracts. The sequence of the C/EBP alpha promoter that includes the USF binding 
site is also capable of forming stable complexes with purified Myc+Max
heterodimers and mutation of this site drastically reduces transcription of C/EBP
alpha promoter luciferase constructs both in liver and non liver cell lines. In
addition, we identify three novel protein-binding sites two of which display
similarity to NF-1 and a NF kappa B binding sites. The region located between
nucleotides -197 and -178 forms several heat-stable complexes with liver nuclear 
proteins in vitro which are recognized mainly by antibodies specific for C/EBP
alpha. Furthermore, transient expression of C/EBP alpha and to a lesser extent
C/EBP beta expression vectors, results in transactivation of a cotransfected
C/EBP alpha promoter-luciferase reporter construct. These experiments support the
notion that the C/EBP alpha gene is regulated by C/EBP alpha but other
C/EBP-related proteins may also be involved.

PMCID: PMC309408
PMID: 8493090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genomics. 1993 Apr;16(1):266-8.

Localization of the gene-encoding upstream stimulatory factor (USF) to human
chromosome 1q22-q23.

Shieh BH(1), Sparkes RS, Gaynor RB, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The upstream stimulatory factor, USF, is a ubiquitously expressed cellular
transcription factor that binds to a symmetrical DNA sequence that is found in a 
variety of viral and cellular promoters. A full-length cDNA encoding the 43-kDa
USF protein has previously been isolated. USF contains both helix-loop-helix and 
leucine repeats, which are involved in regulating its DNA binding and
dimerization properties. We report the use of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids
and in situ hybridization in localizing the gene-encoding USF to human chromosome
1q22-q23.

PMID: 8486371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Mar 11;21(5):1103-9.

Ultraviolet A (320-380 nm) radiation causes an alteration in the binding of a
specific protein/protein complex to a short region of the promoter of the human
heme oxygenase 1 gene.

Nascimento AL(1), Luscher P, Tyrrell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Research, Epalinges.

Ultraviolet A (320-380 nm) radiation strongly stimulates expression of the human 
heme oxygenase 1 gene as a consequence of an enhancement in transcription rate
(1). We have used a 147 bp fragment of the promoter of this gene as a probe for
DNA binding activity in nuclear extracts prepared from untreated and UVA treated 
populations of cultured human skin fibroblasts. Analysis using gel
electrophoresis mobility shift assays clearly demonstrates the appearance of a
strong binding activity unique to UVA-treated extracts that is formed in the
absence of de novo protein synthesis. Footprint analysis defines a binding region
from -41 to -50 bp that partially overlaps with a region known to constitutively 
bind upstream stimulatory factor (USF). Further analysis using synthetic
oligonucleotides and gel retardation has confirmed that the crucial sequence for 
binding the protein present in both control and UVA-treated extracts lies within 
a 26 bp sequence that includes the core USF binding site. UVA radiation appears
to lead to a modification of the USF complex (or closely related proteins(s)) to 
give a structurally modified protein/protein complex which protects only the
upstream half of a region originally defined by foot-printing of the promoter
with USF.

PMCID: PMC309269
PMID: 7840819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 25;21(4):977-85.

IGH minisatellite suppression of USF-binding-site- and E mu-mediated
transcriptional activation of the adenovirus major late promoter.

Trepicchio WL(1), Krontiris TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), New England Medical Center
Hospitals, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111.

The 50bp repeat unit of the minisatellite within the DH-JH interval of the human 
immunoglobulin heavy chain locus binds a nuclear factor present in a wide variety
of cell types. The binding site contains the myc/HLH motif, CACGTG, and
represents a 15 of 17 base match for the USF/MLTF binding site adjacent to the
adenovirus major late promoter (MLP). Unlike the USF/MLTF site, the IGH
minisatellite possesses no enhancer activity. However, it can significantly
suppress, in cis and in trans, USF-site-mediated transcriptional activation of
the MLP. In murine myeloma cells, the IGH minisatellite can suppress, in trans,
MLP activation by the murine heavy chain gene enhancer, E mu. These activities
potentially represent a DNA-based form of squelching.

PMCID: PMC309232
PMID: 8451197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. EMBO J. 1993 Feb;12(2):501-11.

Human transcription factor USF stimulates transcription through the initiator
elements of the HIV-1 and the Ad-ML promoters.

Du H(1), Roy AL, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10021.

Earlier in vitro studies identified USF as a cellular factor which activates the 
adenovirus major late (Ad-ML) promoter by binding to an E-box motif located at
position -60 with respect to the cap site. Purified USF contains 44 and 43 kDa
polypeptides, and the latter was found (by cDNA cloning) to be a helix-loop-helix
protein. In this report, we demonstrate a 25-to 30-fold stimulation of
transcription via an upstream binding site by ectopic expression of the 43 kDa
form of USF (USF43) in transient transfection assays. More recent data have also 
revealed alternate interactions of USF43 at pyrimidine-rich (consensus YYAYTCYY) 
initiator (Inr) elements present in a variety of core promoters. In agreement
with this observation, we show here that USF43 can recognize the initiator
elements of the HIV-1 promoter, as well as those in the Ad-ML promoter, and that 
ectopic expression of USF43 can stimulate markedly the corresponding core
promoters (TATA and initiator elements) when analyzed in transient
co-transfection assays. Mutations in either Inr 1 or Inr 2 reduced the
USF43-dependent transcription activity in vivo. In addition, in vitro
transcription assays showed that mutations in either or both of the Inr 1 and Inr
2 sequences of the HIV-1 and Ad-ML promoters could affect transcription
efficiency, but not the position of the transcriptional start site. These results
indicate that USF43 can stimulate transcription through initiator elements in two
viral promoters, although the exact mechanism and physiological significance of
this effect remain unclear.

PMCID: PMC413233
PMID: 8440240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jan 25;21(2):345-50.

The helix-loop-helix containing transcription factor USF binds to and
transactivates the promoter of the p53 tumor suppressor gene.

Reisman D(1), Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia
29208.

Expression of the wild-type p53 tumor suppressor gene has been found to play an
important role in the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation.
In addition, in many transformed cells and primary tumors, the gene has undergone
allelic deletions and mutant forms of the p53 gene are expressed at elevated
levels. In defining transcriptional regulatory regions of the p53 gene, we have
previously shown that both the human and murine p53 promoters contain a conserved
consensus recognition sequence for the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) containing
family of DNA-binding proteins. In the murine p53 promoter this element is
required for full promoter activity and contains the sequence CACGTG, a sequence 
identical to the recognition site for the bHLH containing transcription factors
c-Myc, USF and TFE3. Here we examine the ability of one of these factors, USF, to
bind to the p53 promoter. By assaying the binding activity of in vitro translated
USF as well as factors present in nuclear extracts, we conclude that the
transcription factor USF binds in a site-specific manner to a CACGTG motif within
the murine p53 promoter and represents the major DNA-binding activity observed in
nuclear extracts. Elevated levels of USF, generated upon transfection of a vector
expressing USF, lead to enhanced activity of the p53 promoter. These findings
indicate that USF may play a central role in regulating p53 expression.

PMCID: PMC309112
PMID: 8441640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Nov;12(11):5094-101.

Definition of the transcriptional activation domain of recombinant 43-kilodalton 
USF.

Kirschbaum BJ(1), Pognonec P, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021-6399.

The cellular transcription factor USF is involved in the regulation of both
cellular and viral genes and consists of 43- and 44-kDa polypeptides which
independently show site-specific DNA binding. Cloning of the corresponding cDNA
revealed that the 43-kDa polypeptide (USF43) is a member of the basic
(B)-helix-loop-helix (HLH)-leucine zipper (LZ) family of proteins and provided a 
means for its functional dissection. Initial structure-function studies revealed 
that the HLH and LZ regions are both important for USF43 oligomerization and DNA 
binding. The studies presented here have focused on the determination of domains 
that contribute to transcriptional activation in vitro and show that (i) both a
small region close to the N terminus and a region between residues 93 and 156
contribute strongly to transcriptional activation, (ii) full activation depends
on the presence of both domains, (iii) the B-HLH-LZ region has no intrinsic
activation potential but DNA binding is absolutely required for transcriptional
activation, and (iv) the B-HLH-LZ region can be replaced by the Gal4 DNA binding 
domain without loss of activation potential.

PMCID: PMC360443
PMID: 1406684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Oct 11;20(19):5143-8.

Adenovirus DNA replication facilitates binding of the MLTF/USF transcription
factor to the viral major late promoter within infected cells.

Toth M(1), Doerfler W, Shenk T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton
University, NJ 08544-1014.

The activity of the adenovirus major late promoter is substantially increased as 
the infection proceeds from the early to late phase. To gain insight into the
regulation of this promoter, we analyzed protein-DNA interactions by in vivo DMS 
and DNasel footprinting during the course of adenovirus infection. Little or no
protein interaction at promoter sequences was detected early (5 hr) after
infection but strong interactions at the major late transcription factor
(MLTF/USF) binding site and at the TATA box were evident late (12 hr) after
infection. Comparison of in vivo and in vitro footprints revealed that the in
vivo interaction late after infection results from binding of the cellular
transcription factor MLTF/USF. Nuclear extracts prepared from uninfected cells as
well as cells harvested at 5 and 12 hr after infection contained similar levels
of MLTF/USF footprint activity, therefore the lack of a detectable interaction
early after infection is not due to reduced levels of the factor early in the
viral growth cycle. Viral DNA replication was required for MLTF/USF binding at
the major late promoter. These results indicate that DNA replication participates
in the regulation of adenovirus late gene expression by facilitating the binding 
of a transcription factor to the major late promoter.

PMCID: PMC334297
PMID: 1408829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Apr;12(4):1846-55.

Transforming growth factor beta 1-responsive element: closely associated binding 
sites for USF and CCAAT-binding transcription factor-nuclear factor I in the type
1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene.

Riccio A(1), Pedone PV, Lund LR, Olesen T, Olsen HS, Andreasen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, University of Naples, Italy.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) is the name of a group of closely
related polypeptides characterized by a multiplicity of effects, including
regulation of extracellular proteolysis and turnover of the extracellular matrix.
Its cellular mechanism of action is largely unknown. TGF-beta 1 is a strong and
fast inducer of type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene transcription. We
have identified a TGF-beta 1-responsive element in the 5'-flanking region of the 
human type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene and shown that it is functional
both in its natural context and when fused to a heterologous nonresponsive
promoter. Footprinting and gel retardation experiments showed that two different 
nuclear factors, present in extracts from both TGF-beta 1-treated and nontreated 
cells, bind to adjacent sequences contained in the responsive unit. A palindromic
sequence binds a trans-acting factor(s) of the CCAAT-binding transcription
factor-nuclear factor I family. A partially overlapping dyad symmetry interacts
with a second protein that much evidence indicates to be USF. USF is a
transactivator belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors. Mutations which abolish the binding of either CCAAT-binding
transcription factor-nuclear factor I or USF result in reduction of
transcriptional activation upon exposure to TGF-beta 1, thus showing that both
elements of the unit are necessary for the TGF-beta 1 response. We discuss the
possible relationship of these findings to the complexity of the TGF-beta action.

PMCID: PMC369628
PMID: 1549130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jan 25;20(2):287-93.

Identification of USF as the ubiquitous murine factor that binds to and
stimulates transcription from the immunoglobulin lambda 2-chain promoter.

Chang LA(1), Smith T, Pognonec P, Roeder RG, Murialdo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

To study the specificity and identity of NF-lambda 2, a ubiquitous murine nuclear
factor that interacts specifically with the promoter of the lambda 2-chain gene
and stimulates its transcription, competition experiments were carried out using 
DNA fragments from various immunoglobulin regulatory elements. The results showed
that a fragment containing the H-chain enhancer competed efficiently for the
binding of NF-lambda 2. Dissection of the H-chain enhancer revealed that the
microE3 motif contributed the competing ability. Additionally, a regulatory
region found in the adenovirus major late promoter, which interacts with the
human general transcription factor USF, competed very efficiently for binding to 
NF-lambda 2. This region contains a sequence, CACGTGAC, which is identical to a
region within the NF-lambda 2 motif. The pattern of complexes formation using
oligonucleotide probes corresponding to the NF-lambda 2 and USF motifs were
identical, and they both differed from that displayed by the E3 probes. Antisera 
against different domains of USF also react specifically with NF-lambda 2 showing
that this factor is antigenically related, if not identical, to USF. Furthermore,
the activity of the lambda 2 promoter in an in vitro transcription assay was
significantly reduced when the nuclear extract used was USF-depleted. Addition of
exogenous USF to this extract restored the transcription activity. Therefore, we 
conclude that NF-lambda 2 is the murine homologue of USF.

PMCID: PMC310368
PMID: 1741254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Virology. 1992 Jan;186(1):133-47.

A human binding site for transcription factor USF/MLTF mimics the negative
regulatory element of human immunodeficiency virus type 1.

Giacca M(1), Gutierrez MI, Menzo S, d'Adda di Fagagna F, Falaschi A.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Trieste,
Italy.

Transcriptional regulation of the proviral form of the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) is exerted by its 5' long terminal repeat (LTR), which
contains recognition sites for several cell factors. By gel retardation and DNase
I footprinting experiments we have identified a binding site for a human nuclear 
protein between nucleotides -152 to -174 upstream of transcription start site, in
a region previously recognized as a negative regulator of transcription (negative
regulatory element, NRE). The recognized sequence contains the dyad symmetry
element CACGTG, which represents a binding motif, very conserved through
evolution, present in a putative human DNA replication origin (pB48), in the
upstream element of the major late promoter (MLP-UE) of adenovirus, and, as
transcriptional element, upstream of many eukaryotic genes. Common binding
activities exist in human nuclear extracts for pB48, MLP-UE and the HIV-1 LTR; at
least three protein species recognize the LTR sequence, of 44 (corresponding to
transcription factor USF/MLTF), 70, and 110 kDa, respectively. Chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assays suggest that the USF/MLTF binding site located in the
HIV-1 LTR acts as a negative regulator of transcription, and that it contributes 
to the overall negative function exerted by the NRE. An oligonucleotide
corresponding to another characterized human USF/MLTF binding site can
functionally replace part of the activity of the NRE. This negative function is
exerted both in presence or absence of tat transactivation, in different cell
lines, and after PMA stimulation.

PMID: 1727595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gene Expr. 1992;2(3):231-40.

Members of the USF family of helix-loop-helix proteins bind DNA as homo- as well 
as heterodimers.

Sirito M(1), Walker S, Lin Q, Kozlowski MT, Klein WH, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

We have isolated human cDNA clones for USF2, a new member of the upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) family of transcription factors. Analysis of these
clones revealed the existence of highly conserved elements in the C terminal
region of all USF proteins. These include the basic region, helix-loop-helix
(HLH) motif, and, in the case of the human proteins, the C-terminal leucine
repeat (LR). In addition, a highly conserved USF-specific domain is located
immediately upstream of the basic region. Using in vitro translated proteins, we 
found that all members of the USF family bound DNA as dimers. The N-terminal
portion of USF, including the USF-specific domain, was entirely dispensable for
dimer formation and DNA-binding. However, deletion mutants of USF2 lacking the LR
were deficient in DNA-binding activity. Interestingly, each of the USF proteins
could form functional heterodimers with the other family members, including the
sea urchin USF, which does not have a LR motif. This indicates that the conserved
LR in human USF is not required for dimer formation, and influences only
indirectly DNA-binding.

PMID: 1450663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nature. 1991 Nov 21;354(6350):245-8.

Cooperative interaction of an initiator-binding transcription initiation factor
and the helix-loop-helix activator USF.

Roy AL(1), Meisterernst M, Pognonec P, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021.

Transcription initiation by mammalian RNA polymerase II is effected by multiple
common factors interacting through minimal promoter elements and regulated by
gene-specific factors interacting with distal control elements. Minimal promoter 
elements that can function independently or together, depending on the specific
promoter, include the upstream TATA box and a pyrimidine-rich initiator (Inr)
overlapping the transcription start site. The binding of TFIID to the TATA
element promotes the assembly of other factors into a preinitiation complex but
factors which function at the Inr have not been defined. We show here that a
novel factor (TFII-I) binds specifically to Inr elements, supports basal
transcription from the adenovirus major late promoter and is immunologically
related to the helix-loop-helix activator USF. We further show that TFII-I also
binds to the upstream high-affinity USF site (E box), that USF also binds to the 
Inr, and that TFII-I and USF interact cooperatively at both Inr and E box sites. 
Thus, TFII-I represents a novel type of transcription initiation factor whose
interactions at multiple promoter elements may aid novel communication mechanisms
between upstream regulatory factors and the general transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 1961251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Oct;11(10):5125-36.

Recombinant 43-kDa USF binds to DNA and activates transcription in a manner
indistinguishable from that of natural 43/44-kDa USF.

Pognonec P(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021-6399.

USF is a cellular factor involved in the transcriptional regulation of several
cellular and viral promoters. Purified USF from HeLa cells (HeLa USF) consists of
43- and 44-kDa polypeptides which show independent binding to a specific DNA
element. A cDNA encoding the 43-kDa species has been previously cloned. We show
here that the purified form of bacterially expressed 43-kDa USF (i) exists in
solution as a dimer whose formation is greatly favored under reducing conditions,
(ii) binds to its cognate DNA sequence in a manner indistinguishable from that of
HeLa USF, and (iii) is as efficient as HeLa USF in stimulating transcription from
target promoters in a reconstituted cell-free system. Additional data indicate
that the 44-kDa component of HeLa USF is immunologically unrelated to the 43-kDa 
polypeptide but is associated with it in HeLa cell extracts. These results
suggest that the 43-kDa component possesses an intrinsic DNA binding and
transcriptional activation potential and that the 44-kDa USF component of the
natural USF complex may have some regulatory role.

PMCID: PMC361528
PMID: 1922036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 15;266(23):15457-63.

The upstream stimulatory factor binds to and activates the promoter of the rat
class I alcohol dehydrogenase gene.

Potter JJ(1), Cheneval D, Dang CV, Resar LM, Mezey E, Yang VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

The gene encoding rat class I alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) is expressed primarily 
in the liver. Recent studies in our laboratories indicate that multiple cellular 
factors present in the rat liver interact with various regions of the promoter of
this gene. One of the regions contains the sequence 5'-CACATG-3' that has an "E
box" homology to which a number of transcription factors containing the basic
helix-loop-helix motif bind. We now demonstrate that the human transcription
factor, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), a basic helix-loop-helix-containing
protein, binds to and activates the promoter of the rat class I ADH gene.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays of labeled oligonucleotide containing the
5'-CACATG-3' sequence within the ADH promoter revealed the formation of multiple 
DNA-protein complexes when nuclear extracts obtained from adult rat liver were
used. The binding of proteins to the DNA could be competed away with an
oligonucleotide specifying a sequence within the adenovirus major late promoter
(MLP) that had previously been shown to bind USF. Similar complexes were observed
when electrophoretic mobility shift assays of labeled MLP oligonucleotide were
performed with rat liver nuclear extracts. Conversely, nuclear extracts isolated 
from HeLa cells, cells known to have abundant USF, contain factors that interact 
with the sequence present in the ADH promoter. This interaction could be competed
efficiently by the MLP oligonucleotide. USF synthesized in an in vitro
transcription and translation system also binds to the ADH promoter as well as to
the MLP. In addition, antiserum directed against USF recognizes factors present
in the rat liver nuclear extracts that interact with the ADH promoter.
Furthermore, transcription directed from both the ADH and the adenovirus major
late promoters was inhibited by an oligonucleotide representing the USF-binding
site within the ADH promoter in a cell-free in vitro transcription system.
Lastly, an ADH promoter-reporter gene construct was transactivated by an
eukaryotic expression vector containing USF in HepG2 cells co-transfected with
the two constructs. These experiments demonstrate that USF is present in the rat 
liver and that it binds to and activates the promoter of the rat class I ADH gene
in a sequence-specific manner.

PMID: 1869565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mech Dev. 1991 Mar;33(3):179-90.

Characterization of the murine Hox-2.3 promoter: involvement of the transcription
factor USF (MLTF).

Zwartkruis F(1), Hoeijmakers T, Deschamps J, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology Utrecht.

The murine homeobox-containing gene Hox-2.3 contains a basal promoter in a 210-bp
region upstream of the transcription start site. In vitro studies of DNA-protein 
interactions in this region, and in a 1.3-kb upstream region which is known to
play a role in tissue specific expression in vivo, led to the identification of
DNA elements interacting with nuclear proteins from embryocarcinoma cells. Among 
the factors binding to the basal promoter is the upstream stimulating factor
(USF), also known as major late transcription factor (MLTF). A single point
mutation in its binding site abolishes binding in vitro and leads to 50%
reduction of the transcriptional activity as measured in receptor gene
experiments, showing that it is an activator of Hox-2.3 expression.

PMID: 1677811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Dec;87(23):9153-7.

Recombinant yeast TFIID, a general transcription factor, mediates activation by
the gene-specific factor USF in a chromatin assembly assay.

Meisterernst M(1), Horikoshi M, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10021.

The TATA box-binding transcription factor TFIID from Saccharomyces cerevisiae was
tested for its ability to mediate regulatory factor functions both in a cell-free
system reconstituted with other general initiation factors (purified from HeLa
cells) and in a combined nucleosome assembly-transcription system. In the latter 
assay recombinant yeast TFIID, expressed in and purified from bacteria, was
sufficient to prevent nucleosome assembly-mediated repression and to mediate
transcriptional enhancement of the adenovirus major late promoter by the
gene-specific activator USF. In contrast, recombinant yeast TFIID was unable to
mediate activation by USF in the system reconstituted only with purified general 
factors. Under the same conditions a partially purified natural yeast TFIID was
able to mediate activation by both USF and Sp1 (assayed with the human
immunodeficiency virus promoter), but to a lesser extent than observed with a
partially purified natural human TFIID. The implications of these findings are
discussed with respect to the structure of the yeast and human TATA factors and
the possible involvement either of specific TFIID modifications or of
coactivators.

PMCID: PMC55122
PMID: 2251256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 1990 Oct;4(10):1730-40.

The adenovirus major late transcription factor USF is a member of the
helix-loop-helix group of regulatory proteins and binds to DNA as a dimer.

Gregor PD(1), Sawadogo M, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021-6999.

We isolated full-length cDNAs encoding the 43-kD form of human upstream
stimulatory factor (USF), a cellular factor required for efficient transcription 
of the adenovirus major late (AdML) promoter in vitro. Sequence analysis showed
USF to be a member of the c-myc-related family of DNA-binding proteins. Using
proteins translated in vitro, we identified a DNA-binding domain near the
carboxyl terminus, which includes both a helix-loop-helix motif and a leucine
repeat. We show that USF interacts with its target DNA as a dimer. The leucine
repeat is required for efficient DNA binding of the intact protein and for
interactions between full-length and truncated USF proteins. Interestingly, it is
not required for DNA binding of the isolated helix-loop-helix domain. The
structure of different cDNA clones indicates that USF RNA is differentially
spliced, and alternative exon usage may regulate the levels of functional USF
protein.

PMID: 2249772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Dev. 1989 May;3(5):651-62.

Positive and negative regulation of the gene for transcription factor IIIA in
Xenopus laevis oocytes.

Scotto KW(1), Kaulen H, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021.

Expression of the positively acting 5S gene-specific transcription factor,
TFIIIA, is regulated during development, with highest levels of mRNA and protein 
occurring during oogenesis. By analysis of TFIIIA promoter mutants microinjected 
into late stage Xenopus oocytes, we have determined DNA sequences required for
the transcription of this gene and we have identified proteins that bind to these
regulatory sequences. A negative element lies between positions -306 and -289.
Three positive-acting sequences are located between positions -289 and -253, -250
and -173, and -144 and -101. Gel shift analyses of TFIIIA promoter fragments
incubated with Xenopus oocyte extracts have identified two DNA-protein complexes.
One complex, designated B1, requires sequences within the promoter region
extending from -271 to -253 while the second complex, designated B2, involves
promoter sequences from -235 to -221. The protein involved in formation of the B1
complex has been found to be related to the human adenovirus major late
transcription factor, USF.

PMID: 2744458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 25;263(24):11994-2001.

Multiple forms of the human gene-specific transcription factor USF. II. DNA
binding properties and transcriptional activity of the purified HeLa USF.

Sawadogo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021-6399.

The gene-specific upstream stimulatory transcription factor (USF) is required for
maximal expression of the adenovirus major late promoter in vivo as well as in
vitro. We have examined the DNA binding and transcriptional properties of USF
purified to near-homogeneity from HeLa cell nuclei (Sawadogo, M., Van Dyke, M.
W., Gregor, P. D., and Roeder, R. G. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 11985-11993). The
44-and 43,000-dalton forms of USF displayed identical affinities for the major
late promoter upstream sequence. Specific binding parameters were greatly
influenced by neighboring sequences, but not by the topological state of the DNA.
The dissociation rate was highly dependent upon the concentration of competitor
DNA, indicating that USF can efficiently transfer from one binding site to
another by passing through a doubly bound intermediate state (direct transfer
mechanism). Transcription stimulation by purified USF showed titration curves
identical to those observed with cruder preparations of the transcription factor.
However, the overall stimulation observed at saturating USF concentration was
significantly lower with the purified protein. By contrast, interaction with TATA
box-binding RNA polymerase II transcription factor D was observed with both
USF-containing fractions. This could suggest the existence of two different
mechanisms for upstream sequence-dependent transcription stimulation, where one
critical component (or some necessary modification of the upstream factor itself)
may be missing in reactions reconstituted with purified USF.

PMID: 3403559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 25;263(24):11985-93.

Multiple forms of the human gene-specific transcription factor USF. I. Complete
purification and identification of USF from HeLa cell nuclei.

Sawadogo M(1), Van Dyke MW, Gregor PD, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10021-6999.

The human gene-specific upstream stimulatory transcription factor (USF) is
required, both in vivo and in vitro, for maximal expression of the major late
promoter (MLP) of adenovirus. We report here the complete purification and
identification of USF from HeLa cell nuclei. The protein was followed throughout 
its purification using a quantitative filter binding assay. With a combination of
classical purification techniques and fast-flow protein liquid chromatography,
USF can be purified to homogeneity starting either with a standard HeLa cell
nuclear extract or with a higher salt extract from (lysed) HeLa cell nuclei
(nuclear pellet extract). Approximately 20,000-fold purification from the nuclear
pellet extract and 80,000-fold from the nuclear extract are necessary to obtain
homogeneous preparations of the transcription factor. A maximum of 20,000
molecules of USF appear to be present in HeLa cells. Two major forms of the USF
protein can be distinguished both by their slightly different mobilities in
sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis (apparent molecular weights 44,000 and
43,000, respectively) and by different electrophoretic mobilities of the
corresponding protein-DNA complexes. Both forms of USF are heat-stable and
interact with the MLP as monomers. Antibodies elicited against purified HeLa USF 
interact with the transcription factor bound to the MLP upstream element.

PMID: 3403558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


