
1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Jan 11;17 Suppl 1:4. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0846-z.

Predicting transcription factor site occupancy using DNA sequence intrinsic and
cell-type specific chromatin features.

Kumar S(1,)(2), Bucher P(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), School of Life
Sciences, EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, Switzerland. kumar.sunil@epfl.ch. 
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, 
Switzerland. kumar.sunil@epfl.ch. (3)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research (ISREC), School of Life Sciences, EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015,
Switzerland. philipp.bucher@epfl.ch. (4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), 
EPFL, Station 15, Lausanne, CH-1015, Switzerland. philipp.bucher@epfl.ch.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the mechanisms by which transcription factors (TF) are 
recruited to their physiological target sites is crucial for understanding gene
regulation. DNA sequence intrinsic features such as predicted binding affinity
are often not very effective in predicting in vivo site occupancy and in any case
could not explain cell-type specific binding events. Recent reports show that
chromatin accessibility, nucleosome occupancy and specific histone
post-translational modifications greatly influence TF site occupancy in vivo. In 
this work, we use machine-learning methods to build predictive models and assess 
the relative importance of different sequence-intrinsic and chromatin features in
the TF-to-target-site recruitment process.
METHODS: Our study primarily relies on recent data published by the ENCODE
consortium. Five dissimilar TFs assayed in multiple cell-types were selected as
examples: CTCF, JunD, REST, GABP and USF2. We used two types of candidate target 
sites: (a) predicted sites obtained by scanning the whole genome with a position 
weight matrix, and (b) cell-type specific peak lists provided by ENCODE.
Quantitative in vivo occupancy levels in different cell-types were based on
ChIP-seq data for the corresponding TFs. In parallel, we computed a number of
associated sequence-intrinsic and experimental features (histone modification,
DNase I hypersensitivity, etc.) for each site. Machine learning algorithms were
then used in a binary classification and regression framework to predict site
occupancy and binding strength, for the purpose of assessing the relative
importance of different contextual features.
RESULTS: We observed striking differences in the feature importance rankings
between the five factors tested. PWM-scores were amongst the most important
features only for CTCF and REST but of little value for JunD and USF2. Chromatin 
accessibility and active histone marks are potent predictors for all factors
except REST. Structural DNA parameters, repressive and gene body associated
histone marks are generally of little or no predictive value.
CONCLUSIONS: We define a general and extensible computational framework for
analyzing the importance of various DNA-intrinsic and chromatin-associated
features in determining cell-type specific TF binding to target sites. The
application of our methodology to ENCODE data has led to new insights on
transcription regulatory processes and may serve as example for future studies
encompassing even larger datasets.

PMID: 26818008  [PubMed - in process]


2. FEBS J. 2016 Mar;283(6):1077-87. doi: 10.1111/febs.13650. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Genome-wide analyses in neuronal cells reveal that upstream transcription factors
regulate lysosomal gene expression.

Yamanaka T(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Tosaki A(2), Kurosawa M(2,)(3), Shimogori T(4),
Hattori N(5), Nukina N(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Neuropathology, Doshisha University Graduate School
of Brain Science, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Structural Neuropathology,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (3)Department of Neuroscience for 
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Mechanisms of Thalamus Development,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (5)Department of Neurology,
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The upstream transcription factors (USFs) USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitously
expressed transcription factors that are characterized by a conserved basic
helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper DNA-binding domain. They form homo- or
heterodimers, and recognize E-box motifs to modulate gene expression. They are
known to regulate diverse cellular functions, including the cell cycle, immune
responses and glucose/lipid metabolism, but their roles in neuronal cells remain 
to be clarified. Here, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation of USF1 from
mouse brain cortex. Subsequent promoter array analysis (ChIP-chip) indicated that
USF1 exclusively bound to the CACGTG E-box motifs in the proximal promoter
regions. Importantly, functional annotation of the USF1-binding targets revealed 
an enrichment of genes related to lysosomal functions. Gene expression array
analysis using a neuronal cell line subsequently revealed that knockdown of USFs 
de-regulated lysosomal gene expression. Altered expression was validated by
quantitative RT-PCR, supporting the conclusion that USFs regulate lysosomal gene 
expression. Furthermore, USF knockdown slightly increased LysoTracker Red
staining, implying a role for USFs in modulating lysosomal homeostasis. Together,
our comprehensive genome-scale analyses identified lysosomal genes as targets of 
USFs in neuronal cells, suggesting a potential additional pathway of lysosomal
regulation.DATABASE: The data for the gene expression array and ChIP-chip have
been submitted to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession numbers
GSE76615 and GSE76616, respectively.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

PMID: 26756308  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cell Signal. 2016 Feb;28(2):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.11.007. Epub 2015 
Nov 11.

The nuclear fraction of protein kinase CK2 binds to the upstream stimulatory
factors (USFs) in the absence of DNA.

Spohrer S(1), Dimova EY(2), Kietzmann T(2), Montenarh M(1), Götz C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg,
Germany. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Saarland University, Homburg, Germany. Electronic address: claudia.goetz@uks.eu.

The functions of the upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 are, like those
of other transcription factors, regulated by reversible phosphorylation. Besides 
many other kinases also protein kinase CK2 phosphorylates USF1 but not USF2. In a
yeast-two-hybrid screen, however, the non-catalytic CK2ß subunit of CK2 was
identified as a binding partner of USF2. This surprising observation prompted us 
to investigate the CK2/USF interaction in more detail in the present study. By
using immunofluorescence analyses as well as co-immunoprecipitations we found
that USF1 and USF2 bound to CK2a and CK2ß exclusively in the nucleus, though CK2ß
and to a minor amount CK2a were also present in the cytoplasm. Furthermore, we
found that unlike other substrates the phosphorylation of USF1 required the
presence of the regulatory CK2ß subunit; the catalytic a-subunit of CK2 alone was
not able to phosphorylate USF1. Thus, the correct phosphorylation of USF1 is only
guaranteed and strictly controlled in particular by nuclear CK2ß. Although the
data indicated that a nuclear subfraction of CK2 subunits associated with USF
proteins, DNA pull down experiments revealed that the CK2 subunits did not
co-localize with DNA bound USF proteins indicating that the USF/CK2 interaction
has a pre- or post DNA binding function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26577526  [PubMed - in process]


4. Front Biol (Beijing). 2015 Jun;10(3):221-229. Epub 2015 May 13.

Role of upstream stimulatory factor 2 in diabetic nephropathy.

Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD). About 20%-30% of people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes develop DN. DN is
characterized by both glomerulosclerosis with thickening of the glomerular
basement membrane and mesangial matrix expansion, and tubulointerstitial
fibrosis. Hyperglycemia and the activation of the intra-renal renin-angiotensin
system (RAS) in diabetes have been suggested to play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of DN. However, the mechanisms are not well known. Studies from our 
laboratory demonstrated that the transcription factor-upstream stimulatory factor
2 (USF2) is an important regulator of DN. Moreover, the renin gene is a
downstream target of USF2. Importantly, USF2 transgenic (Tg) mice demonstrate a
specific increase in renal renin expression and angiotensin II (AngII) levels in 
kidney and exhibit increased urinary albumin excretion and extracellular matrix
deposition in glomeruli, supporting a role for USF2 in the development of
diabetic nephropathy. In this review, we summarize our findings of the mechanisms
by which diabetes regulates USF2 in kidney cells and its role in regulation of
renal renin-angiotensin system and the development of diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC4610405
PMID: 26494984  [PubMed]


5. Biol Res. 2015 Oct 9;48:56. doi: 10.1186/s40659-015-0047-2.

Differential expression of upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 2 variants in
eutopic endometria from women with endometriosis: estradiol regulation.

Castro J(1), Araya G(2), Inostroza P(3), Hidalgo P(4), González-Ramos R(5,)(6),
Sovino H(7,)(8), Boric MA(9), Fuentes A(10,)(11), Johnson MC(12).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal and Child Research, University of
Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile. jazmin.castro@gmail.com. (2)Faculty of
Medicine, Institute of Maternal and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box
226-3, Santiago, Chile. garayarecabal@gmail.com. (3)Faculty of Medicine,
Institute of Maternal and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3,
Santiago, Chile. pamela.inostrozab@usach.cl. (4)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of
Maternal and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago,
Chile. paulina.hidalgo.g@gmail.com. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal
and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile.
reinaldogonzalezr@yahoo.com. (6)San Borja-Arriarán Clinical Hospital, Santiago,
Chile. reinaldogonzalezr@yahoo.com. (7)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal
and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile.
hsovino@yahoo.com. (8)San Borja-Arriarán Clinical Hospital, Santiago, Chile.
hsovino@yahoo.com. (9)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal and Child
Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile.
mboric@med.uchile.cl. (10)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal and Child
Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile.
fuentesarielster@gmail.com. (11)San Borja-Arriarán Clinical Hospital, Santiago,
Chile. fuentesarielster@gmail.com. (12)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Maternal
and Child Research, University of Chile, P.O. Box 226-3, Santiago, Chile.
cjohnson@med.uchile.cl.

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis, pro-inflammatory and invasive benign disease estrogen 
dependent, abnormally express in endometria the enzyme P450Arom, positively
regulated by steroid factor-1 (SF-1). Our objective was to study the nuclear
protein contents of upstream stimulating factor 2 (USF2a and USF2b), a positive
regulator of SF-1, throughout the menstrual cycle in eutopic endometria from
women with and without (control) endometriosis and the involvement of nuclear
estrogen receptors (ER) and G-coupled protein estrogen receptor (GPER)-1.
RESULTS: Upstream stimulating factor 2 protein contents were higher in mid
(USF2b) and late (USF2a and USF2b) secretory phase in eutopic endometria from
endometriosis than control (p < 0.05). In isolated control epithelial cells
incubated with E2 and PGE2, to resemble the endometriosis condition, the data
showed: (a) significant increase of USF2a and USF2b nuclear protein contents when
treated with E2, PPT (specific agonist for ERa) or G1 (specific agonist for
GPER1); (b) no increase in USF2 binding to SF-1 E-Box/DNA consensus sequence in
E2-treated cells; (c) USF2 variants protein contents were not modified by PGE2;
(d) SF-1 nuclear protein content was significantly higher than basal when treated
with PGE2, E2 or G1, stimulation unaffected by ICI (nuclear ER antagonist); and
(e) increased (p < 0.05) cytosolic protein contents of P450Arom when treated with
PGE2, E2, PPT or G1 compared to basal, effect that was additive with E2 + PGE2
together. Nevertheless, in endometriosis cells, the high USF2, SF-1 and P450Arom 
protein contents in basal condition were unmodified.
CONCLUSION: These data strongly suggest that USF2 variants and P450Arom are
regulated by E2 through ERa and GPER1, whereas SF-1 through GPER1, visualized by 
the response of the cells obtained from control endometria, being unaffected the 
endogenously stimulated cells from endometriosis origin. The lack of E2
stimulation on USF2/SF-1 E-Box/DNA-sequence binding and the absence of PGE2
effect on USF2 variants opposite to the strong induction that they exert on SF1
and P450 proteins suggest different mechanisms and indirect regulations. The
sustained USF2 variants protein expression during the secretory phase in eutopic 
endometria from women with endometriosis may participate in the pathophysiology
of this disease strongly associated with infertility and its characteristic
endometrial invasion to ectopic sites in the pelvic cavity.

PMCID: PMC4600330
PMID: 26453052  [PubMed - in process]


6. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 3;117(2):142-56. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.306712. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

Vascular smooth muscle LRP6 limits arteriosclerotic calcification in diabetic
LDLR-/- mice by restraining noncanonical Wnt signals.

Cheng SL(1), Ramachandran B(1), Behrmann A(1), Shao JS(1), Mead M(1), Smith C(1),
Krchma K(1), Bello Arredondo Y(1), Kovacs A(1), Kapoor K(1), Brill LM(1), Perera 
R(1), Williams BO(1), Towler DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute, Cardiovascular Pathobiology, Orlando, FL (S.-L.C., B.R.,
A.B., M.M., C.S., Y.B.A., K.K., L.M.B., R.P., D.A.T.); MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Cancer Biology, Houston, TX (J.-S.S.); Washington University, Department of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO (K.K., A.K.); and Van Andel Research Institute,
Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, Grand Rapids, MI (B.O.W.). (2)From the
Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
Cardiovascular Pathobiology, Orlando, FL (S.-L.C., B.R., A.B., M.M., C.S.,
Y.B.A., K.K., L.M.B., R.P., D.A.T.); MD Anderson Cancer Center, Cancer Biology,
Houston, TX (J.-S.S.); Washington University, Department of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO (K.K., A.K.); and Van Andel Research Institute, Department of Cancer and Cell 
Biology, Grand Rapids, MI (B.O.W.). dwight.towler@utsouthwestern.edu.

RATIONALE: Wnt signaling regulates key aspects of diabetic vascular disease.
OBJECTIVE: We generated SM22-Cre;LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) mice to determine
contributions of Wnt coreceptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 
6 (LRP6) in the vascular smooth muscle lineage of male low-density lipoprotein
receptor-null mice, a background susceptible to diet (high-fat diet)-induced
diabetic arteriosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: As compared with LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) controls,
SM22-Cre;LRP6(fl/fl);LDLR(-/-) (LRP6-VKO) siblings exhibited increased aortic
calcification on high-fat diet without changes in fasting glucose, lipids, or
body composition. Pulse wave velocity (index of arterial stiffness) was also
increased. Vascular calcification paralleled enhanced aortic osteochondrogenic
programs and circulating osteopontin (OPN), a matricellular regulator of
arteriosclerosis. Survey of ligands and Frizzled (Fzd) receptor profiles in
LRP6-VKO revealed upregulation of canonical and noncanonical Wnts alongside
Fzd10. Fzd10 stimulated noncanonical signaling and OPN promoter activity via an
upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-activated cognate inhibited by LRP6. RNA
interference revealed that USF1 but not USF2 supports OPN expression in LRP6-VKO 
vascular smooth muscle lineage, and immunoprecipitation confirmed increased USF1 
association with OPN chromatin. ML141, an antagonist of cdc42/Rac1 noncanonical
signaling, inhibited USF1 activation, osteochondrogenic programs, alkaline
phosphatase, and vascular smooth muscle lineage calcification. Mass spectrometry 
identified LRP6 binding to protein arginine methyltransferase (PRMT)-1, and
nuclear asymmetrical dimethylarginine modification was increased with LRP6-VKO.
RNA interference demonstrated that PRMT1 inhibits OPN and TNAP, whereas PRMT4
supports expression. USF1 complexes containing the histone H3 asymmetrically
dimethylated on Arg-17 signature of PRMT4 are increased with LRP6-VKO. Jmjd6, a
demethylase downregulated with LRP6 deficiency, inhibits OPN and TNAP expression,
USF1: histone H3 asymmetrically dimethylated on Arg-17 complex formation, and
transactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: LRP6 restrains vascular smooth muscle lineage noncanonical signals
that promote osteochondrogenic differentiation, mediated in part via USF1- and
arginine methylation-dependent relays.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4490945 [Available on 2016-07-03]
PMID: 26034040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Cardiol. 2015 Dec;66(6):527-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2014.12.022. Epub 2015 Mar 
24.

The expression profile analysis of NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice to explore the
pathogenesis of congenital heart disease.

Li J(1), Cao Y(2), Wu Y(2), Chen W(2), Yuan Y(2), Ma X(3), Huang G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect, Shanghai 201102, China.
(2)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China. (3)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai 201102, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect,
Shanghai 201102, China. Electronic address: xiaojingma021@163.com. (4)Pediatric
Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect, Shanghai 201102, China. Electronic
address: gyhuang@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mutation of NKX2-5 could lead to the development of congenital heart 
disease (CHD) which is a common inherited disease. This study aimed to
investigate the pathogenesis of CHD in NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice.
METHODS: The expression profile in the NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice (GSE528)
was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. The heart tissues from the
null/heterozygous embryonic day 12.5 mice were compared with wild-type mice to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and then DEGs corresponding to
the transcriptional factors were filtered out based on the information in the
TRANSFAC database. In addition, a transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed according to transcription factor binding site information from the
University of California Santa Cruz database. A pathway interaction network was
constructed by latent pathways identification analysis.
RESULTS: The 42 DEGs corresponding to transcriptional factors from the null and
heterozygous embryos were identified. The transcriptional regulatory networks
included five down-regulated DEGs (SP1, SRY, JUND, STAT6, and GATA6), and six
up-regulated DEGs [POU2F1, NFY (NFYA/NFYB/NFYC), USF2 and MAX]. Latent pathways
analysis demonstrated that ribosome, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and dilated
cardiomyopathy pathways significantly interacted.
CONCLUSION: The identified DEGs and latent pathways could provide new
comprehensive view for understanding the pathogenesis of CHD.

Copyright © 2015 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25818641  [PubMed - in process]


8. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Feb 18;6:3. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00003. eCollection
2015.

Protein kinases as switches for the function of upstream stimulatory factors:
implications for tissue injury and cancer.

Horbach T(1), Götz C(2), Kietzmann T(3), Dimova EY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu, University of 
Oulu , Oulu, Finland ; Department of Chemistry, University of Kaiserslautern ,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland 
University , Homburg, Germany. (3)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu , Oulu, Finland.

The upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) are regulators of important cellular
processes. Both USF1 and USF2 are supposed to have major roles in metabolism,
tissue protection and tumor development. However, the knowledge about the
mechanisms that control the function of USFs, in particular in tissue protection 
and cancer, is limited. Phosphorylation is a versatile tool to regulate protein
functions. Thereby, phosphorylation can positively or negatively affect different
aspects of transcription factor function including protein stability,
protein-protein interaction, cellular localization, or DNA binding. The present
review aims to summarize the current knowledge about the regulation of USFs by
direct phosphorylation and the consequences for USF functions in tissue
protection and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4332324
PMID: 25741280  [PubMed]


9. Biol Chem. 2015 Apr;396(4):367-76. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2014-0318.

Evolutionary divergence of Threonine Aspartase1 leads to species-specific
substrate recognition.

Wünsch D, Hahlbrock A, Heiselmayer C, Bäcker S, Schrenk C, Benne F, Schilling O, 
Knauer SK.

Proteases are key regulators of life. Human Threonine Aspartase1 processes
substrates, such as the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) protein, containing two
cleavage sites, CS1 and CS2. Likewise, MLL's Drosophila ortholog trithorax is
cleaved by Drosophila Threonine Aspartase1 (dTasp), suggesting a mechanistic
coevolution. However, a detailed analysis of dTasp's function was missing so far.
Here, active and inactive dTasp mutants allowed to compare substrate recognition 
and cleavage site selectivity of human and Drosophila enzymes. In contrast to the
human protease, our cell-based assay revealed a preferential processing of
CS2-like (QLD<U+2193>Gx[xD/Dx]) targets for dTasp, whereas cleavage of CS1-like targets 
(QVD<U+2193>Gx[xD/Dx]) was significantly impaired. Systematic mutagenesis of the CS2
sequence defined the motif x[FILMW]D<U+2193>Gx[xD/Dx] as the consensus cleavage sequence
for dTasp. Substrate species selectivity of the enzymes was uncovered by
demonstrating that dTasp cleaves Drosophila TFIIA, but not the human ortholog,
suggesting evolutionary divergence of TFIIA downstream networks. Also, Drosophila
USF2 was neither predicted nor cleaved by dTasp. Moreover, we found that dTasp
cleavage site selectivity is independent of heterocomplex formation, as dTasp
exists predominantly as an aß-monomer. Collectively, we provide novel insights
into evolutionary similarities and divergence concerning Threonine Aspartase1
function in different species, which may aid to dissect and better target human
Threonine Aspartase1 in malignancies.

PMID: 25720119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):481-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.11.028. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

Arsenic trioxide suppresses transcription of hTERT through down-regulation of
multiple transcription factors in HL-60 leukemia cells.

Zhang Y(1), Sun M(2), Shi W(2), Yang Q(2), Chen C(2), Wang Z(3), Zhou X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Diagnosis, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Donghu Road
169, Wuhan 430071, China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Wannan Medical College, Wuhu 241000, China. (2)Clinical Laboratories of Bengbu
Medical College, Anhui 233030, China. (3)The Cyrus Tang Hematology Center and
Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology, Jiangsu Institute of Hematology,
the First Affiliated Hospital, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.
Electronic address: zhiweichina@126.com. (4)Center for Gene Diagnosis, Zhongnan
Hospital, Wuhan University, Donghu Road 169, Wuhan 430071, China. Electronic
address: zhouxjyk@163.com.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is largely caused by the t(15,17) chromosome
translocation, leading to the production of the PML/retinoic acid receptor alpha 
fusion. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and arsenic trioxide (ATO), as a
monotherapy or combination therapy, have been successfully used to treat APL
primarily by targeting the degradation of the fusion protein. We previously
observed that ATO treatment induced cell death in APL cell line HL-60 accompanied
by inhibition of the human telomere reverse transcriptase (hTERT) activity, a
critical enzyme responsible for the control of cell replication and
transformation in cancer cells. In the present study, we investigated the
underlying mechanism by which hTERT activity is inhibited by ATO in HL-60 cells. 
Our results showed that ATO down-regulated the expression of hTERT at both mRNA
and protein levels. Further molecular analysis revealed that the expression of
four transcription factors Sp1, c-Myc, NF-<U+03BA>B and USF2, which are located in the
proximate promoter region (-1126 to -47) of hTERT, was also suppressed by ATO.
Notably, we observed that down-regulation of these four factors by their siRNAs
potentiates ATO-induced cell growth inhibition and apoptosis. Therefore, our
results provide a novel mechanism of action of ATO for the treatment of APL.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25436934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Reproduction. 2015 Feb;149(2):203-12. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0445. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Requirement of the transcription factor USF1 in bovine oocyte and early embryonic
development.

Datta TK(1), Rajput SK(2), Wee G(2), Lee K(1), Folger JK(2), Smith GW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (2)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and GenomicsMichigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USADepartments of Animal
SciencePhysiologyMichigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824,
USAAnimal Genomics LaboratoryNational Dairy Research Institute, Animal
Biotechnology Centre, Karnal 132001, Haryana, IndiaDepartment of Biology
EducationCollege of Education, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of 
Korea smithge7@msu.edu.

Upstream stimulating factor 1 (USF1) is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that specifically binds to E-box DNA motifs, known cis-elements of key
oocyte expressed genes essential for oocyte and early embryonic development.
However, the functional and regulatory role of USF1 in bovine oocyte and embryo
development is not understood. In this study, we demonstrated that USF1 mRNA is
maternal in origin and expressed in a stage specific manner during the course of 
oocyte maturation and preimplantation embryonic development. Immunocytochemical
analysis showed detectable USF1 protein during oocyte maturation and early
embryonic development with increased abundance at 8-16-cell stage of embryo
development, suggesting a potential role in embryonic genome activation.
Knockdown of USF1 in germinal vesicle stage oocytes did not affect meiotic
maturation or cumulus expansion, but caused significant changes in mRNA abundance
for genes associated with oocyte developmental competence. Furthermore,
siRNA-mediated depletion of USF1 in presumptive zygote stage embryos demonstrated
that USF1 is required for early embryonic development to the blastocyst stage. A 
similar (USF2) yet unique (TWIST2) expression pattern during oocyte and early
embryonic development for related E-box binding transcription factors known to
cooperatively bind USF1 implies a potential link to USF1 action. This study
demonstrates that USF1 is a maternally derived transcription factor required for 
bovine early embryonic development, which also functions in regulation of JY1,
GDF9, and FST genes associated with oocyte competence.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMCID: PMC4286489
PMID: 25385722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 19;9(9):e107914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107914.
eCollection 2014.

GSK3ß-dependent phosphorylation alters DNA binding, transactivity and half-life
of the transcription factor USF2.

Horbach T(1), Chi TF(2), Götz C(3), Sharma S(2), Juffer AH(2), Dimova EY(2),
Kietzmann T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu, University of 
Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Department of Chemistry, University of Kaiserslautern,
Kaiserslautern, Germany. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Medical Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg, Germany.

The upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) is a regulator of important cellular
processes and is supposed to have also a role during tumor development. However, 
the knowledge about the mechanisms that control the function of USF2 is limited. 
The data of the current study show that USF2 function is regulated by
phosphorylation and identified GSK3ß as an USF2-phosphorylating kinase. The
phosphorylation sites within USF2 could be mapped to serine 155 and threonine
230. In silico analyses of the 3-dimensional structure revealed that
phosphorylation of USF2 by GSK3ß converts it to a more open conformation which
may influence transactivity, DNA binding and target gene expression. Indeed,
experiments with GSK-3ß-deficient cells revealed that USF2 transactivity, DNA
binding and target gene expression were reduced upon lack of GSK3ß. Further,
experiments with USF2 variants mimicking GSK3ß phosphorylated USF2 in
GSK3ß-deficient cells showed that phosphorylation of USF2 by GSK3ß did not affect
cell proliferation but increased cell migration. Together, this study reports a
new mechanism by which USF2 may contribute to cancerogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4169611
PMID: 25238393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):734-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.142. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

The hexosamine biosynthetic pathway induces gene promoter activity of acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase beta.

Imbriolo J(1), Mapanga RF(1), Essop MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardio-Metabolic Research Group (CMRG), Department of Physiological Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa. (2)Cardio-Metabolic
Research Group (CMRG), Department of Physiological Sciences, Stellenbosch
University, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa. Electronic address:
mfessop@sun.ac.za.

The cardiac isoform of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACCß) produces malonyl-CoA, a
potent inhibitor of mitochondrial fatty acid (FA) uptake. Higher ACCß activity
decreases FA utilization, potentially leading to intracellular myocardial lipid
accumulation and insulin resistance (IR). Since increased hexosamine biosynthetic
pathway (HBP) flux is linked to IR onset, we hypothesized that HBP activation
leads to the induction of ACCß gene promoter activity. Rat H9c2 cardio-myoblasts 
were transiently transfected with a 1317bp human ACCß promoter-luciferase
construct (pPIIß-1317)±an expression construct encoding the HBP rate-limiting
step, i.e., glutamine:fructose 6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFAT)±various HBP
modulators. The administration of l-glutamine (HBP substrate) dose-dependently
increased, while HBP inhibitors attenuated pPIIß-1317 activity. Co-transfections 
with dominant-negative GFAT constructs diminished pPIIß-1317 activity. To explore
underlying transcriptional mechanisms, we co-transfected with upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) expression constructs and found that USF2 induced
pPIIß-1317 activity vs. controls. Moreover, co-transfection of a GFAT expression 
construct+USF reporter-promoter construct (with consensus USF binding elements)
led to induction of pPIIß-1317 activity vs. controls. We next performed
transfections with GFAT±full length ACCß and seven truncated promoter-luciferase 
constructs, respectively. Here GFAT-mediated ACCß promoter induction was blunted 
when co-transfected with the pPIIß-38/+65 deletion construct indicating that USF2
binds to the proximal ACCß promoter region (near start codon). Our study
demonstrates that HBP activation induces ACCß gene promoter activity in H9c2
cells via USF2. We propose that such ACCß induction may elicit serious downstream
effects, e.g. the inhibition of FA ß-oxidation and the onset of IR.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25195817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2809-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.08.028. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

The upstream stimulatory factor USF1 is regulated by protein kinase CK2
phosphorylation.

Lupp S(1), Götz C(2), Khadouma S(1), Horbach T(3), Dimova EY(3), Bohrer AM(1),
Kietzmann T(3), Montenarh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University, Homburg,
Germany. (2)Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saarland University,
Homburg, Germany. Electronic address: claudia.goetz@uks.eu. (3)Faculty of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland.

The upstream stimulatory factors 1 (USF1) and 2 (USF2) are transcription factors 
which bind to E-box motifs of various promoters regulating a variety of different
cellular processes. Only little is known about the regulation of USFs. Here, we
identified protein kinase CK2 as an enzyme that phosphorylates USF1 but not USF2.
Using deletion mutants and point mutants we were able to identify threonine 100
as the major phosphorylation site for CK2. It is well known that USF1 and USF2
form hetero-dimers. Binding studies revealed that the inhibition of CK2 kinase
activity by a specific inhibitor enhanced binding of USF1 to USF2. Furthermore,
transactivation studies showed that the inhibition of CK2 phosphorylation of USF1
stimulated transcription from the glucokinase promoter as well as the fatty acid 
synthetase promoter but not from the heme oxygenase-1 promoter. Thus, we have
shown for the first time that CK2 phosphorylation of USF1 modulates two
functionally important properties of USF1, namely hetero-dimerization and
transactivation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25194820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Comput Biol Med. 2014 Oct;53:250-7. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.07.021. Epub
2014 Aug 2.

A molecular prospective provides new insights into implication of PDYN and OPRK1 
genes in alcohol dependence.

Faisal M(1), Waseem D(2), Ismatullah H(3), Taqi MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Bioinformatics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
Pakistan. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad 45320,
Pakistan. (3)Department of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, International
Islamic University, Islamabad, Pakistan. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad 45320, Pakistan. Electronic address: mm_taqi@qau.edu.pk.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) both in coding and non-coding regions
govern gene functions prompting differential vulnerability to diseases,
heterogeneous response to pharmaceutical regimes and environmental anomalies.
These genetic variations, SNPs, may alter an individual<U+05F3>s susceptibility for
alcohol dependence by remodeling DNA-protein interaction patterns in prodynorphin
(PDYN) and the <U+03BA>-opioid receptor (OPRK1) genes. In order to elaborate the
underlying molecular mechanism behind these susceptibility differences we used
bioinformatics tools to retrieve differential DNA-protein interactions at PDYN
and OPRK1 SNPs significantly associated with alcohol dependence. Our results show
allele-specific DNA-protein interactions depicting allele-specific mechanisms
implicated in differential regulation of gene expression. Several transcription
factors, for instance, VDR, RXR-alpha, NFYA, CTF family, USF-1, USF2, ER, AR and 
predominantly SP family show an allele-specific binding affinity with PDYN gene; 
likewise, GATA, TBP, AP-1, USF-2, C/EBPbeta, Cart-1 and ER interact with OPRK1
SNPs on intron 2 in an allele-specific manner. In a nutshell, transition of a
single nucleotide may modify differential DNA-protein interactions at OPRK1 and
PDYN<U+05F3>s SNPs, significantly associated with pathology that may lead to altered
individual vulnerability for alcohol dependence.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25177835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10385-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku721. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Dual roles of c-Myc in the regulation of hTERT gene.

Zhao Y(1), Cheng D(2), Wang S(2), Zhu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of C & M Physiology, Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Department of C & M Physiology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University College of
Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington, USA. (3)Department of C & M Physiology,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Washington State University College of
Pharmacy, Spokane, Washington, USA jiyue.zhu@wsu.edu.

Human telomerase gene hTERT is important for cancer and aging. hTERT promoter is 
regulated by multiple transcription factors (TFs) and its activity is dependent
on the chromatin environment. However, it remains unsolved how the interplay
between TFs and chromatin environment controls hTERT transcription. In this
study, we employed the recombinase-mediated BAC targeting and BAC recombineering 
techniques to dissect the functions of two proximal E-box sites at -165 and +44
nt in regulating the hTERT promoter in the native genomic contexts. Our data
showed that mutations of these sites abolished promoter binding by c-Myc/Max,
USF1 and USF2, decreased hTERT promoter activity, and prevented its activation by
overexpressed c-Myc. Upon inhibition of histone deacetylases, mutant and wildtype
promoters were induced to the same level, indicating that the E-boxes functioned 
to de-repress the hTERT promoter and allowed its transcription in a repressive
chromatin environment. Unexpectedly, knockdown of endogenous c-Myc/Max proteins
activated hTERT promoter. This activation did not require the proximal E-boxes
but was accompanied by increased promoter accessibility, as indicated by
augmented active histone marks and binding of multiple TFs at the promoter. Our
studies demonstrated that c-Myc/Max functioned in maintaining chromatin-dependent
repression of the hTERT gene in addition to activating its promoter.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176324
PMID: 25170084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Med Res. 2014 Aug 23;19:45. doi: 10.1186/s40001-014-0045-9.

Expressions of heparanase and upstream stimulatory factor in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Chen B, Chen XP(1), Wu MS, Cui W, Zhong M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated Yijishan Hospital of Wannan Medical 
College, Wuhu 241001, Anhui Province, China. drcxp@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: The expression of heparanase (HPSE) was associated with postoperative
metastatic recurrence in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The six
E-box binding sites in the core promoter of the HPSE gene suggested that
transcription factors of E-box such as upstream stimulatory factor (USF) might
regulate the transcription of the HPSE gene. The aim of our study is to measure
the levels of HPSE and USF expression and investigate the relationship between
USF expression and clinicopathological parameters in patients with HCC.
METHODS: HPSE, USF1 and USF2 expressions in human HCC cell lines (BEL-7402, HepG2
and HCCLM3) and 15 fresh human HCC tissue samples were measured by real-time
reverse transcriptase-PCR and Western blot analysis. The normal liver cell line
QSG7701 or fresh normal liver tissue samples obtained from 15 additional surgical
patients with hepatic rupture was used as a control. The protein expressions were
determined by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded human HCC tissues and
corresponding non-neoplastic tumor surrounding tissues (NTST) of 57 patients.
RESULTS: HPSE, USF1 and USF2 mRNA expressions were increased in HCC cell lines
and HCC tissues compared with normal liver cell line and normal liver tissue. The
protein expressions of HPSE, USF1 and USF2 in HCC cell lines and HCC tissues were
also increased. Both USF1 and USF2 expressions were positively correlated with
HPSE. USF1 and USF2 expressions were increased in patients with liver cirrhosis, 
worse tissue differentiation, advanced HCC stages and metastatic recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased USF in HCC is associated with HPSE expression. USF might
be an important factor in regulating HPSE expression and act as a novel marker of
metastatic recurrence of HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4237794
PMID: 25149140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 23;9(7):e102730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102730.
eCollection 2014.

Multiple E-boxes in the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase gene
function as a glucose-responsive element.

Wutthisathapornchai A(1), Vongpipatana T(1), Muangsawat S(1), Boonsaen T(1),
MacDonald MJ(2), Jitrapakdee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand. (2)UW Childrens Diabetes Center, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, United States of America.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is an anaplerotic enzyme that regulates glucose-induced
insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. Dysregulation of its expression is
associated with type 2 diabetes. Herein we describe the molecular mechanism
underlying the glucose-mediated transcriptional regulation of the PC gene.
Incubation of the rat insulin cell line INS-1 832/13 with glucose resulted in a
2-fold increase in PC mRNA expression. Transient transfections of the rat PC
promoter-luciferase reporter construct in the above cell line combined with
mutational analysis indicated that the rat PC gene promoter contains the
glucose-responsive element (GRE), comprising three canonical E-boxes (E1, E3 and 
E4) and one E-box-like element (E2) clustering between nucleotides -546 and -399,
upstream of the transcription start site. Mutation of any of these E-boxes
resulted in a marked reduction of glucose-mediated transcriptional induction of
the reporter gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that the
upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2) bind to E1, the Specificity 
Protein-1 (Sp1) binds to E2, USF2 and the carbohydrate responsive element binding
protein (ChREBP) binds to E4, while unknown factors binds to E3. High glucose
promotes the recruitment of Sp1 to E2 and, USF2 and ChREBP to E4. Silencing the
expression of Sp1, USF2 and ChREBP by their respective siRNAs in INS-1 832/13
cells blunted glucose-induced expression of endogenous PC. We conclude that the
glucose-mediated transcriptional activation of the rat PC gene is regulated by at
least these three transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4108332
PMID: 25054881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem J. 2014 Oct 15;463(2):287-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140643.

Pdx1 and USF transcription factors co-ordinately regulate Alx3 gene expression in
pancreatic ß-cells.

Fernández-Pérez A, Vallejo M.

Alterations in transcription factors expressed in insulin-producing islet ß-cells
generate pancreatic dysfunction leading to diabetes. The homeodomain
transcription factor Alx3 (aristaless-like homeobox 3) expressed in pancreatic
islets participates in the regulated expression of several islet genes, and its
deficiency in mice leads to islet cell apoptosis and glucose intolerance. In the 
present study, we investigated the mechanisms that regulate expression of Alx3 in
pancreatic islets at the transcriptional level. We found that the Alx3 promoter
contains at least eight putative regulatory elements with an E-box consensus
sequence, three of which were determined to be functional and required for Alx3
promoter activity by mutational analysis in transfected MIN6 ß-cells. We
determined that these E-box elements are recognized by the basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors USF1 (upstream stimulatory factor 1) and USF2. We also
identified a highly conserved A-box in the Alx3 promoter that is recognized by
the islet-specific transcription factor Pdx1 (pancreatic and duodenal homeobox
1). Pdx1-mediated transactivation of the Alx3 promoter requires the integrity of 
the three functional E-boxes and the co-operation with USF transcription factors 
bound to them. The results from the present study indicate that Pdx1 contributes 
to the transcriptional transactivation of Alx3 in pancreatic ß-cells by acting in
co-ordination with USF1 and USF2.

PMID: 25040025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Oct;115(10):1840-7. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24861.

The basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper transcription factor USF2 integrates
serum-induced PAI-1 expression and keratinocyte growth.

Qi L(1), Higgins CE, Higgins SP, Law BK, Simone TM, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology & Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany, New
York, 12208.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1), a major regulator of the
plasmin-dependent pericellular proteolytic cascade, is prominently expressed
during the tissue response to injury although the factors that impact PAI-1
induction and their role in the repair process are unclear. Kinetic modeling
using established biomarkers of cell cycle transit (c-MYC; cyclin D1; cyclin A)
in synchronized human (HaCaT) keratinocytes, and previous cytometric assessments,
indicated that PAI-1 transcription occurred early after serum-stimulation of
quiescent (G0) cells and prior to G1 entry. It was established previously that
differential residence of USF family members (USF1<U+2192>USF2 switch) at the PE2 region
E box (CACGTG) characterized the G0 <U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>G1 transition period and the
transcriptional status of the PAI-1 gene. A consensus PE2 E box motif
(5'-CACGTG-3') at nucleotides -566 to -561 was required for USF/E box
interactions and serum-dependent PAI-1 transcription. Site-directed CG<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>AT
substitution at the two central nucleotides inhibited formation of USF/probe
complexes and PAI-1 promoter-driven reporter expression. A dominant-negative USF 
(A-USF) construct or double-stranded PE2 "decoy" attenuated serum- and
TGF-ß1-stimulated PAI-1 synthesis. Tet-Off induction of an A-USF insert reduced
both PAI-1 and PAI-2 transcripts while increasing the fraction of Ki-67(+) cells.
Conversely, overexpression of USF2 or adenoviral-delivery of a PAI-1 vector
inhibited HaCaT colony expansion indicating that the USF1<U+2009><U+2192><U+2009>USF2 transition and
subsequent PAI-1 transcription are critical events in the epithelial go-or-grow
response. Collectively, these data suggest that USF2, and its target gene PAI-1, 
regulate serum-stimulated keratinocyte growth, and likely the cadence of cell
cycle progression in replicatively competent cells as part of the injury repair
program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4134751
PMID: 24905330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Genomics. 2014;2014:165175. doi: 10.1155/2014/165175. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Expression data analysis to identify biomarkers associated with asthma in
children.

Xu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Rizhao City People's Hospital, No. 126 Donggang
Area, Tai'an Road, Rizhao City, Shandong 276800, China.

Asthma is characterized by recurrent episodes of wheezing, shortness of breath,
chest tightness, and coughing. It is usually caused by a combination of complex
and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions. We obtained
gene expression data with high-throughput screening and identified biomarkers of 
children's asthma using bioinformatics tools. Next, we explained the pathogenesis
of children's asthma from the perspective of gene regulatory networks: DAVID was 
applied to perform Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
enriching analysis for the top 3000 pairs of relationships in differentially
regulatory network. Finally, we found that HAND1, PTK1, NFKB1, ZIC3, STAT6, E2F1,
PELP1, USF2, and CBFB may play important roles in children's asthma initiation.
On account of regulatory impact factor (RIF) score, HAND1, PTK7, and ZIC3 were
the potential asthma-related factors. Our study provided some foundations of a
strategy for biomarker discovery despite a poor understanding of the mechanisms
underlying children's asthma.

PMCID: PMC3985200
PMID: 24790987  [PubMed]


22. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4363-74. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku107. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

Dissecting the function of the adult ß-globin downstream promoter region using an
artificial zinc finger DNA-binding domain.

Barrow JJ(1), Li Y, Hossain M, Huang S, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Epigenetics,
Genetics Institute, Shands Cancer Center, Powell-Gene Therapy Center, University 
of Florida, Gainesville, 32610, FL, USA.

Developmental stage-specific expression of the ß-type globin genes is regulated
by many cis- and trans-acting components. The adult ß-globin gene contains an
E-box located 60 bp downstream of the transcription start site that has been
shown to bind transcription factor upstream stimulatory factor (USF) and to
contribute to efficient in vitro transcription. We expressed an artificial zinc
finger DNA-binding domain (ZF-DBD) targeting this site (+60 ZF-DBD) in murine
erythroleukemia cells. Expression of the +60 ZF-DBD reduced the recruitment and
elongation of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) at the adult ß-globin gene and at the
same time increased the binding of Pol II at locus control region (LCR) element
HS2, suggesting that Pol II is transferred from the LCR to the globin gene
promoters. Expression of the +60 ZF-DBD also reduced the frequency of
interactions between the LCR and the adult ß-globin promoter.
ChIP-exonuclease-sequencing revealed that the +60ZF-DBD was targeted to the adult
ß-globin downstream promoter and that the binding of the ZF-DBD caused
alterations in the association of USF2 containing protein complexes. The data
demonstrate that targeting a ZF-DBD to the adult ß-globin downstream promoter
region interferes with the LCR-mediated recruitment and activity of Pol II.

PMCID: PMC3985677
PMID: 24497190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Mar;33(3):670-6. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1610. Epub 2013 Dec
27.

Transcriptome and miRNA network analysis of familial hypercholesterolemia.

Chen H(1), Wang L(2), Jiang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cardiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai
200065, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The General Hospital
of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750004, P.R. China.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disorder characterized by a high 
serum concentration of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. The high LDL
cholesterol level leads to an excess deposition of cholesterol in the arterial
walls and accelerated atherosclerosis, thereby increasing the risk of premature
coronary heart disease. In the present study, we used a DNA microarray approach
to identify gene expression profiles that distinguish patients with FH from
healthy control subjects. Furthermore, transcription factors (TFs), microRNAs
(miRNAs), target genes and pathways were analyzed to explore the potential
transcriptional interactions occurring in FH. Publicly available microarray and
regulation data were used to construct a regulatory network to identify
additional genes related to FH and their interactions. The results revealed that 
specificity protein 1 (SP1), signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1) and spleen focus forming virus (SFFV) proviral integration oncogene spi1 
(SPI1) play a central role in the FH regulatory network. In addition, the TF,
upstream transcription factor 2, c-fos interacting (USF2) and the gene,
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), were identified to be associated with FH,
although no reports for these proteins exist in the literature. Overall,
transcriptional network analysis proved to be effective approach to identify
novel targets for FH therapy.

PMID: 24378567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 27;288(52):37048-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.520023. Epub
2013 Nov 7.

A haplotype of angiotensin receptor type 1 associated with human hypertension
increases blood pressure in transgenic mice.

Jain S(1), Prater A, Pandey V, Rana A, Puri N, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo
Health Science Campus, Toledo, Ohio 43614.

The renin-angiotensin system plays an important role in the regulation of blood
pressure via angiotensin II and the angiotensin II receptor type 1 (AT1R). Human 
AT1R gene promoter has four SNPs: T/A at -777, T/G at -680, A/C at -214, and A/G 
at -119, that are in linkage disequilibrium. Variants -777T, -680T, -214A, and
-119A almost always occur together (named haplotype I), and variants -777A,
-680G, -214C, and -119G almost always occur together (named haplotype II) in
Caucasian subjects. Genomic DNA analyses, from 388 normotensive and 374
hypertensive subjects, link haplotype I of the human AT1R (hAT1R) gene with
hypertension in Caucasians (p = 0.004, <U+03C7>(2) = 8.46). Our results show increased
basal promoter activity of the hAT1R gene in cells (H295R and A7r5) transfected
with reporter construct containing haplotype I. We also show increased binding of
the transcription factor, USF2, to oligonucleotide containing nucleoside -214A as
opposed to -214C. Recombineering of a 166-kb bacterial artificial chromosome
containing 68 kb of the 5'-flanking region, 45 kb of the coding sequence, and 53 
kb of the 3'-flanking region of the hAT1R gene was employed to generate
transgenic mice with either haplotype. We show that (a) hAT1R mRNA level is
increased in the kidney and heart of transgenic mice containing haplotype I as
compared with haplotype II; (b) USF2 binds more strongly to the chromatin
obtained from the kidney of transgenic mice containing haplotype I as compared
with haplotype II; and (c) blood pressure and oxidative stress are increased in
transgenic mice containing haplotype I as compared with haplotype II.

PMCID: PMC3873561
PMID: 24202179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Circulation. 2013 Oct 15;128(16):1758-69. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002885.
Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Impaired cholesterol metabolism and enhanced atherosclerosis in clock mutant
mice.

Pan X(1), Jiang XC, Hussain MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Pediatrics, SUNY Downstate Medical Center,
Brooklyn, NY.

BACKGROUND: Clock is a key transcription factor that positively controls
circadian regulation. However, its role in plasma cholesterol homeostasis and
atherosclerosis has not been studied.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We show for the first time that dominant-negative Clock
mutant protein (Clock(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)) enhances plasma cholesterol and atherosclerosis
in 3 different mouse models. Detailed analyses revealed that
Clk(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)Apoe(-/-) mice display hypercholesterolemia resulting from the
accumulation of apolipoprotein B48-containing cholesteryl ester-rich
lipoproteins. Physiological studies showed that enhanced cholesterol absorption
by the intestine contributes to hypercholesterolemia. Molecular studies indicated
that the expression of Niemann Pick C1 Like 1, Acyl-CoA:Cholesterol
acyltransferase 1, and microsomal triglyceride transfer protein in the intestines
of Clk(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)Apoe(-/-) mice was high and that enterocytes assembled and
secreted more chylomicrons. Furthermore, we identified macrophage dysfunction as 
another potential cause of increased atherosclerosis in Clk(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)Apoe(-/-)
mice. Macrophages from Clk(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19)Apoe(-/-) mice expressed higher levels of
scavenger receptors and took up more modified lipoproteins compared with
Apoe(-/-) mice, but they expressed low levels of ATP binding casette protein
family A member 1 and were defective in cholesterol efflux. Molecular studies
revealed that Clock regulates ATP binding casette protein family A member 1
expression in macrophages by modulating upstream transcription factor 2
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Clock(<U+0394>19/<U+0394>19) protein enhances atherosclerosis by increasing
intestinal cholesterol absorption, augmenting uptake of modified lipoproteins by 
macrophages, and reducing cholesterol efflux from macrophages. These studies
establish that circadian Clock activity is crucial in maintaining low plasma
cholesterol levels and in reducing atherogenesis in mice.

PMCID: PMC3897228
PMID: 24014832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 21;8(8):e72358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072358. eCollection
2013.

STAT3 or USF2 contributes to HIF target gene specificity.

Pawlus MR(1), Wang L, Murakami A, Dai G, Hu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Graduate Program, School of Dental Medicine University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

The HIF1- and HIF2-mediated transcriptional responses play critical roles in
solid tumor progression. Despite significant similarities, including their
binding to promoters of both HIF1 and HIF2 target genes, HIF1 and HIF2 proteins
activate unique subsets of target genes under hypoxia. The mechanism for HIF
target gene specificity has remained unclear. Using siRNA or inhibitor, we
previously reported that STAT3 or USF2 is specifically required for activation of
endogenous HIF1 or HIF2 target genes. In this study, using reporter gene assays
and chromatin immuno-precipitation, we find that STAT3 or USF2 exhibits specific 
binding to the promoters of HIF1 or HIF2 target genes respectively even when
over-expressed. Functionally, HIF1a interacts with STAT3 to activate HIF1 target 
gene promoters in a HIF1a HLH/PAS and N-TAD dependent manner while HIF2a
interacts with USF2 to activate HIF2 target gene promoters in a HIF2a N-TAD
dependent manner. Physically, HIF1a HLH and PAS domains are required for its
interaction with STAT3 while both N- and C-TADs of HIF2a are involved in physical
interaction with USF2. Importantly, addition of functional USF2 binding sites
into a HIF1 target gene promoter increases the basal activity of the promoter as 
well as its response to HIF2+USF2 activation while replacing HIF binding site
with HBS from a HIF2 target gene does not change the specificity of the reporter 
gene. Importantly, RNA Pol II on HIF1 or HIF2 target genes is primarily
associated with HIF1a or HIF2a in a STAT3 or USF2 dependent manner. Thus, we
demonstrate here for the first time that HIF target gene specificity is achieved 
by HIF transcription partners that are required for HIF target gene activation,
exhibit specific binding to the promoters of HIF1 or HIF2 target genes and
selectively interact with HIF1a or HIF2a protein.

PMCID: PMC3749168
PMID: 23991099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;45(11):2359-68. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.07.025. Epub 2013 Aug 16.

Cobalt stimulates HIF-1-dependent but inhibits HIF-2-dependent gene expression in
liver cancer cells.

Befani C(1), Mylonis I, Gkotinakou IM, Georgoulias P, Hu CJ, Simos G, Liakos P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences,
University of Thessaly, Biopolis, Larissa 41110, Greece.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are transcriptional regulators that mediate the 
cellular response to low oxygen. Although HIF-1 is usually considered as the
principal mediator of hypoxic adaptation, several tissues and different cell
types express both HIF-1 and HIF-2 isoforms under hypoxia or when treated with
hypoxia mimetic chemicals such as cobalt. However, the similarities or
differences between HIF-1 and HIF-2, in terms of their tissue- and
inducer-specific activation and function, are not adequately characterized. To
address this issue, we investigated the effects of true hypoxia and hypoxia
mimetics on HIF-1 and HIF-2 induction and specific gene transcriptional activity 
in two hepatic cancer cell lines, Huh7 and HepG2. Both hypoxia and cobalt caused 
rapid induction of both HIF-1a and HIF-2a proteins. Hypoxia induced
erythropoietin (EPO) expression and secretion in a HIF-2-dependent way.
Surprisingly, however, EPO expression was not induced when cells were treated
with cobalt. In agreement, both HIF-1- and HIF-2-dependent promoters (of PGK and 
SOD2 genes, respectively) were activated by hypoxia while cobalt only activated
the HIF-1-dependent PGK promoter. Unlike cobalt, other hypoxia mimetics such as
DFO and DMOG activated both types of promoters. Furthermore, cobalt impaired the 
hypoxic stimulation of HIF-2, but not HIF-1, activity and cobalt-induced HIF-2a
interacted poorly with USF-2, a HIF-2-specific co-activator. These data show
that, despite similar induction of HIF-1a and HIF-2a protein expression, HIF-1
and HIF-2 specific gene activating functions respond differently to different
stimuli and suggest the operation of oxygen-independent and gene- or
tissue-specific regulatory mechanisms involving additional transcription factors 
or co-activators.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3855297
PMID: 23958427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Proteomics. 2013 Aug;13(16):2377-85. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200521. Epub 2013 Jul
22.

Construction of a novel oligonucleotide array-based transcription factor
interaction assay platform and its uses for profiling STAT1 cofactors in mouse
fibroblast cells.

Zeng L(1), Sun Y, Xie L, Wei L, Ren Y, Zhao J, Qin W, Mitchelson K, Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Medical Systems Biology Research Center,
Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing, China.

Here, we describe a novel oligonucleotide array-based transcription factor (TF)
interaction assay platform that can directly identify cointeracting TF complexes 
following binding to their regulatory DNA elements. This platform that combines
immuno-coprecipitation technology with our previously reported oligonucleotide
array-based TF assay (OATFA), is named targeted immuno-coprecipitation OATFA
(TIC-OATFA). We illustrate use of the system to identify interaction partners of 
STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins 1) in mouse
fibroblasts. Several previously known partners of STAT1, as well as new partners,
were identified by TIC-OATFA, including the upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 
(USF1, USF2), nuclear factor of activated T cells, TATA box-binding protein,
nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2, nuclear factor-kappa B, and nuclear factor 1.
Both USF1 and nuclear factor-kappa B are well known to interact with STAT1, but
the other five TFs are previously unreported STAT1 interaction partners. We
examined interactions between one new TF, USF2, and STAT1 in detail. USF2 belongs
to the group of bHLH-zip transcription factors, which in a number of diseases
including cancers, has enhanced activity. In summary, a novel oligonucleotide
array-based assay platform was developed and used to study interactions between
STAT1 and functional TF binding partners, revealing that USF2 and potentially
four other new TFs are partners of STAT1 in an IFN-<U+03B3> stimulated mouse fibroblast 
cell line.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23749757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):987-99. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 May 9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a regulates the expression of the murine pyruvate
carboxylase gene through the HNF4-specific binding motif in its proximal
promoter.

Chavalit T(1), Rojvirat P, Muangsawat S, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is the first regulatory enzyme of gluconeogenesis. Here
we report that the proximal promoter of the murine PC gene contains three binding
sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a). These sites include the classical
direct repeat 1 (DR1) (-386/-374), non-perfect DR1 (-118/-106) and HNF4a-specific
binding motif (H4-SBM) (-26/-14). Under basal conditions, mutation of the
non-perfect DR1 decreased promoter activity by 50%, whereas mutation of neither
the DR1 nor the H4-SBM had any effect. In marked contrast, only mutation of the
H4-SBM decreased HNF4a-transactivation of the promoter activity by 65%. EMSA
revealed that HNF4a binds to the DR1site and H4-SBM with similar affinity while
it binds poorly to the non-perfect DR1. Interestingly, this non-perfect DR1 also 
coincides with two E-boxes. Mutation of the non-perfect DR1 together with the
nearby E-box reduced USF1- but not USF2-transactivation of promoter activity,
suggesting that USF1 partly contributes to the basal activity of the promoter.
Substitution of the H4-SBM with the DR1 marginally reduced the basal promoter
activity but did not eliminate HNF4a-transactivation, suggesting that HNF4a can
exert its effect via DR1 within this promoter context. ChIP-assay confirmed that 
HNF4a is associated with the H4-SBM. Suppression of HNF4a expression in AML12
cells down-regulated PC mRNA and PC protein by 60% and 50%, respectively,
confirming that PC is a target of HNF4a. We also propose a model for differential
regulation of P1 promoter of PC gene in adipose tissue and liver.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 28;288(26):19238-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.451054. Epub
2013 May 7.

Upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 mediate the transcription of angiotensin II 
binding and inhibitory protein.

Matsuda M(1), Tamura K, Wakui H, Maeda A, Ohsawa M, Kanaoka T, Azushima K, Uneda 
K, Haku S, Tsurumi-Ikeya Y, Toya Y, Maeshima Y, Yamashita A, Umemura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science and Cardiorenal Medicine, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, USA.

The angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R)-associated protein (ATRAP/Agtrap)
promotes constitutive internalization of the AT1R so as to specifically inhibit
the pathological activation of its downstream signaling yet preserve the
base-line physiological signaling activity of the AT1R. Thus, tissue-specific
regulation of Agtrap expression is relevant to the pathophysiology of
cardiovascular and renal disease. However, the regulatory mechanism of Agtrap
gene expression has not yet been fully elucidated. In this study, we show that
the proximal promoter region from -150 to +72 of the mouse Agtrap promoter, which
contains the X-box, E-box, and GC-box consensus motifs, is able to elicit
substantial transcription of the Agtrap gene. Among these binding motifs, we
showed that the E-box specifically binds upstream stimulatory factor (Usf) 1 and 
Usf2, which are known E-box-binding transcription factors. It is indicated that
the E-box-Usf1/Usf2 binding regulates Agtrap expression because of the following:
1) mutation of the E-box to prevent Usf1/Usf2 binding reduces Agtrap promoter
activity; 2) knockdown of Usf1 or Usf2 affects both endogenous Agtrap mRNA and
Agtrap protein expression, and 3) the decrease in Agtrap mRNA expression in the
afflicted kidney by unilateral ureteral obstruction is accompanied by changes in 
Usf1 and Usf2 mRNA. Furthermore, the results of siRNA transfection in mouse
distal convoluted tubule cells and those of unilateral ureteral obstruction in
the afflicted mouse kidney suggest that Usf1 decreases but Usf2 increases the
Agtrap gene expression by binding to the E-box. The results also demonstrate a
functional E-box-USF1/USF2 interaction in the human AGTRAP promoter, thereby
suggesting that a strategy of modulating the E-box-USF1/USF2 binding has novel
therapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC3696694
PMID: 23653383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060211. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Phosphorylated C/EBPß influences a complex network involving YY1 and USF2 in lung
epithelial cells.

Viart V(1), Varilh J, Lopez E, René C, Claustres M, Taulan-Cadars M.

Author information: 
(1)UFR de Médecine, Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France ; INSERM U827,
Laboratoire de Génétique de Maladies Rares, Montpellier, France.

The promoter of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene CFTR
is tightly controlled by regulators including CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins
(C/EBPs). We previously reported that the transcription factors YY1 and USF2
affect CFTR expression. We can now demonstrate that C/EBPß, a member of the CCAAT
family, binds to the CFTR promoter and contributes to its transcriptional
activity. Our data reveal that C/EBPß cooperates with USF2 and acts
antagonistically to YY1 in the control of CFTR expression. Interestingly, YY1, a 
strong repressor, fails to repress the CFTR activation induced by USF2 through
DNA binding competition. Collectively, the data strongly suggest a model by which
USF2 functionally interacts with YY1 blocking its inhibitory activity, in favour 
of C/EBPß transactivation. Further investigation into the interactions between
these three proteins revealed that phosphorylation of C/EBPß influences the DNA
occupancy of YY1 and favours the interaction between USF2 and YY1. This
phosphorylation process has several implications in the CFTR transcriptional
process, thus evoking an additional layer of complexity to the mechanisms
influencing CFTR gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3613372
PMID: 23560079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Sep;114(9):1997-2006. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24542.

Cell-cycle specific association of transcription factors and RNA polymerase ii
with the human ß-globin gene locus.

Rosenberg M(1), Fan AX, Lin IJ, Liang SY, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Center 
for Epigenetics, Genetics Institute, Powell Gene Therapy Center, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 32610, USA.

The human ß-globin genes are regulated by a locus control region (LCR) and are
expressed at extremely high levels in erythroid cells. How transcriptional
fidelity of highly expressed genes is regulated and maintained during the cell
cycle is not completely understood. Here, we analyzed the association of
transcription factor USF, the co-activator CBP, topoisomerase I (Topo I), basal
transcription factor TFIIB, and RNA polymerase II (Pol II) with the ß-globin gene
locus at specific cell-cycle stages. The data demonstrate that while association 
of Pol II with globin locus associated chromatin decreased in mitotically
arrested cells, it remained bound at lower levels at the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter. 
During early S-phase, association of CBP, USF, and Pol II with the globin gene
locus decreased. The re-association of CBP and USF2 with the LCR preceded
re-association of Pol II, suggesting that these proteins together mediate
recruitment of Pol II to the ß-globin gene locus during S-phase. Finally, we
analyzed the association of Topo I with the globin gene locus during late
S-phase. In general, Topo I association correlated with the binding of Pol II.
Inhibition of Topo I activity reduced Pol II binding at the LCR and intergenic
regions but not at the <U+03B3>-globin gene promoter. The data demonstrate dynamic
associations of transcription factors with the globin gene locus during the cell 
cycle and support previous results showing that specific components of
transcription complexes remain associated with highly transcribed genes during
mitosis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3744833
PMID: 23519692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):949-64. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2869-1. Epub 2013
Feb 27.

Insulin signalling mechanisms for triacylglycerol storage.

Czech MP(1), Tencerova M, Pedersen DJ, Aouadi M.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 373
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. Michael.Czech@umassmed.edu

Insulin signalling is uniquely required for storing energy as fat in humans.
While de novo synthesis of fatty acids and triacylglycerol occurs mostly in
liver, adipose tissue is the primary site for triacylglycerol storage. Insulin
signalling mechanisms in adipose tissue that stimulate hydrolysis of circulating 
triacylglycerol, uptake of the released fatty acids and their conversion to
triacylglycerol are poorly understood. New findings include (1) activation of
DNA-dependent protein kinase to stimulate upstream stimulatory factor (USF)1/USF2
heterodimers, enhancing the lipogenic transcription factor sterol regulatory
element binding protein 1c (SREBP1c); (2) stimulation of fatty acid synthase
through AMP kinase modulation; (3) mobilisation of lipid droplet proteins to
promote retention of triacylglycerol; and (4) upregulation of a novel
carbohydrate response element binding protein ß isoform that potently stimulates 
transcription of lipogenic enzymes. Additionally, insulin signalling through
mammalian target of rapamycin to activate transcription and processing of SREBP1c
described in liver may apply to adipose tissue. Paradoxically, insulin resistance
in obesity and type 2 diabetes is associated with increased triacylglycerol
synthesis in liver, while it is decreased in adipose tissue. This and other
mysteries about insulin signalling and insulin resistance in adipose tissue make 
this topic especially fertile for future research.

PMCID: PMC3652374
PMID: 23443243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Cancer. 2013 Jul;133(1):67-78. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28010. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

MiRNA-362-3p induces cell cycle arrest through targeting of E2F1, USF2 and PTPN1 
and is associated with recurrence of colorectal cancer.

Christensen LL(1), Tobiasen H, Holm A, Schepeler T, Ostenfeld MS, Thorsen K,
Rasmussen MH, Birkenkamp-Demtroeder K, Sieber OM, Gibbs P, Lubinski J, Lamy P;
COLOFOL steering group, Laurberg S, Oster B, Hansen KQ, Hagemann-Madsen R, Byskov
K, Ørntoft TF, Andersen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.
liselotte.christensen@ki.au.dk

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths in Western 
countries. A significant number of CRC patients undergoing curatively intended
surgery subsequently develop recurrence and die from the disease. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are aberrantly expressed in cancers and appear to have both diagnostic
and prognostic significance. In this study, we identified novel miRNAs associated
with recurrence of CRC, and their possible mechanism of action. TaqMan(®) Human
MicroRNA Array Set v2.0 was used to profile the expression of 667 miRNAs in 14
normal colon mucosas and 46 microsatellite stable CRC tumors. Four miRNAs
(miR-362-3p, miR-570, miR-148 a* and miR-944) were expressed at a higher level in
tumors from patients with no recurrence (p<0.015), compared with tumors from
patients with recurrence. A significant association with increased disease free
survival was confirmed for miR-362-3p in a second independent cohort of 43 CRC
patients, using single TaqMan(®) microRNA assays. In vitro functional analysis
showed that over-expression of miR-362-3p in colon cancer cell lines reduced cell
viability, and proliferation mainly due to cell cycle arrest. E2F1, USF2 and
PTPN1 were identified as potential miR-362-3p targets by mRNA profiling of HCT116
cells over-expressing miR-362-3p. Subsequently, these genes were confirmed as
direct targets by Luciferase reporter assays and their knockdown in vitro
phenocopied the effects of miR-362-3p over-expression. We conclude that
miR-362-3p may be a novel prognostic marker in CRC, and hypothesize that the
positive effects of augmented miR-362-3p expression may in part be mediated
through the targets E2F1, USF2 and PTPN1.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23280316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Dec;16(15):2051-6.

Regulation network analysis in the esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Xiang J(1), Zang W, Che J, Chen K, Hang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has high
regional selectivity. The molecular mechanisms of ESCC are complex and involve
multiple oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, receptor tyrosine kinases,
cytoplasmic enzymes, and tumor interstitial elements.
AIM: Here we used bioinformatics to obtain some important genes and pathways
involved in ESCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this article, we did Affymetrix microarray data
collection from three big databases, and then selected all the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) according to some principles. On this basis, we carried
out regulation network analysis and pathway enrichment analysis, obtaining ESCC
related regulation network analysis, after which we selected significant pathways
on regulation network and established TF-pathway regulation network.
RESULTS: In the transcription factors (TFs) regulation network we found SP1,
E2F1, USF2 and SP3 form a local network which suggested that these TFs might play
a more important role in ESCC. Some key pathways were also identified, such as
P53 signaling pathway, melanoma and prostate cancer pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of crucial molecular pathways involved in ESCC
would ultimately improve therapeutic effects and facilitate the development of
new treatment strategies.

PMID: 23280018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem J. 2013 Feb 15;450(1):199-208. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120962.

Differential configurations involving binding of USF transcription factors and
Twist1 regulate Alx3 promoter activity in mesenchymal and pancreatic cells.

García-Sanz P(1), Fernández-Pérez A, Vallejo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC (Consejo Superior
de Investigaciones Científicas)/Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, and CIBERDEM
(Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas 
Asociadas), Madrid, Spain.

During embryonic development, the aristaless-type homeodomain protein Alx3 is
expressed in the forehead mesenchyme and contributes to the regulation of
craniofacial development. In the adult, Alx3 is expressed in pancreatic islets
where it participates in the control of glucose homoeostasis. In the present
study, we investigated the transcriptional regulation of Alx3 gene expression in 
these two cell types. We found that the Alx3 promoter contains two E-box
regulatory elements, named EB1 and EB2, that provide binding sites for the basic 
helix-loop-helix transcription factors Twist1, E47, USF (upstream stimulatory
factor) 1 and USF2. In primary mouse embryonic mesenchymal cells isolated from
the forehead, EB2 is bound by Twist1, whereas EB1 is bound by USF1 and USF2.
Integrity of both EB1 and EB2 is required for Twist1-mediated transactivation of 
the Alx3 promoter, even though Twist1 does not bind to EB1, indicating that
binding of USF1 and USF2 to this element is required for Twist1-dependent Alx3
promoter activity. In contrast, in pancreatic islet insulin-producing cells, the 
integrity of EB2 is not required for proximal promoter activity. The results of
the present study indicate that USF1 and USF2 are important regulatory factors
for Alx3 gene expression in different cell types, whereas Twist1 contributes to
transcriptional transactivation in mesenchymal, but not in pancreatic, cells.

PMID: 23181698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Angiogenesis. 2013 Jan;16(1):223-33. doi: 10.1007/s10456-012-9314-9. Epub 2012
Oct 25.

PPARa agonist Wy14643 suppresses cathepsin B in human endothelial cells via
transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms.

Reichenbach G(1), Starzinski-Powitz A, Sloane BF, Doll M, Kippenberger S, Bernd
A, Kaufmann R, Meissner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Cathepsin B has been shown to be important in angiogenesis; therefore,
understanding its regulation in endothelial cells should provide fundamental
information that will aid in the development of new treatment options. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) have been shown to have
anti-inflammatory, anti-angiogenic and anti-tumorigenic properties. We explored
the influence of a PPARa agonist on cathepsin B expression in human endothelial
cells. The PPARa agonist, Wy14643, was found to inhibit cathepsin B protein
expression. Further studies demonstrated the Wy14643-dependent but
PPARa-independent suppression of cathepsin B. This has been previously described 
for other PPAR agonists. Wy14643 suppressed the accumulation of cathepsin B mRNA,
which was accompanied by the selective suppression of a 5'-alternative splice
variant. Consistent with these results, luciferase promoter assays and
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis demonstrated that the suppression was
facilitated by reduced binding of the transcription factors USF1/2 to an E-box
within the cathepsin B promoter. Additionally, Wy14643 treatment resulted in a
reduction in cathepsin B half-life, suggesting a posttranslational regulatory
mechanism. Overall, our results suggest that the PPARa-dependent anti-angiogenic 
action of Wy14643 seems to be mediated, in part, by Wy14643-dependent but
PPARa-independent regulation of cathepsin B expression.

PMID: 23096928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genes Brain Behav. 2013 Mar;12(2):282-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00857.x.
Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Allele-specific transcriptional activity of the variable number of tandem repeats
in 5' region of the DRD4 gene is stimulus specific in human neuronal cells.

Paredes UM(1), Quinn JP, D'Souza UM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP), Institute 
of Psychiatry, King's College, University of London, London.
ursula.paredes@zoo.ox.ac.uk

The dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene includes several variable number of tandem
repeat loci that have been suggested to modulate DRD4 gene expression patterns.
Previous studies showed differential basal activity of the two most common
variants of a tandem repeat (120 bp per repeat unit) located in the 5' region
adjacent to the DRD4 promoter in human cell lines. In this communication, we
further characterized the ability of this polymorphic repeat to elicit tissue-,
allele- and stimuli-specific transcriptional activity in vitro. The short and
long variants of the DRD4 5' tandem repeat were cloned into a luciferase reporter
gene construct containing the SV40 promoter. The luciferase constructs were
cotransfected with expression vectors of two ubiquitously expressed human
transcription factors (TFs), CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2), into human cell lines and primary cultures of neonate rat cortex
and luciferase activity measured. Overexpression with these TFs resulted in
differential cell- and allele-specific transcriptional activities of the
luciferase constructs. The results of our experiments show that variants of this 
tandem repeat in the 5' promoter of the DRD4 gene will direct differential
reporter gene transcriptional activity in a cell-type-specific manner dependent
on the signal pathways activated.

© 2012 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 23013251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(22):4595-610. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00724-12. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 and hypoxia-inducible factor 2a (HIF2a)
cooperatively activate HIF2 target genes during hypoxia.

Pawlus MR(1), Wang L, Ware K, Hu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

While the functions of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a)/aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) and HIF2a/ARNT (HIF2) proteins in activating
hypoxia-inducible genes are well established, the role of other transcription
factors in the hypoxic transcriptional response is less clear. We report here for
the first time that the basic helix-loop-helix-leucine-zip transcription factor
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) is required for the hypoxic transcriptional 
response, specifically, for hypoxic activation of HIF2 target genes. We show that
inhibiting USF2 activity greatly reduces hypoxic induction of HIF2 target genes
in cell lines that have USF2 activity, while inducing USF2 activity in cells
lacking USF2 activity restores hypoxic induction of HIF2 target genes.
Mechanistically, USF2 activates HIF2 target genes by binding to HIF2 target gene 
promoters, interacting with HIF2a protein, and recruiting coactivators CBP and
p300 to form enhanceosome complexes that contain HIF2a, USF2, CBP, p300, and RNA 
polymerase II on HIF2 target gene promoters. Functionally, the effect of USF2
knockdown on proliferation, motility, and clonogenic survival of HIF2-dependent
tumor cells in vitro is phenocopied by HIF2a knockdown, indicating that USF2
works with HIF2 to activate HIF2 target genes and to drive HIF2-depedent
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3486188
PMID: 22966206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Oct;10(10):1332-42. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0351. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

SINE retrotransposons cause epigenetic reprogramming of adjacent gene promoters.

Estécio MR(1), Gallegos J, Dekmezian M, Lu Y, Liang S, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. mestecio@mdanderson.org

Almost half of the human genome and as much as 40% of the mouse genome is
composed of repetitive DNA sequences. The majority of these repeats are
retrotransposons of the SINE and LINE families, and such repeats are generally
repressed by epigenetic mechanisms. It has been proposed that these elements can 
act as methylation centers from which DNA methylation spreads into gene promoters
in cancer. Contradictory to a methylation center function, we have found that
retrotransposons are enriched near promoter CpG islands that stay
methylation-free in cancer. Clearly, it is important to determine which
influence, if any, these repetitive elements have on nearby gene promoters. Using
an in vitro system, we confirm here that SINE B1 elements can influence the
activity of downstream gene promoters, with acquisition of DNA methylation and
loss of activating histone marks, thus resulting in a repressed state. SINE
sequences themselves did not immediately acquire DNA methylation but were marked 
by H3K9me2 and H3K27me3. Moreover, our bisulfite sequencing data did not support 
that gain of DNA methylation in gene promoters occurred by methylation spreading 
from SINE B1 repeats. Genome-wide analysis of SINE repeats distribution showed
that their enrichment is directly correlated with the presence of USF1, USF2, and
CTCF binding, proteins with insulator function. In summary, our work supports the
concept that SINE repeats interfere negatively with gene expression and that
their presence near gene promoters is counter-selected, except when the promoter 
is protected by an insulator element.

PMCID: PMC3475755
PMID: 22952045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):3034-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200519. Epub 2012
Aug 13.

Upstream stimulating factors regulate the expression of ROR<U+03B3>T in human
lymphocytes.

Ratajewski M(1), Walczak-Drzewiecka A, Salkowska A, Dastych J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Medical Biology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, 93-232 Lodz, Poland.

Retinoic acid-related orphan receptor <U+03B3>T (ROR<U+03B3>T) is the orphan nuclear receptor
that regulates the development of Th17 cells and the expression of IL-17. The
differentiation of Th17 cells is associated with the upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>T mRNA, 
and the mechanisms regulating that process in human cells are not well
understood. We investigated the transcriptional regulation of ROR<U+03B3>T in a human
lymphocytic cell line and Th17 differentiated from naive CD4+ cells from human
peripheral blood. A series of experiments, including 5' deletion and in situ
mutagenesis analysis of the human ROR<U+03B3>T promoter, chromatin immunoprecipitation, 
and overexpression of selected transcription factors, revealed that the
transcription factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) and USF-2 are
indispensable for the transcription of ROR<U+03B3>T in human lymphocytes. There was also
upregulation of USF-1 and USF-2 during the differentiation of Th17 cells from
naive CD4+ cells. In this article, we report the first analysis, to our
knowledge, of the human ROR<U+03B3>T promoter and demonstrate the role of the USF-1 and 
USF-2 transcription factors in regulating the expression of ROR<U+03B3>T in human
lymphocytes. Thus, USFs are important for the molecular mechanisms of Th17
differentiation, and possible changes in the expression of USFs might be of
interest for inflammatory conditions with a Th17 component. Furthermore, these
observations suggest a possible link between metabolic disorders in which the
role of glucose-induced USF expression has already been established and
autoimmune diseases in which the upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>T is frequently detected.

PMID: 22891280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040730. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Yersinia enterocolitica YopT and Clostridium difficile toxin B induce expression 
of GILZ in epithelial cells.

Köberle M(1), Göppel D, Grandl T, Gaentzsch P, Manncke B, Berchtold S, Müller S, 
Lüscher B, Asselin-Labat ML, Pallardy M, Sorg I, Langer S, Barth H, Zumbihl R,
Autenrieth IB, Bohn E.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, Eberhard Karls 
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

Glucocorticoid induced-leucine zipper (GILZ) has been shown to be induced in
cells by different stimuli such as glucocorticoids, IL-10 or deprivation of IL-2.
GILZ has anti-inflammatory properties and may be involved in signalling
modulating apoptosis. Herein we demonstrate that wildtype Yersinia enterocolitica
which carry the pYV plasmid upregulated GILZ mRNA levels and protein expression
in epithelial cells. Infection of HeLa cells with different Yersinia mutant
strains revealed that the protease activity of YopT, which cleaves the
membrane-bound form of Rho GTPases was sufficient to induce GILZ expression.
Similarly, Clostridium difficile toxin B, another bacterial inhibitor of Rho
GTPases induced GILZ expression. YopT and toxin B both increased transcriptional 
activity of the GILZ promoter in HeLa cells. GILZ expression could not be linked 
to the inactivation of an individual Rho GTPase by these toxins. However, forced 
expression of RhoA and RhoB decreased basal GILZ promoter activity. Furthermore, 
MAPK activation proved necessary for profound GILZ induction by toxin B. Promoter
studies and gel shift analyses defined binding of upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) 1 and 2 to a canonical c-Myc binding site (E-box) in the GILZ promoter as a
crucial step of its trans-activation. In addition we could show that USF-1 and
USF-2 are essential for basal as well as toxin B induced GILZ expression. These
findings define a novel way of GILZ promoter trans-activation mediated by
bacterial toxins and differentiate it from those mediated by dexamethasone or
deprivation of IL-2.

PMCID: PMC3392236
PMID: 22792400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hypertension. 2012 Sep;60(3):697-704. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.198242.
Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Chronic hypoxia during gestation causes epigenetic repression of the estrogen
receptor-a gene in ovine uterine arteries via heightened promoter methylation.

Dasgupta C(1), Chen M, Zhang H, Yang S, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, Division of Pharmacology, Department of Basic
Sciences, Loma Linda University, School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) plays a key role in the adaptation of increased uterine
blood flow in pregnancy. Chronic hypoxia is a common stress to maternal
cardiovascular homeostasis and causes increased risk of preeclampsia. Studies in 
pregnant sheep demonstrated that hypoxia during gestation downregulated ERa gene 
expression in uterine arteries. The present study tested the hypothesis that
hypoxia causes epigenetic repression of the ERa gene in uterine arteries via
heightened promoter methylation. Ovine ERa promoter of 2035 bp spanning from
-2000 to +35 of the transcription start site was cloned. No estrogen or
hypoxia-inducible factor response elements were found at the promoter. Two
transcription factor binding sites, USF(-15) and Sp1(-520), containing CpG
dinucleotides were identified, which had significant effects on the promoter
activity. The USF element binds transcription factors USF1 and USF2, and the Sp1 
element binds Sp1, as well as ERa through Sp1. Deletion of the Sp1 site abrogated
17ß-estradiol-induced increase in the promoter activity. In normoxic control
sheep, CpG methylation at the Sp1 but not the USF site was significantly
decreased in uterine arteries of pregnant as compared with nonpregnant animals.
In pregnant sheep exposed to long-term high-altitude hypoxia, CpG methylation at 
both Sp1 and USF sites in uterine arteries was significantly increased.
Methylation inhibited transcription factor binding and the promoter activity. The
results provide evidence of hypoxia causing heightened promoter methylation and
resultant ERa gene repression in uterine arteries and suggest new insights of
molecular mechanisms linking gestational hypoxia to aberrant uteroplacental
circulation and increased risk of preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3421058
PMID: 22777938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Phys Chem A. 2012 Aug 2;116(30):7830-5. doi: 10.1021/jp302979a. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

Photophysical studies of Ru(II)tris(2,2'-bipyridine) confined within a
Zn(II)-trimesic acid polyhedral metal-organic framework.

Larsen RW(1), Wojtas L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida , 4202 East Fowler Ave., 
Tampa, Florida 33602, United States.

The ability to confine photoactive catalysts within metal-organic framework (MOF)
materials affords the opportunity to expand the functional diversity of these
materials into solar based applications. Here, the confinement of
Ru(II)tris(2,2'-bipyridine) (RuBpy) by a MOF material derived from Zn(II) ions
and trimesic acid (hereafter, USF2) is examined. Although the encapsulated RuBpy 
could not be crystallographically resolved within the MOF framework, the
photophysical properties of the complex are characteristic of confinement
including extended triplet metal-to-ligand ((3)MLCT) lifetime (tethanol = 614 ns 
and tUSF2 = 1.2 µs at 25 °C) and a slight hypsochromic shift in the steady-state 
emission spectrum relative to RuBpy in ethanol. The extended lifetime is
attributed to a deactivation of a nonradiative (3)dd that is antibonding with
respect to the Ru(II)-bipyridine due to a confined molecular environment. These
results represent one of the first examples of RuBpy encapsulation and
photophysical characterization within a polyhedral MOF material.

PMID: 22757617  [PubMed]


45. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e31984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031984. Epub 2012 May 31.

Dynamic network of transcription and pathway crosstalk to reveal molecular
mechanism of MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

Shao L(1), Wang L, Wei Z, Xiong Y, Wang Y, Tang K, Li Y, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

Recent research has revealed various molecular markers in lung cancer. However,
the organizational principles underlying their genetic regulatory networks still 
await investigation. Here we performed Network Component Analysis (NCA) and
Pathway Crosstalk Analysis (PCA) to construct a regulatory network in human lung 
cancer (A549) cells which were treated with 50 uM motexafin gadolinium (MGd), a
metal cation-containing chemotherapeutic drug for 4, 12, and 24 hours. We
identified a set of key TFs, known target genes for these TFs, and signaling
pathways involved in regulatory networks. Our work showed that putative
interactions between these TFs (such as ESR1/Sp1, E2F1/Sp1, c-MYC-ESR,
Smad3/c-Myc, and NFKB1/RELA), between TFs and their target genes (such as
BMP41/Est1, TSC2/Myc, APE1/Sp1/p53, RARA/HOXA1, and SP1/USF2), and between
signaling pathways (such as PPAR signaling pathway and Adipocytokines signaling
pathway). These results will provide insights into the regulatory mechanism of
MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3365074
PMID: 22693540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Nov;113(11):3466-75. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24223.

Statins modulate transcriptional activity of heme-oxygenase-1 promoter in NIH 3T3
Cells.

Mrad MF(1), Mouawad CA, Al-Hariri M, Eid AA, Alam J, Habib A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, American University of
Beirut, Lebanon.

Statins, inhibitors of HMG CoA reductase, have pleiotropic effects independent of
their capacity to lower cholesterol. Heme-oxygenase-1(HO-1) plays an important
role as an anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory enzyme. In the present study, we
used NIH 3T3 cells which express HO-1 to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
HO-1 induction by statins. Simvastatin or fluvastatin induced a significant
increase in HO-1 protein expression and mRNA levels. Both statins stimulated
activity of a mouse HO-1 promoter (-1,287 to +73<U+2009>bp)/luciferase reporter gene,
3.25<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23 (Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test) and 3.13<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.33
(Mean<U+2009>±<U+2009>S.E.M., n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, t-test), respectively. This effect was more
pronounced in the short proximal promoter than the full promoter of HO-1. Gel
retardation experiments for C/EBP and upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
DNA-binding activities using simvastatin- or fluvastatin-treated cells showed
significant nuclear protein-DNA complexes which were supershifted with antibodies
specific for C/EBP ß and d or USF-1 and USF-2. Point mutations of the proximal
HO-1 promoter (-149 to +73<U+2009>bp) for the myc/max which binds USF or the C/EBP
binding sequences showed a reduction in statin-induced reporter activity whereas 
no role of the distal C/EBP binding elements located at -4<U+2009>kb was observed.
Moreover, overexpression of mutated C/EBP ß and USF factor or the siRNA for both 
factors supported a role of these transcription factors in statin-dependent
induction of HO-1, with a clearer effect for C/EBP.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22689023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hypertension. 2012 Jun;59(6):1212-9. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.192971.
Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Gene trapping uncovers sex-specific mechanisms for upstream stimulatory factors 1
and 2 in angiotensinogen expression.

Park S(1), Liu X, Davis DR, Sigmund CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 3181 MERF, Roy J and Lucille A Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism (C/A) located within an E-box at the -20
position of the human angiotensinogen (AGT) promoter may regulate transcriptional
activation through differential recruitment of the transcription factors upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and 2. To study the contribution of USF1 on AGT gene
expression, mice carrying a (-20C) human AGT (hAGT) transgene were bred with mice
harboring a USF1 gene trap allele designed to knock down USF1 expression. USF1
mRNA was reduced relative to controls in liver (9 ± 1%), perigenital adipose (16 
± 3%), kidney (17 ± 1%), and brain (34 ± 2%) in double-transgenic mice. This
decrease was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed a decrease in USF1, with retention of USF2 
binding at the hAGT promoter in the liver of male mice. hAGT expression was
reduced in the liver and other tissues of female but not male mice. The decrease 
in endogenous AGT expression was insufficient to alter systolic blood pressure at
baseline but caused reduced systolic blood pressure in female USF1 gene trap mice
fed a high-fat diet. Treatment of USF1 knockdown males with intravenous
adenoviral short hairpin RNA targeting USF2 resulted in reduced expression of
USF1, USF2, and hAGT protein. Our data from chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
suggests that this decrease in hAGT is attributed to decreased USF2 binding to
the hAGT promoter. In conclusion, both USF1 and USF2 are essential for AGT
transcriptional regulation, and distinct sex-specific and tissue-specific
mechanisms are involved in the activities of these transcription factors in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3357008
PMID: 22547438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1819(7):644-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.01.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Chromatin domains, insulators, and the regulation of gene expression.

Ghirlando R(1), Giles K, Gowher H, Xiao T, Xu Z, Yao H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Key Diseases, National Insitute of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892-0540, USA.

The DNA sequence elements called insulators have two basic kinds of properties.
Barrier elements block the propagation of heterochromatic structures into
adjacent euchromatin. Enhancer blocking elements interfere with interaction
between an enhancer and promoter when placed between them. We have dissected a
compound insulator element found at the 5' end of the chicken ß-globin locus,
which possesses both activities. Barrier insulation is mediated by two kinds of
DNA binding proteins: USF1/USF2, a heterodimer which recruits multiple enzyme
complexes capable of marking histone on adjacent nucleosomes with 'activating'
marks, and Vezf1, which protects against DNA methylation. We have found that the 
heterochromatic region upstream of the insulator element is maintained in its
silent state by a dicer-dependent mechanism, suggesting a mechanism for Vezf1
function in the insulator. Enhancer blocking function in the ß-globin insulator
element is conferred by a binding site for CTCF. Consistent with this property,
CTCF binding was found some years ago to be essential for imprinted expression at
the Igf2/H19 locus. Work in many laboratories has since demonstrated that CTCF
helps stabilize long-range interactions in the nucleus. We have recently shown
that in the case of the human insulin locus such an interaction, over a distance 
of ~300kb, can result in stimulation of a target gene which itself is important
for insulin secretion. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Chromatin in time and space.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3484685
PMID: 22326678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Clin Dysmorphol. 2012 Jan;21(1):33-6. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32834e7f9f.

A case of mosaic trisomy 19q12-q13.2 with high BMI, macrocephaly, and speech
delay: does USF2 determine size in the 19q phenotypes?

Wilson BT(1), Newby R, Watts K, Hellens SW, Zwolinski SA, Splitt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Genetics Service, Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre
for Life, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

Hall et al. (2010) describe a boy with mosaic trisomy of the proximal part of
19q, with obesity, macrocephaly and global developmental delay. The patient is
interesting with regard to his cytogenetic abnormality, which is smaller than
those previously reported, and does not include the candidate obesity and
insulin-resistance genes identified by other authors (Zung et al., 2007;
Davidsson et al., 2010) as possible causes of the overweight/obesity seen in four
of five previously documented patients. This suggests that a novel obesity locus 
may reside in the duplicated region 19q13.11q13.2. We present a phenotypically
similar boy with intrachromosomal insertion of material derived from proximal 19q
into proximal 19p, causing mosaic trisomy 19q12q13.2, and consider the role of
USF2, a master transcriptional regulator of metabolic genes, in 19q phenotypes.

PMID: 22107929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochem J. 2012 Feb 15;442(1):127-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111269.

Induction of group IVC phospholipase A2 in allergic asthma: transcriptional
regulation by TNFa in bronchoepithelial cells.

Bickford JS(1), Newsom KJ, Herlihy JD, Mueller C, Keeler B, Qiu X, Walters JN, Su
N, Wallet SM, Flotte TR, Nick HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Airway inflammation in allergen-induced asthma is associated with eicosanoid
release. These bioactive lipids exhibit anti- and pro-inflammatory activities
with relevance to pulmonary pathophysiology. We hypothesized that
sensitization/challenge using an extract from the ubiquitous fungus Aspergillus
fumigatus in a mouse model of allergic asthma would result in altered
phospholipase gene expression, thus modulating the downstream eicosanoid pathway.
We observed the most significant induction in the group IVC PLA2 (phospholipase
A2) [also known as cPLA2<U+03B3> (cytosolic PLA2<U+03B3>) or PLA2G4C]. Our results infer that
A. fumigatus extract can induce cPLA2<U+03B3> levels directly in eosinophils, whereas
induction in lung epithelial cells is most likely to be a consequence of TNFa
(tumour necrosis factor a) secretion by A. fumigatus-activated macrophages. The
mechanism of TNFa-dependent induction of cPLA2<U+03B3> gene expression was elucidated
through a combination of promoter deletions, ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation)
and overexpression studies in human bronchoepithelial cells, leading to the
identification of functionally relevant CRE (cAMP-response element), NF-<U+03BA>B
(nuclear factor <U+03BA>B) and E-box promoter elements. ChIP analysis demonstrated that 
RNA polymerase II, ATF-2 (activating transcription factor 2)-c-Jun, p65-p65 and
USF (upstream stimulating factor) 1-USF2 complexes are recruited to the cPLA2<U+03B3>
enhancer/promoter in response to TNFa, with overexpression and dominant-negative 
studies implying a strong level of co-operation and interplay between these
factors. Overall, our results link cytokine-mediated alterations in cPLA2<U+03B3> gene
expression with allergic asthma and outline a complex regulatory mechanism.

PMID: 22082005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Endocrinology. 2012 Jan;153(1):492-500. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1310. Epub 2011 Nov 
8.

Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) oppositely regulate human type 1
iodothyronine deiodinase gene in liver.

Kanamoto N(1), Tagami T, Ueda-Sakane Y, Sone M, Miura M, Yasoda A, Tamura N, Arai
H, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
kyotetsu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase (D1), a selenoenzyme that catalyzes the
bioactivation of thyroid hormone, is expressed mainly in the liver. Its
expression and activity are modulated by several factors, but the precise
mechanism of its transcriptional regulation remains unclear. In the present
study, we have analyzed the promoter of human D1 gene (hDIO1) to identify factors
that prevalently increase D1 activity in the human liver. Deletion and mutation
analyses demonstrated that a forkhead box (FOX)A binding site and an E-box site
within the region between nucleotides -187 and -132 are important for hDIO1
promoter activity in the liver. EMSA demonstrated that FOXA1 and FOXA2
specifically bind to the FOXA binding site and that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) specifically binds to the E-box element. Overexpression of FOXA2 decreased 
hDIO1 promoter activity, and short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of FOXA2
increased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA. In contrast, overexpression of USF1/2
increased hDIO1 promoter activity. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
FOXA1 decreased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA, but knockdown of both FOXA1 and
FOXA2 restored it. The response of the hDIO1 promoter to USF was greatly
attenuated in the absence of FOXA1. Taken together, these results indicate that a
balance of FOXA1 and FOXA2 expression modulates hDIO1 expression in the liver.

PMID: 22067325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Nov;9(11):1520-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0090. Epub 
2011 Oct 7.

Interaction of HIF and USF signaling pathways in human genes flanked by
hypoxia-response elements and E-box palindromes.

Hu J(1), Stiehl DP, Setzer C, Wichmann D, Shinde DA, Rehrauer H, Hradecky P,
Gassmann M, Gorr TA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Rampant activity of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1 in cancer is frequently 
associated with the malignant progression into a harder-to-treat, increasingly
aggressive phenotype. Clearly, anti-HIF strategies in cancer cells are of
considerable clinical interest. One way to fine-tune, or inhibit, HIF's
transcriptional outflow independently of hydroxylase activities could be through 
competing transcription factors. A CACGTG-binding activity in human hepatoma
cells was previously found to restrict HIF's access to hypoxia response
cis-elements (HRE) in a Daphnia globin gene promoter construct (phb2). The CACGTG
factor, and its impact on hypoxia-responsive human genes, was analyzed in this
study by genome-wide computational scans as well as gene-specific quantitative
PCR, reporter and DNA-binding assays in hepatoma (Hep3B), cervical carcinoma
(HeLa), and breast carcinoma (MCF7) cells. Among six basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors known to target CACGTG palindromes, we identified upstream 
stimulatory factor (USF)-1/2 as predominant phb2 CACGTG constituents in Hep3B,
HeLa, and MCF7 cells. Human genes with adjacent or overlapping HRE and CACGTG
motifs included with lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA) and Bcl-2/E1B 19 kDa
interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) hypoxia-induced HIF-1 targets. Parallel recruitment
of HIF-1a and USF1/2a to the respective promoter chromatin was verified for all
cell lines investigated. Mutual complementing (LDHA) or moderating (BNIP3)
cross-talk was seen upon overexpression or silencing of HIF-1a and USF1/2a.
Distinct (LDHA) or overlapping (BNIP3) promoter-binding sites for HIF-1 and USFs 
were subsequently characterized. We propose that, depending on abundance or
activity of its protein constituents, O(2)-independent USF signaling can function
to fine-tune or interfere with HIF-mediated transcription in cancer cells.

Mol Cancer Res; 9(11); 1520-36. ©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21984181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011 Dec;301(6):F1260-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00128.2011. Epub 2011 Sep 14.

ID1 inhibits USF2 and blocks TGF-ß-induced apoptosis in mesangial cells.

Sato AY(1), Antonioli E, Tambellini R, Campos AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas,
Universidade de São Paulo, Av. Albert Einstein, 627 Morumbi, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

Mesangial cells (MC) play an essential role in normal function of the glomerulus.
Phenotypic changes in MC lead to the development of glomerular diseases such as
diabetic nephropathy and glomerulosclerosis. The late phase of diabetic
glomerulopathy is characterized by MC death and fibrosis. Current data highlight 
the transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß as a trigger of the pathological changes
observed in MC, including death by apoptosis. However, the mechanisms and
mediators involved in this process are still poorly understood. Identification of
novel elements involved in MC death may provide a better understanding of the
pathophysiology of glomerular diseases. Here, we show that bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs; known antagonists of the profibrotic effects of TGF-ß in the
kidney) strongly induce inhibitor of DNA binding (ID1) mRNA transcription and
protein expression in human MC. ID genes have been implicated in cell survival
control and are constitutively expressed in MC. We show that BMPs and ID1 exert
an anti-apoptotic effect in MC by inhibition of USF2 transcriptional activity. On
the other hand, TGF-ß upregulates USF2, increasing BAX (proapoptotic gene) levels
and apoptosis rates. Taken together, our results point to a novel molecular
pathway that modulates MC apoptosis, which is potentially involved in the
pathogenesis of glomerular diseases.

PMID: 21921026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Virology. 2011 Sep 15;418(1):57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.07.002. Epub 2011
Aug 2.

Identification and functional analysis of a second RBF-2 binding site within the 
HIV-1 promoter.

Dahabieh MS(1), Ooms M, Malcolm T, Simon V, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, Life 
Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall,
Vancouver, B.C. Canada. dahabieh@interchange.ubc.ca

Transcription from the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) is mediated by numerous
host transcription factors. In this study we characterized an E-box motif (RBE1) 
within the core promoter that was previously implicated in both transcriptional
activation and repression. We show that RBE1 is a binding site for the RBF-2
transcription factor complex (USF1, USF2, and TFII-I), previously shown to bind
an upstream viral element, RBE3. The RBE1 and RBE3 elements formed complexes of
identical mobility and protein constituents in gel shift assays, both with Jurkat
T-cell nuclear extracts and recombinant USF/TFII-I. Furthermore, both elements
are regulators of HIV-1 expression; mutations in LTR-luciferase reporters and in 
HIV-1 molecular clones resulted in decreased transcription, virion production,
and proviral expression in infected cells. Collectively, our data indicate that
RBE1 is a bona fide RBF-2 binding site and that the RBE1 and RBE3 elements are
necessary for mediating proper transcription from the HIV-1 LTR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3176309
PMID: 21813151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):965-76. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093013. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Upstream stimulatory factor induces Nr5a1 and Shbg gene expression during the
onset of rat Sertoli cell differentiation.

Wood MA(1), Mukherjee P, Toocheck CA, Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology, Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproduction Services, Magee Women's Research Institute,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Within the testis, each Sertoli cell can support a finite number of developing
germ cells. During development, the cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and
the onset of differentiation establish the final number of Sertoli cells and,
thus, the total number of sperm that can be produced. The upstream stimulatory
factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2, respectively) differentially regulate numerous
Sertoli cell genes during differentiation. To identify genes that are activated
by USF proteins during differentiation, studies were conducted in Sertoli cells
isolated from 5- and 11-day-old rats, representing proliferating and
differentiating cells, respectively. Usf1 mRNA and USF1 protein levels were
increased between 5 and 11 days after birth. In vitro studies revealed that USF1 
and USF2 DNA-binding activity also increased at 11 days for the promoters of four
potential target genes, Fshr, Gata4, Nr5a1, and Shbg. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that USF recruitment increased in vivo
between 5 and 11 days after birth at the Fshr, Gata4, and Nr5a1 promoters.
Expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg, but not of Fshr or Gata4, mRNAs was elevated in
11-day-old Sertoli cells compared with 5-day-old Sertoli cells. Transient
transfection of USF1 and USF2 expression vectors up-regulated Nr5a1 and Shbg
promoter activity. RNA interference assays demonstrated that USF1 and USF2
contribute to Nr5a1 and Shbg expression in differentiating cells. Together, these
data indicate that increased USF levels induce the expression of Nr5a1 and Shbg
during the differentiation of Sertoli cells, whereas Fshr and Gata4 expression is
not altered by USF proteins during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3197915
PMID: 21734262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Jan;347(1):117-28. doi: 10.1007/s00441-011-1181-y. Epub
2011 Jun 4.

TGF-ß1 <U+2192> SMAD/p53/USF2 <U+2192> PAI-1 transcriptional axis in ureteral
obstruction-induced renal fibrosis.

Samarakoon R(1), Overstreet JM, Higgins SP, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research (MC-165), Albany Medical College, 
47 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, USA.

Chronic kidney disease constitutes an increasing medical burden affecting 26
million people in the United States alone. Diabetes, hypertension, ischemia,
acute injury, and urological obstruction contribute to renal fibrosis, a common
pathological hallmark of chronic kidney disease. Regardless of etiology, elevated
TGF-ß1 levels are causatively linked to the activation of profibrotic signaling
pathways initiated by angiotensin, glucose, and oxidative stress. Unilateral
ureteral obstruction (UUO) is a useful and accessible model to identify
mechanisms underlying the progression of renal fibrosis. Plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), a major effector and downstream target of TGF-ß1 in the
progression of several clinically important fibrotic disorders, is highly
up-regulated in UUO and causatively linked to disease severity. SMAD and non-SMAD
pathways (pp60(c-src), epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], mitogen-activated
protein kinase, p53) are required for PAI-1 induction by TGF-ß1. SMAD2/3,
pp60(c-src), EGFR, and p53 activation are each increased in the obstructed
kidney. This review summarizes the molecular basis and translational significance
of TGF-ß1-stimulated PAI-1 expression in the progression of kidney disease
induced by ureteral obstruction. Mechanisms discussed here appear to be operative
in other renal fibrotic disorders and are relevant to the global issue of tissue 
fibrosis, regardless of organ site.

PMCID: PMC3188682
PMID: 21638209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2011 Aug;301(2):F271-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00221.2011. Epub 2011 May 4.

Role of the USF1 transcription factor in diabetic kidney disease.

Sanchez AP(1), Zhao J, You Y, Declèves AE, Diamond-Stanic M, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Renal Translational Medicine, Division of Nephrology-Hypertension, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, Veterans Administration San
Diego HealthCare System, La Jolla, 92093, USA.

The predominant transcription factors regulating key genes in diabetic kidney
disease have not been established. The transcription factor upstream stimulatory 
factor 1 (USF1) is an important regulator of glucose-mediated transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß1 expression in mesangial cells; however, its role in the
development of diabetic kidney disease has not been evaluated. In the present
study, wild-type (WT; USF1 +/+), heterozygous (USF1 +/-), and homozygous (USF1
-/-) knockout mice were intercrossed with Akita mice (Ins2/Akita) to induce type 
1 diabetes. Mice were studied up to 36 wk of age. The degree of hyperglycemia and
kidney hypertrophy were similar in all groups of diabetic mice; however, the USF1
-/- diabetic mice had significantly less albuminuria and mesangial matrix
expansion than the WT diabetic mice. TGF-ß1 and renin gene expression and protein
were substantially increased in the WT diabetic mice but not in USF1 -/- diabetic
mice. The underlying pathway by which USF1 is regulated by high glucose was
investigated in mesangial cell culture. High glucose inhibited AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) activity and increased USF1 nuclear translocation.
Activation of AMPK with AICAR stimulated AMPK activity and reduced nuclear
accumulation of USF1. We thus conclude that USF1 is a critical transcription
factor regulating diabetic kidney disease and plays a critical role in
albuminuria, mesangial matrix accumulation, and TGF-ß1 and renin stimulation in
diabetic kidney disease. AMPK activity may play a key role in high
glucose-induced regulation of USF1.

PMCID: PMC3154594
PMID: 21543418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;31(7):1332-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01186-10. Epub 2011 Jan
31.

Role of helix-loop-helix proteins during differentiation of erythroid cells.

Anantharaman A(1), Lin IJ, Barrow J, Liang SY, Masannat J, Strouboulis J, Huang
S, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
Genetics Institute, Center for Epigenetics, Shands Cancer Center, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins play a profound role in the process of
development and cellular differentiation. Among the HLH proteins expressed in
differentiating erythroid cells are the ubiquitous proteins Myc, USF1, USF2, and 
TFII-I, as well as the hematopoiesis-specific transcription factor Tal1/SCL. All 
of these HLH proteins exhibit distinct functions during the differentiation of
erythroid cells. For example, Myc stimulates the proliferation of erythroid
progenitor cells, while the USF proteins and Tal1 regulate genes that specify the
differentiated phenotype. This minireview summarizes the known activities of Myc,
USF, TFII-I, and Tal11/SCL and discusses how they may function sequentially,
cooperatively, or antagonistically in regulating expression programs during the
differentiation of erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC3135301
PMID: 21282467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. BMC Genet. 2010 Dec 10;11:110. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-11-110.

Genetic study of the hepcidin gene (HAMP) promoter and functional analysis of the
c.-582A > G variant.

Parajes S(1), González-Quintela A, Campos J, Quinteiro C, Domínguez F, Loidi L.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Hepcidin acts as the main regulator of iron homeostasis through
regulation of intestinal absorption and macrophage release. Hepcidin deficiency
causes iron overload whereas its overproduction is associated with anaemia of
chronic diseases. The aims of the study were: to identify genetic variants in the
hepcidin gene (HAMP) promoter, to asses the associations between the variants
found and iron status parameters, and to functionally study the role on HAMP
expression of the most frequent variant.
RESULTS: The sequencing of HAMP promoter from 103 healthy individuals revealed
two genetic variants: The c.-153C > T with a frequency of 0.014 for allele T,
which is known to reduce hepcidin expression and the c.-582A > G with a 0.218
frequency for allele G. In an additional group of 224 individuals, the c.-582A > 
G variant genotype showed no association with serum iron, transferrin or ferritin
levels.The c.-582G HAMP promoter variant decreased the transcriptional activity
by 20% compared to c.-582A variant in cells from the human hepatoma cell line
HepG2 when cotransfected with luciferase reporter constructs and plasmid
expressing upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and by 12-14% when cotransfected 
with plasmid expressing upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2).
CONCLUSIONS: The c.-582A > G HAMP promoter variant is not associated with serum
iron, transferrin or ferritin levels in the healthy population. The in vitro
effect of the c.-582A > G variant resulted in a small reduction of the gene
transactivation by allele G compared to allele A. Therefore the effect of the
variant on the hepcidin levels in vivo would be likely negligible. Finally, the
c.-153C > T variant showed a frequency high enough to be considered when a
genetic analysis is done in iron overload patients.

PMCID: PMC3004809
PMID: 21143959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):3007-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.161646. Epub 2010 
Nov 17.

Cell-based analysis of structure-function activity of threonine aspartase 1.

Bier C(1), Knauer SK, Klapthor A, Schweitzer A, Rekik A, Krämer OH, Marschalek R,
Stauber RH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Oncology/Mainzer Screening Center, University Hospital 
of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101 Mainz, Germany. bier@uni-mainz.de

Taspase1 is a threonine protease responsible for cleaving intracellular
substrates. As such, (de)regulated Taspase1 function is expected not only to be
vital for ordered development but may also be relevant for disease. However, the 
full repertoires of Taspase1 targets as well as the exact biochemical
requirements for its efficient and substrate-specific cleavage are not yet
resolved. Also, no cellular assays for this protease are currently available,
hampering the exploitation of the (patho)biological relevance of Taspase1. Here, 
we developed highly efficient cell-based translocation biosensor assays to probe 
Taspase1 trans-cleavage in vivo. These modular sensors harbor variations of
Taspase1 cleavage sites and localize to the cytoplasm. Expression of Taspase1 but
not of inactive Taspase1 mutants or of unrelated proteases triggers proteolytic
cleavage and nuclear accumulation of the biosensors. Employing our assay combined
with scanning mutagenesis, we identified the sequence and spatial requirements
for efficient Taspase1 processing in liquid and solid tumor cell lines.
Collectively, our results defined an improved Taspase1 consensus recognition
sequence, Q(3)(F/I/L/V)(2)D(1)<U+2193>G(1)'X(2)'D(3)'D(4)', allowing the first
genome-wide bioinformatic identification of the human Taspase1 degradome. Among
the 27 most likely Taspase1 targets are cytoplasmic but also nuclear proteins,
such as the upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) or the nuclear RNA export
factors 2/5 (NXF2/5). Cleavage site recognition and proteolytic processing of
selected targets were verified in the context of the biosensor and for the
full-length proteins. We provide novel mechanistic insights into the function and
bona fide targets of Taspase1 allowing for a focused investigation of the
(patho)biological relevance of this type 2 asparaginase.

PMCID: PMC3024795
PMID: 21084304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Nov 4;11:79. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-79.

Regulation of CEACAM1 transcription in human breast epithelial cells.

Gencheva M(1), Chen CJ, Nguyen T, Shively JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, 
CA 91010, USA.

BACKGROUND: Carcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1 (CEACAM1) is a
transmembrane protein with multiple functions in different cell types. CEACAM1
expression is frequently mis-regulated in cancer, with down-regulation reported
in several tumors of epithelial origin and de novo expression of CEACAM1 in lung 
cancer and malignant melanoma. In this report we analyzed the regulation of
CEACAM1 expression in three breast cancer cell lines that varied in CEACAM1
expression from none (MCF7) to moderate (MDA-MB-468) to high (MCF10A, comparable 
to normal breast).
RESULTS: Using in vivo footprinting and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
we show that the CEACAM1 proximal promoter in breast cells is bound in its active
state by SP1, USF1/USF2, and IRF1/2. When down-regulated the CEACAM1 promoter
remains accessible to USF2 and partially accessible to USF1. Interferon-<U+03B3>
up-regulates CEACAM1 mRNA by a mechanism involving further induction of IRF-1 and
USF1 binding at the promoter. As predicted by this analysis, silencing of IRF1
and USF1 but not USF2 by RNAi resulted in a significant decrease in CEACAM1
protein expression in MDA-MB-468 cells. The inactive CEACAM1 promoter in MCF7
cells exhibits decreased histone acetylation at the promoter region, with no
evidence of H3K9 or H3K27 trimethylation, histone modifications often linked to
condensed chromatin structure.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that transcription activators USF1 and IRF1
interact to modulate CEACAM1 expression and that the chromatin structure of the
promoter is likely maintained in a poised state that can promote rapid induction 
under appropriate conditions.

PMCID: PMC2991322
PMID: 21050451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 26;402(4):767-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.10.106. Epub 2010 Oct 29.

Regulation of the promoter region of the human adiponutrin/PNPLA3 gene by glucose
and insulin.

Rae-Whitcombe SM(1), Kennedy D, Voyles M, Thompson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

The adiponutrin/PNPLA3 gene is highly expressed in adipose tissue and liver. Its 
expression is down-regulated by fasting and rapidly induced by refeeding a high
carbohydrate diet. We aimed to determine whether the promoter region of
adiponutrin is regulated by glucose and insulin. Endogenous adiponutrin mRNA was 
increased in mouse 3T3-L1 and human SGBS adipocytes and in human HepG2 cells
cultured in 25 mM glucose compared to absence of glucose. A 3100 bp 5'-upstream
region of the human adiponutrin gene was cloned into a luciferase reporter
plasmid and used in transient transfection studies. Promoter activity was
up-regulated by 25 mM glucose, 4.7-fold in HepG2 cells and 2-fold in CHO cells.
The effect was shown in CHO cells to be concentration dependent and to depend on 
glucose metabolism as a non-metabolisable analogue was without effect. In CHO
cells constitutively expressing human insulin receptor (CHO-IR), there was a
concentration dependent increase of promoter activity by insulin in the presence 
of glucose. Cotransfection with an expression plasmid for upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2), increased promoter activity 1.6-fold in CHO-IR cells. The
combined effect of insulin and USF2 (2.3-fold) was greater than the individual
effects. Cotransfection of carbohydrate-response element binding protein did not 
elicit any induction of promoter activity. These results point to potential
mechanisms for the observed in vivo nutritional regulation of adiponutrin
expression and its up-regulation in fatty liver and by obesity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21036152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2011;117(3):e62-70. doi: 10.1159/000320594. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

High glucose upregulates upstream stimulatory factor 2 in human renal proximal
tubular cells through angiotensin II-dependent activation of CREB.

Visavadiya NP(1), Li Y, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
KY 40536-0200, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: We have previously demonstrated that a transcription factor,
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), regulates glucose-induced thrombospondin 1 
expression and transforming growth factor-ß activity in mesangial cells, and
plays an important role in diabetic glomerulopathy. In this study, we determined 
whether USF2 expression in renal proximal tubular cells is regulated by glucose
and contributes to diabetic tubulointerstitial fibrosis.
METHODS: Human renal proximal tubular cells (HK-2 cells) were treated with
normal- or high-glucose medium for 24 h. After treatment, real-time PCR or
immunoblotting was used to determine the expression of USF2 and other components 
of the renin-angiotensin system in HK-2 cells.
RESULTS: High glucose upregulated USF2 expression and increased extracellular
matrix accumulation in HK-2 cells; both were inhibited by siRNA-mediated USF2
knockdown. In addition, high glucose stimulated angiotensinogen and renin
expression, increased renin activity, and resulted in increased angiotensin II
formation. Treatment of HK-2 cells with an angiotensin II receptor 1 (AT1)
blocker--losartan--prevented high-glucose-induced USF2 expression and
high-glucose-enhanced phosphorylation of CREB (cAMP response element-binding
protein).
CONCLUSION: Our data established that high glucose stimulated USF2 expression in 
HK-2 cells, at least in part, through angiotensin II-AT1-dependent activation of 
CREB, which can contribute to diabetic tubulointerstitial fibrosis.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2948662
PMID: 20814220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Oct;45(2):94-100. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9431-0. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

Lithium chloride regulation of the substance P encoding preprotachykinin a, Tac1 
gene in rat hippocampal primary cells.

Haddley K(1), Spencer EM, Vasiliou SA, Howard M, Thippeswamy T, Bubb VJ, Quinn
JP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, Merseyside
L69 3GE, UK.

In rat hippocampal cultures, the preprotachykinin A (PPTA/Tac1) gene, which
encodes the neuropeptide substance P, is regulated by the action of lithium. We
used reporter gene and expression constructs to demonstrate that this mechanism
of action of lithium is mediated via a previously characterised cis-regulatory
Ebox element in the proximal promoter, which binds members of the basic
Helix-Loop-Helix family of transcription factors. Consistent with this, in
hippocampal cells, both the expression of the endogenous gene and the function of
this promoter element are differentially regulated by the basic Helix-Loop-Helix 
factors, upstream stimulatory factor 1 and 2 (USF1/2). In addition, the genes for
USF1 and USF2 are differentially regulated by lithium in these cells. Our data
implicate USF1 as a major regulator of the action of lithium on the proximal PPTA
promoter.

PMID: 20690045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 15;111(3):720-6. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22760.

Upstream stimulatory factor-2 mediates quercetin-induced suppression of PAI-1
gene expression in human endothelial cells.

Olave NC(1), Grenett MH, Cadeiras M, Grenett HE, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

The polyphenol quercetin (Quer) represses expression of the cardiovascular
disease risk factor plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) in cultured
endothelial cells (ECs). Transfection of PAI-1 promoter-luciferase reporter
deletion constructs identified a 251-bp fragment (nucleotides -800 to -549)
responsive to Quer. Two E-box motifs (CACGTG), at map positions -691 (E-box1) and
-575 (E-box2), are platforms for occupancy by several members of the c-MYC family
of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-LZ) proteins. Promoter truncation 
and electrophoretic mobility shift/supershift analyses identified upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)-1 and USF-2 as E-box1/E-box2 binding factors. ECs
co-transfected with a 251<U+2009>bp PAI-1 promoter fragment containing the two E-box
motifs (p251/luc) and a USF-2 expression vector (pUSF-2/pcDNA) exhibited reduced 
luciferase activity versus p251/luc alone. Overexpression of USF-2 decreased,
while transfection of a dominant-negative USF construct increased, EC growth
consistent with the known anti-proliferative properties of USF proteins.
Quer-induced decreases in PAI-1 expression and reduced cell proliferation may
contribute, at least in part, to the cardioprotective benefit associated with
daily intake of polyphenols.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3521593
PMID: 20626032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Postepy Biochem. 2010;56(1):55-60.

[HINT1--a novel tumor suppressor protein of the HIT superfamily].

[Article in Polish]

Ozga M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioorganic Chemistry, Centre of Molecular and Macromolecular
Studies of the Polish Academy of Sciences, 112 Sienkiewicza St., 90-363 Lodz,
Poland. mozga@bio.cbmm.lodz.pl

The histidine triad nucleotide binding protein1 (Hint1) belongs to the first
branch of the HIT superfamily. Hint1 catalyses the process of hydrolysis of the
P-N bond in AMP-lysine, AMP-alanine, AMP-NH2. The physiological role of this
enzyme is still unclear. There is accumulating evidence that HINT1 is a novel
tumor suppressor protein, albeit the mechanism of action of HINT1 in respect to
tumor suppression is not fully understood. Recent findings have shown that Hint1 
inhibits the activity of the transcription factors AP1, MITF and USF2, as well as
influences the transcription process of some genes of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.
Thereby, it seems that Hint1 exerts its major cellular function as gene
transcription regulator, and thus, this function provides its potential role as a
tumor suppressor protein. The clinical relevance of impairments in the Hint1
expression with the respect to specific human cancers is still a matter of
extensive studies.

PMID: 20499681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):F121-7. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00074.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 21.

Glycated albumin upregulates upstream stimulatory factor 2 gene transcription in 
mesangial cells.

Li Y(1), Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky 40536, USA.

Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the most common cause of end-stage renal failure. We
previously demonstrated that a transcription factor called upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2) was upregulated in the kidneys from diabetic animals in vivo as
well as in mesangial cells (MCs) exposed to high-glucose media in vitro. USF2
mediates glucose-induced thrombospondin 1 expression and transforming growth
factor-beta activity in MCs and plays a role in DN. Glycated proteins have been
shown to accumulate in the kidneys of diabetic patients and contribute to DN.
However, whether glycated proteins regulate USF2 expression in MCs and play a
role in DN is unknown. In the present studies, we determined the effect of
glycated albumin on UFS2 gene expression in primary rat MCs. We found that
glycated albumin upregulated USF2 expression (mRNA and protein) in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. We also demonstrated that glycated albumin stimulated USF2
gene expression at the transcriptional level. By using the luciferase-promoter
deletion assay, site-directed mutagenesis, and transactivation assay, we
identified a glycated albumin-responsive region in the USF2 gene promoter (-837
to -430, relative to the transcription start site) and demonstrated that glycated
albumin-induced USF2 expression was mediated through NF-kappaB-dependent
transactivation of the USF2 promoter. Furthermore, glycated albumin increased
nuclear NF-kappaB subunit-p65 protein levels. siRNA-mediated p65 knockdown
prevented glycated albumin-induced USF2 gene expression (promoter activity, mRNA,
and protein levels). Taken together, these data suggest that glycated albumin
upregulated USF2 gene transcription in MCs through NF-kappaB-dependent
transactivation of the USF2 promoter.

PMCID: PMC2904172
PMID: 20410211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Aug;12(8):1124-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01457.x.
Epub 2010 Feb 23.

H. pylori-induced promoter hypermethylation downregulates USF1 and USF2
transcription factor gene expression.

Bussière FI(1), Michel V, Mémet S, Avé P, Vivas JR, Huerre M, Touati E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, Paris, France.

Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with the development of gastric
adenocarcinoma. Upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 regulate the
transcription of genes related to immune response, cell cycle and cell
proliferation. A decrease in their expression is observed in human gastric
epithelial cells infected with H. pylori, associated to a lower binding to their 
DNA E-box recognition site as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. DNA 
methylation leads to gene silencing. The treatment of cells with 5'-azacytidine, 
an inhibitor of DNA methylation, restored the USF1 and USF2 gene expression in
the presence of infection. Using promoter PCR methylation assay, a DNA
hypermethylation was shown in the promoter region of USF1 and USF2 genes, in
infected cells. The inhibition of USF1 and USF2 expression by H. pylori and the
DNA hypermethylation in their gene promoter region was confirmed in gastric
tissues isolated from 12 to 18 months infected mice. Our study demonstrated the
involvement of USF1 and USF2 as molecular targets of H. pylori and the key role
of DNA methylation in their regulation. These mechanisms occurred in the context 
of metaplastic lesions, suggesting that alteration of USF1 and USF2 levels could 
participate in the promotion of neoplastic process during H. pylori infection.

PMID: 20180799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 18;11:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-5.

Upstream stimulating factors 1 and 2 enhance transcription from the
placenta-specific promoter 1.1 of the bovine cyp19 gene.

Fürbass R(1), Tomek W, Vanselow J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit Molecular Biology, Research Institute for the Biology of Farm
Animals (FBN), Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2, 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.
fuerbass@fbn-dummerstorf.de

BACKGROUND: Placenta-derived oestrogens have an impact on the growth and
differentiation of the trophoblast, and are involved in processes initiating and 
facilitating birth. The enzyme that converts androgens into oestrogens, aromatase
cytochrome P450 (P450arom), is encoded by the Cyp19 gene. In the placenta of the 
cow, expression of Cyp19 relies on promoter 1.1 (P1.1). Our recent studies of
P1.1 in vitro and in a human trophoblast cell line (Jeg3) revealed that
interactions of placental nuclear protein(s) with the E-box element at position
-340 are required for full promoter activity. The aim of this work was to
identify and characterise the placental E-box (-340)-binding protein(s) (E-BP) as
a step towards understanding how the expression of Cyp19 is regulated in the
bovine placenta.
RESULTS: The significance of the E-box was confirmed in cultured primary bovine
trophoblasts. We enriched the E-BP from placental nuclear extracts using
DNA-affinity Dynabeads and showed by Western blot analysis and supershift EMSA
experiments that the E-BP is composed of the transcription factors upstream
stimulating factor (USF) 1 and USF2. Depletion of the USFs by RNAi and expression
of a dominant-negative USF mutant, were both associated with a significant
decrease in P1.1-dependent reporter gene expression. Furthermore, scatter plot
analysis of P1.1 activity vs. USF binding to the E-box revealed a strong positive
correlation between the two parameters.
CONCLUSION: From these results we conclude that USF1 and USF2 are activators of
the bovine placenta-specific promoter P1.1 and thus act in the opposite mode as
in the case of the non-orthologous human placenta-specific promoter.

PMCID: PMC2822775
PMID: 20082704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Genomics. 2009 Dec 10;10:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-595.

Deciphering the transcriptional circuitry of microRNA genes expressed during
human monocytic differentiation.

Schmeier S(1), MacPherson CR, Essack M, Kaur M, Schaefer U, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki
Y, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western
Cape, Modderdam Road, Bellville, South Africa. sebastian.schmeier@kaust.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Macrophages are immune cells involved in various biological processes
including host defence, homeostasis, differentiation, and organogenesis.
Disruption of macrophage biology has been linked to increased pathogen infection,
inflammation and malignant diseases. Differential gene expression observed in
monocytic differentiation is primarily regulated by interacting transcription
factors (TFs). Current research suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs) degrade and
repress translation of mRNA, but also may target genes involved in
differentiation. We focus on getting insights into the transcriptional circuitry 
regulating miRNA genes expressed during monocytic differentiation.
RESULTS: We computationally analysed the transcriptional circuitry of miRNA genes
during monocytic differentiation using in vitro time-course expression data for
TFs and miRNAs. A set of TF-->miRNA associations was derived from predicted TF
binding sites in promoter regions of miRNA genes. Time-lagged expression
correlation analysis was utilised to evaluate the TF-->miRNA associations. Our
analysis identified 12 TFs that potentially play a central role in regulating
miRNAs throughout the differentiation process. Six of these 12 TFs (ATF2, E2F3,
HOXA4, NFE2L1, SP3, and YY1) have not previously been described to be important
for monocytic differentiation. The remaining six TFs are CEBPB, CREB1, ELK1,
NFE2L2, RUNX1, and USF2. For several miRNAs (miR-21, miR-155, miR-424, and
miR-17-92), we show how their inferred transcriptional regulation impacts
monocytic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The study demonstrates that miRNAs and their transcriptional
regulatory control are integral molecular mechanisms during differentiation.
Furthermore, it is the first study to decipher on a large-scale, how miRNAs are
controlled by TFs during human monocytic differentiation. Subsequently, we have
identified 12 candidate key controllers of miRNAs during this differentiation
process.

PMCID: PMC2797535
PMID: 20003307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Proteomics. 2010 Jan;10(2):203-11. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800693.

Purification and identification of a transcription factor, USF-2, binding to
E-box element in the promoter of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT).

Jiang S(1), Galindo MR, Jarrett HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
78249, USA.

Controversy remains about the identity of the transcription factor(s) (TFs),
which bind to the two E-box elements (CACGTG, proximal and distal) of the human
telomerase (hTERT) gene promoter, the essential elements in the regulation of
telomerase. Here, systematic oligonucleotide trapping supplemented with 2-DE and 
proteomic methods was used to identify E-box binding TFs. Although insufficient
purity was obtained from the proximal E-box element trapping, further
fractionation provided by 2-DE and specific identification from Southwestern
blotting analysis allow us to clearly identify an E-box binding TF. The protein
spot was cut from 2-DE and in-gel digested with trypsin for LC-nanospray
ESI-MS/MS analysis. This identified upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2). Western
blotting analysis with specific antibodies clearly shows USF2 present in the
purified fraction and USF2 antibody supershifts the specific DNA-binding complex 
on non-denaturing gels. Furthermore, a novel method was developed in which the
specific DNA-TF complex was separated on a non-denaturing gel, the band was cut
and applied to SDS-PAGE for a second dimension. Western blots of this second gel 
also confirmed the presence of USF2.

PMCID: PMC2851252
PMID: 19899074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):2038-47. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0092. Epub 2009 Oct
21.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2, a novel FoxA1-interacting protein, is involved in 
prostate-specific gene expression.

Sun Q(1), Yu X, Degraff DJ, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. qian.s.sun@vanderbilt.edu

The forkhead protein A1 (FoxA1) is critical for the androgenic regulation of
prostate-specific promoters. Prostate tissue rescued from FoxA1 knockout mice
exhibits abnormal prostate development, typified by the absence of expression of 
differentiation markers and inability to engage in secretion. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and coimmunoprecipitation studies revealed that FoxA1 is one 
of the earliest transcription factors that binds to prostate-specific promoters, 
and that a direct protein-protein interaction occurs between FoxA1 and androgen
receptor. Interestingly, evidence of the interaction of FoxA1 with other
transcription factors is lacking. The upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), an
E-box-binding transcription factor of the basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper
family, binds to a consensus DNA sequence similar to FoxA1. Our in vitro and in
vivo studies demonstrate the binding of USF2 to prostate-specific gene promoters 
including the probasin promoter, spermine-binding protein promoter, and
prostate-specific antigen core enhancer. Furthermore, we show a direct physical
interaction between FoxA1 and USF2 through the use of immunoprecipitation and
glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays. This interaction is mediated via the 
forkhead DNA-binding domain of FoxA1 and the DNA-binding domain of USF2. In
summary, these data indicate that USF2 is one of the components of the
FoxA1/androgen receptor transcriptional protein complex that contributes to the
expression of androgen-regulated and prostate-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2796152
PMID: 19846536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Dec;37(22):7498-508. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp823.

Molecular interactions between HNF4a, FOXA2 and GABP identified at regulatory DNA
elements through ChIP-sequencing.

Wallerman O(1), Motallebipour M, Enroth S, Patra K, Bysani MS, Komorowski J,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, SE-751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Gene expression is regulated by combinations of transcription factors, which can 
be mapped to regulatory elements on a genome-wide scale using ChIP experiments.
In a previous ChIP-chip study of USF1 and USF2 we found evidence also of binding 
of GABP, FOXA2 and HNF4a within the enriched regions. Here, we have applied
ChIP-seq for these transcription factors and identified 3064 peaks of enrichment 
for GABP, 7266 for FOXA2 and 18783 for HNF4a. Distal elements with USF2 signal
was frequently bound also by HNF4a and FOXA2. GABP peaks were found at
transcription start sites, whereas 94% of FOXA2 and 90% of HNF4a peaks were
located at other positions. We developed a method to accurately define TFBS
within peaks, and found the predicted sites to have an elevated conservation
level compared to peak centers; however the majority of bindings were not
evolutionary conserved. An interaction between HNF4a and GABP was seen at TSS,
with one-third of the HNF4a positive promoters being bound also by GABP, and this
interaction was verified by co-immunoprecipitations.

PMCID: PMC2794179
PMID: 19822575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2009 Aug;74(8):874-81.

Studies on functional role of DNA methylation within the FXYD5-COX7A1 region of
human chromosome 19.

Skvortsova YV(1), Azhikina TL, Stukacheva EA, Sverdlov ED.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow, 117997, Russia.

We used the Rapid Identification of Genomic Splits technique to get a detailed
methylation landscape of a 1-megabase-long human genome region (FXYD5-COX7A1,
chromosome 19) in normal and tumor lung tissues and in the A549 lung cancer cell 
line. All three samples were characterized by an essentially uneven density of
unmethylated sites along the fragment. Strikingly enough, the distribution of
hypomethylated regions did not correlate with gene locations within the fragment.
We also demonstrated that the methylation pattern of this long genomic DNA
fragment was rather stable and practically unchanged in human lung cancer tissue 
as compared with its normal counterpart. On the other hand, the methylation
landscape obtained for the A549 cell line (human lung carcinoma) in the USF2-MAG 
locus showed clear differences from that of the tissues mentioned above. A
comparative analysis of transcriptional activity of the genes in this region
demonstrated the general absence of direct correlation between methylation and
expression, although some data suggest a possible role of methylation in the
regulation of MAG expression through cis-regulatory elements. In total, our data 
provide new evidence for the necessity of revising currently prevailing views on 
the functional significance of methyl groups in genomic DNA.

PMID: 19817687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Signal. 2010 Feb;22(2):212-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.09.016. Epub 2009
Sep 27.

Non-apoptotic Fas signaling regulates invasiveness of glioma cells and modulates 
MMP-2 activity via NFkappaB-TIMP-2 pathway.

Wisniewski P(1), Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Kwiatkowska A, Kaminska B.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Cell Biology, The Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Warsaw,
Poland.

Fas (CD95/APO-1) is a cell surface "death receptor" that mediates apoptosis upon 
engagement by its ligand, FasL. Paradoxically, Fas/FasL can also promote cell
invasion among non-apoptotic cells; here, we show that Fas/FasL signaling can
promote tumor invasion when apoptosis is compromised. We have developed a
recombinant FasL Interfering Protein (FIP) to interfere with Fas signaling in C6 
glioma cells expressing both Fas receptor and its ligand. FIP administration did 
not affect cell viability but impaired cell motility and invasiveness of glioma
cells. Blockade of Fas signaling reduced MMP-2 activity in glioma cells, that was
associated with down-regulation of MAPK signaling, and AP-1 and NFkappaB-driven
transcription. FIP treatment did not affect mmp-2 and mt1-mmp expression but
significantly attenuated timp-2 expression and TIMP-2 amount in the culture
medium. Studies with pharmacological inhibitors of JNK/c-Jun (SP600125) and
NFkappaB (BAY11-7082) signaling pathways demonstrated that timp-2 expression is
regulated by NFkappaB transcription factor. Our findings show that non-apoptotic 
Fas signaling activated in the autocrine manner or through microenvironment
derived factors can regulate invasiveness of glioma cells via modulation of MMP-2
activation, likely by controlling TIMP-2 expression.

PMID: 19788921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Adv Immunol. 2009;103:1-27. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2776(09)03001-6.

Chapter 1: The physiological role of lysyl tRNA synthetase in the immune system.

Nechushtan H(1), Kim S, Kay G, Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Lysyl tRNA synthetase (LysRS) is an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (AaRS). This group 
of ancient proteins, known for their critical role in translation, was found in
recent years to function in a variety of other roles. Besides its enzymatic
activity in aminoacylation of tRNA, LysRS can produce dinucleotide diadenosine
tetraphosphate (Ap(4)A). Intracellularly, it is found mainly in the cytoplasm as 
a part of a multisynthetase complex where it interacts with several proteins,
most notably AIMP2. Besides its role in translation it has been demonstrated that
LysRS can act as a cytokine-like molecule, secreted by cells and having distinct 
effects on macrophages. Moreover, LysRS can bind to the transcription factors
USF2 and MITF and can influence their transcriptional activities following
immunological stimulation of mast cells. In this review, we focus on the
nontranslational functions of LysRS related to the immune system. We begin with a
short discussion of "gene sharing," proceed to a description of its structural
and enzymatic function and then describe some of the in vivo functions of this
enzyme.

PMID: 19755181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS Genet. 2009 Sep;5(9):e1000637. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000637. Epub 2009 
Sep 4.

The variant rs1867277 in FOXE1 gene confers thyroid cancer susceptibility through
the recruitment of USF1/USF2 transcription factors.

Landa I(1), Ruiz-Llorente S, Montero-Conde C, Inglada-Pérez L, Schiavi F, Leskelä
S, Pita G, Milne R, Maravall J, Ramos I, Andía V, Rodríguez-Poyo P, Jara-Albarrán
A, Meoro A, del Peso C, Arribas L, Iglesias P, Caballero J, Serrano J, Picó A,
Pomares F, Giménez G, López-Mondéjar P, Castello R, Merante-Boschin I, Pelizzo
MR, Mauricio D, Opocher G, Rodríguez-Antona C, González-Neira A, Matías-Guiu X,
Santisteban P, Robledo M.

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

In order to identify genetic factors related to thyroid cancer susceptibility, we
adopted a candidate gene approach. We studied tag- and putative functional SNPs
in genes involved in thyroid cell differentiation and proliferation, and in genes
found to be differentially expressed in thyroid carcinoma. A total of 768 SNPs in
97 genes were genotyped in a Spanish series of 615 cases and 525 controls, the
former comprising the largest collection of patients with this pathology from a
single population studied to date. SNPs in an LD block spanning the entire FOXE1 
gene showed the strongest evidence of association with papillary thyroid
carcinoma susceptibility. This association was validated in a second stage of the
study that included an independent Italian series of 482 patients and 532
controls. The strongest association results were observed for rs1867277
(OR[per-allele] = 1.49; 95%CI = 1.30-1.70; P = 5.9x10(-9)). Functional assays of 
rs1867277 (NM_004473.3:c.-283G>A) within the FOXE1 5' UTR suggested that this
variant affects FOXE1 transcription. DNA-binding assays demonstrated that,
exclusively, the sequence containing the A allele recruited the USF1/USF2
transcription factors, while both alleles formed a complex in which
DREAM/CREB/alphaCREM participated. Transfection studies showed an
allele-dependent transcriptional regulation of FOXE1. We propose a FOXE1
regulation model dependent on the rs1867277 genotype, indicating that this SNP is
a causal variant in thyroid cancer susceptibility. Our results constitute the
first functional explanation for an association identified by a GWAS and thereby 
elucidate a mechanism of thyroid cancer susceptibility. They also attest to the
efficacy of candidate gene approaches in the GWAS era.

PMCID: PMC2727793
PMID: 19730683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 31;385(3):466-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.093. Epub 2009 May 24.

In vivo identification of promoter elements and transcription factors mediating
activation of hepatic HMG-CoA reductase by T3.

Boone LR(1), Niesen MI, Jaroszeski M, Ness GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, University of South
Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.

The promoter elements and transcription factors necessary for triiodothyronine
(T3) induction of hepatic HMG-CoA reductase (HMGR) were investigated by
transfecting rat livers with wild type and mutant HMGR promoter-luciferase
constructs using in vivo electroporation. Mutations in the sterol response
element (SRE), nuclear factor-y (NF-Y) site, and the newly identified upstream
transcription factor-2 (USF-2) site essentially abolished the T3 response.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that T(3) treatment
caused a 4-fold increase in in vivo binding of USF-2 to the HMGR promoter.
Co-transfection of the wild type HMGR promoter with siRNAs to USF-2, SREBP-2, or 
NF-Y nearly abolished the T3 induction, as measured by promoter activity. These
data provide in vivo evidence for functional roles for USF-2, SREBP-2, and NF-Y
in mediating the T3-induction of hepatic HMGR transcription.

PMCID: PMC2748396
PMID: 19470373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Apr;1791(4):229-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.01.017.
Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Upstream Stimulatory Factors 1 and 2 activate the human hepatic lipase promoter
via E-box dependent and independent mechanisms.

van Deursen D(1), van Leeuwen M, Vaulont S, Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR, Erasmus MC, 
NL-3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

We studied the transcriptional regulation of the HL gene by USF1 and USF2 in
HepG2 cells. The transcriptional activity of the HL(-685/+13) promoter construct 
was increased up to 25-fold by co-transfection with USF1 and USF2. Silencing of
USF1 by RNA interference reduced promoter activity by 30-40%. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed binding of endogenous USF1 and USF2 to the
proximal HL promoter region. In gel shift assays, USF1 and USF2 bound to E-boxes 
at -307/-312 and -510/-516, and to the TATA-Inr region. Although the -514C-->T
substitution abolished in vitro USF binding to the -510/-516 E-box, the increase 
in HL promoter activity by USF1 and USF2 was unaffected. Deletion and mutation
analysis of the HL promoter region, and insertion of multiple E-box copies in
front of a heterologous promoter, revealed that upregulation by USFs was mainly
mediated through the -307/-312 E-box and the TATA-Inr region. We conclude that in
HepG2 cells USF1 and USF2 regulate transcriptional activity of the HL gene
through their binding to the E-box at -307/-312 and the TATA-Inr region.

PMID: 19416648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Apr 1;607(1-3):156-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.02.016.
Epub 2009 Feb 20.

Metoprolol represses PGC1alpha-mediated carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1B
expression in the diabetic heart.

Sharma V(1), Dhillon P, Parsons H, Allard MF, McNeill JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

We have previously shown that metoprolol decreases carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT-1) activity, a mechanism which may partly explain its
beneficial effects in heart failure. It is possible that this effect occurs as a 
result of repression of cardiac CPT-1B expression. CPT-1B is induced by the
transcription factors peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-alpha
(PPAR-alpha) and PPAR-gamma-coactivator 1alpha (PGC1alpha) and repressed by
upstream stimulatory factor-2 (USF-2). We therefore hypothesized that metoprolol 
represses CPT-1B by increasing USF-2-mediated repression of PGC1alpha. Male
Wistar Rats were divided into 4 groups: control, control treated with metoprolol 
for 5 weeks, diabetic and diabetic treated with metoprolol for 5 weeks. After
termination, the expression of CPT-1 isoforms, PPAR-alpha, PGC1alpha USF-1 and
USF-2, as well as downstream targets were measured. Binding of PPAR-alpha,
PGC1alpha and USF-2 to PGC1alpha was measured using coimmunoprecipitation. The
occupation of PPAR-alpha and MEF-2A consensus sites in the CPT-1B promoter was
measured using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Chronic metoprolol treatment
decreased the expression of CPT-1B in diabetic hearts. The expression of USF-2
was increased by metoprolol in both control and diabetic hearts, but the
association of USF-2 with PGC1alpha was increased by metoprolol only in diabetic 
hearts. Metoprolol prevented the increase in PGC1alpha occupation of the CPT-1B
promoter region observed in the diabetic heart without affecting PPAR-alpha
occupation. Metoprolol decreases CPT-1B expression by decreasing
PGC1alpha-mediated coactivation of PPAR-alpha and MEF-2A. This is associated with
increased PGC1alpha/ USF-2 binding, suggesting that USF-2 mediates the
metoprolol-induced repression of PGC1alpha.

PMID: 19233164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;11(1):187-202. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0061.

Bovine ooplasm partially remodels primate somatic nuclei following somatic cell
nuclear transfer.

Wang K(1), Beyhan Z, Rodriguez RM, Ross PJ, Iager AE, Kaiser GG, Chen Y, Cibelli 
JB.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, 48824, USA.

Interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT) has the potential to become a 
useful tool to address basic questions about the nucleus-cytoplasm interactions
between species. It has also been proposed as an alternative for the preservation
of endangered species and to derive autologous embryonic stem cells. Using
chimpanzee/ bovine iSCNT as our experimental model we studied the early
epigenetic events that take place soon after cell fusion until embryonic genome
activation (EGA). Our analysis suggested partial EGA in iSCNT embryos at the
eight-cell stage, as indicated by Br-UTP incorporation and expression of
chimpanzee embryonic genes. Oct4, Stella, Crabp1, CCNE2, CXCL6, PTGER4, H2AFZ,
c-MYC, KLF4, and GAPDH transcripts were expressed, while Nanog, Glut1, DSC2,
USF2, Adrbk1, and Lin28 failed to be activated. Although development of iSCNT
embryos did not progress beyond the 8- to 16-cell stage, chromatin remodeling
events, monitored by H3K27 methylation, H4K5 acetylation, and global DNA
methylation, were similar in both intra- and interspecies SCNT embryos. However, 
bisulfite sequencing indicated incomplete demethylation of Oct4 and Nanog
promoters in eight-cell iSCNT embryos. ATP production levels were significantly
higher in bovine SCNT embryos than in iSCNT embryos, TUNEL assays did not reveal 
any difference in the apoptotic status of the nuclei from both types of embryos. 
Collectively, our results suggest that bovine ooplasm can partially remodel
chimpanzee somatic nuclei, and provides insight into some of the current barriers
iSCNT must overcome if further embryonic development is to be expected.

PMID: 19196039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Cancer. 2009 Apr 1;124(7):1526-34. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24072.

HINT1 inhibits beta-catenin/TCF4, USF2 and NFkappaB activity in human hepatoma
cells.

Wang L(1), Li H, Zhang Y, Santella RM, Weinstein IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Kunming Medical College, Kunming, China.

In this study we explored the relevance of Hint, a novel tumor suppressor gene,
to human hepatoma. The human hepatoma cell lines Hep3B and HepG2 express very low
levels of the HINT1 protein but the Huh7 cells express a relatively high level.
In Hep3B and HepG2 cells, but not in Huh7 cells, the promoter region of Hint1 is 
partially methylated and treatment with 5-azadcdeoxycytidine increased expression
of the HINT1 protein and Hint1 mRNA in Hep3B and HepG2 cells. Increased
expression of HINT1 in HepG2 cells markedly inhibited their growth. It also
inhibited the transcriptional activities of beta-catenin/TCF4, and USF2, and
inhibited the expression of endogenous cyclin D1 and TGFbeta2. Furthermore, HINT1
co-immunoprecipitated with USF2 in extracts of Hep2 cells. HINT1 also inhibited
NFkappaB transcription factor reporter activity and inhibited translocation of
the endogenous p65 protein to the nucleus of HepG2 cells. Therefore, decreased
expression of the Hint1 gene through epigenetic silencing may play a role in
enhancing the growth of a subset of human hepatoma by increasing the expression
of genes controlled by the transcription factors beta-catenin, USF2, and
NFkappaB.

PMCID: PMC2667231
PMID: 19089909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 16;9:110. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-110.

Upstream stimulatory factors are involved in the P1 promoter directed
transcription of the A beta H-J-J locus.

Finotti A(1), Treves S, Zorzato F, Gambari R, Feriotto G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Biology Section,
University of Ferrara, Via Fossato di Mortara 74, 44100 Ferrara, Italy.
fntlss@unife.it

BACKGROUND: Alternative splicing of the locus A beta H-J-J generates functionally
distinct proteins: the enzyme aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase (AAH),
truncated homologs of AAH with a role in calcium homeostasis humbug and junctate 
and a structural protein of the sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes junctin. AAH and
humbug are over expressed in a broad range of malignant neoplasms. We have
previously reported that this locus contains two promoters, P1 and P2. While AAH 
and humbug are expressed in most tissues under the regulation of the P1 promoter,
AAH, junctin and junctate are predominantly expressed in excitable tissues under 
the control of the P2 promoter. We previously demonstrated that Sp transcription 
factors positively regulate the P1 promoter.
RESULTS: In the present study, we extended the functional characterization of the
P1 promoter of the A beta H-J-J locus. We demonstrated by quantitative Real-time 
RT-PCR that mRNAs from the P1 promoter are actively transcribed in all the human 
cell lines analysed. To investigate the transcription mechanism we transiently
transfected HeLa cells with sequentially deleted reporter constructs containing
different regions of the -661/+81 P1 nucleotide sequence. Our results showed that
(i) this promoter fragment is a powerful activator of the reporter gene in HeLa
cell line, (ii) the region spanning 512 bp upstream of the transcription start
site exhibits maximal level of transcriptional activity, (iii) progressive
deletions from -512 gradually reduce reporter expression. The region responsible 
for maximal transcription contains an E-box site; we characterized the molecular 
interactions between USF1/2 with this E-box element by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and supershift analysis. In addition, our USF1 and USF2 chromatin
immunoprecipitation results demonstrate that these transcription factors bind the
P1 promoter in vivo. A functional role of USF1/USF2 in upregulating P1-directed
transcription was demonstrated by analysis of the effects of (i) in vitro
mutagenesis of the P1/E-box binding site, (ii) RNA interference targeting USF1
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that USF factors positively regulate the core of 
P1 promoter, and, together with our previously data, we can conclude that both Sp
and USF DNA interaction and transcription activity are involved in the P1
promoter dependent expression of AAH and humbug.

PMCID: PMC2625362
PMID: 19087304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1830-40. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0167.

Down-regulation of hsa-miR-10a in chronic myeloid leukemia CD34+ cells increases 
USF2-mediated cell growth.

Agirre X(1), Jiménez-Velasco A, San José-Enériz E, Garate L, Bandrés E, Cordeu L,
Aparicio O, Saez B, Navarro G, Vilas-Zornoza A, Pérez-Roger I, García-Foncillas
J, Torres A, Heiniger A, Calasanz MJ, Fortes P, Román-Gómez J, Prósper F.

Author information: 
(1)Foundation for Applied Medical Research, Division of Cancer, Clínica
Universitaria, University of Navarre, Pamplona, Spain.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small noncoding, single-stranded RNAs that inhibit gene
expression at a posttranscriptional level, whose abnormal expression has been
described in different tumors. The aim of our study was to identify miRNAs
potentially implicated in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). We detected an abnormal
miRNA expression profile in mononuclear and CD34(+) cells from patients with CML 
compared with healthy controls. Of 157 miRNAs tested, hsa-miR-10a, hsa-miR-150,
and hsa-miR-151 were down-regulated, whereas hsa-miR-96 was up-regulated in CML
cells. Down-regulation of hsa-miR-10a was not dependent on BCR-ABL1 activity and 
contributed to the increased cell growth of CML cells. We identified the upstream
stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) as a potential target of hsa-miR-10a and showed that 
overexpression of USF2 also increases cell growth. The clinical relevance of
these findings was shown in a group of 85 newly diagnosed patients with CML in
which expression of hsa-miR-10a was down-regulated in 71% of the patients,
whereas expression of USF2 was up-regulated in 60% of the CML patients, with
overexpression of USF2 being significantly associated with decreased expression
of hsa-miR-10a (P = 0.004). Our results indicate that down-regulation of
hsa-miR-10a may increase USF2 and contribute to the increase in cell
proliferation of CML implicating a miRNA in the abnormal behavior of CML.

PMID: 19074828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2008 Dec;53(16 Suppl):2071-7.

[Structural biology of vesicular transport].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawasaki M, Wakatsuki S.

PMID: 21038587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Blood. 2009 Feb 12;113(7):1547-54. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-164954. Epub 2008
Nov 13.

An insulator with barrier-element activity promotes alpha-spectrin gene
expression in erythroid cells.

Gallagher PG(1), Nilson DG, Steiner LA, Maksimova YD, Lin JY, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520-8064, USA. patrick.gallagher@yale.edu

Understanding mechanisms controlling expression of the alpha-spectrin gene is
important for understanding erythropoiesis, membrane biogenesis, and
spectrin-linked hemolytic anemia. We showed previously that a minimal
alpha-spectrin promoter directed low levels of expression only in early erythroid
development, indicating elements outside the promoter are required for expression
in adult erythrocytes. Addition of noncoding exon 1' and intron 1' conferred a
10-fold increase in activity in reporter gene assays. In this report, we used a
transgenic mouse model to show that addition of exon 1' and intron 1' to the
alpha-spectrin promoter conferred tissue-specific expression of a linked
(A)gamma-globin gene in erythroid cells at all developmental stages. Expression
was nearly position-independent, as 21 of 23 lines expressed the transgene, and
gamma-globin protein was present in 100% of erythrocytes, indicating uniform
expression. Additional in vivo studies revealed that exon 1' functions as an
insulator with barrier-element activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that this region was occupied by the upstream stimulatory factors
1/2 (USF1/USF2), similar to the well-characterized chicken HS4 insulator. These
data identify the first barrier element described in an erythrocyte membrane
protein gene and indicate that exon 1' and intron 1' are excellent candidate
regions for mutations in patients with spectrin-linked hemolytic anemia.

PMCID: PMC2644083
PMID: 19008453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Feb;296(2):F257-65. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.90493.2008. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Activation of renal renin-angiotensin system in upstream stimulatory factor 2
transgenic mice.

Shi L(1), Nikolic D, Liu S, Lu H, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, Univ. of Kentucky, Wethington Bldg. 
Rm. 517, 900 S. Limestone St., Lexington, KY 40536-0200, USA.

Previously we demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) transgenic
(Tg) mice developed nephropathy including albuminuria and glomerular hypertrophy,
accompanied by increased transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta and fibronectin
accumulation in the glomeruli. However, the mechanisms by which overexpression of
USF2 induces kidney injury are unknown. USF has been shown to regulate renin
expression. Moreover, the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) plays important roles in
renal diseases. Therefore, in the present studies the effects of USF2 on the
regulation of RAS in the kidney as well as in mesangial cells from USF2 (Tg) mice
were examined. The role of USF2-mediated regulation of RAS in TGF-beta production
in mesangial cells was also determined. Our data demonstrate that USF2 (Tg) mice 
exhibit increased renin and angiotensin (ANG) II levels in the kidney. In
contrast, renal expression of other components of RAS such as renin receptor,
angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), ACE2, angiotensin type 1a
(AT(1a)) receptor, and AT(2) receptor was not altered in USF2 (Tg) mice.
Similarly, mesangial cells isolated from USF2 (Tg) mice had increased renin and
ANG II levels. Mesangial cells overexpressing USF2 also had increased TGF-beta
production, which was blocked by small interfering RNA-mediated renin gene
knockdown or RAS blockade (enalapril or losartan). Collectively, these results
suggest that USF2 promotes renal renin expression and stimulates ANG II
generation, leading to activation of the intrarenal RAS. In addition,
renin-dependent ANG II generation mediates the effect of USF2 on TGF-beta
production in mesangial cells, which may contribute to the development of
nephropathy in USF2 (Tg) mice.

PMID: 19004931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Nov;43(11):2016-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2008.03.037.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 is implicated in the progression of biliary atresia
by regulation of hepcidin expression.

Huang YH(1), Huang CC, Chuang JH, Hsieh CS, Lee SY, Chen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaoshiung Medical
Center, Niao-Sung Hsiang, Kaohsiung, Taiwan 833, ROC

BACKGROUND: Hepcidin is downregulated during the progression of biliary atresia
(BA), but the mechanism is still unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed single nucleotide polymorphism of rs7251432 and 916145
within hepcidin and its upstream, USF2 gene, respectively, in 52 patients of BA
and 96 healthy controls. Liver tissues were obtained from 10 patients with early 
and late stage of BA, 10 patients with choledochal cyst, and 4 normal controls to
study upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein
expressions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and USF2-specific short
interference RNA (siRNA) were used in human HepG2 cells to show that USF2 can
regulate hepcidin expression.
RESULTS: C and CC allele frequencies of rs916145 of USF2 were significantly
higher in patients with BA than in healthy controls. There was also significantly
higher USF2 protein nuclear translocation in the early stage of BA than in the
late stage, which was compatible with higher hepcidin mRNA expression in the
early stage of BA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated physiologic
bindings of USF2 to the hepcidin promoter in HepG2 cells. USF2 siRNA also
significantly knocked down hepcidin mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrates that C allele of rs916145 in USF2 gene has
more frequency for developing BA, and decreased USF2 protein nuclear
translocation might partly play a role in the decreased hepcidin expression in
the cholestatic liver injury of the late stage of BA.

PMID: 18970934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Korean Med Sci. 2008 Oct;23(5):870-6. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2008.23.5.870.

Overexpression of USF increases TGF-beta1 protein levels, but G1 phase arrest was
not induced in FRTL-5 cells.

Kim KS(1), Jung HS, Chung YJ, Jung TS, Jang HW, Lee MS, Kim KW, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Jungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) is a potent inhibitor of cellular
growth and proliferation by G1 phase arrest or apoptosis. We investigated the
association of TGF-beta1 with the anti-proliferative effect of upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) in Fischer rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5) cells.
[methyl-(3)H] thymidine uptake was measured after treatment of FRTL-5 cells with 
TGF-beta1 to identify its anti-proliferative effect. USF-1 and USF-2 proteins
were in vitro translated, and an electrophoretic mobility shift assay was
performed to identify the interaction between USF and the TGF-beta1 promoter.
FRTL-5 cells were transfected with USF cDNA, and then the expression of TGF-beta1
was examined with Northern and Western blotting. The cell cycle-regulating
proteins associated with TGF-beta1 were also measured. TGF-beta1 significantly
inhibited [methyl-(3)H] thymidine uptake in FRTL-5 cells. Two specific binding
sites for USF were found in the TGF-beta1 promoter: -1,846 approximately -1,841
(CACATG) and -621 approximately -616 (CATGTG). Overexpression of USF increased
both the mRNA levels and protein levels of TGF-beta1. However, the expression of 
cyclin D1, CDK4, cyclin E, and CDK2, and the phosphorylation of retinoblastoma
protein remained unchanged. Overexpression of USF in FRTL-5 cells increased the
expression of TGF-beta10 through specific binding to TGF-beta1 promoter. However,
the USF-induced expression of TGF-beta1 did not cause G1 arrest.

PMCID: PMC2580023
PMID: 18955796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):G1211-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90360.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Regulation of basal core promoter activity of human organic cation transporter 1 
(OCT1/SLC22A1).

Kajiwara M(1), Terada T, Asaka J, Aoki M, Katsura T, Ikai I, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Human organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1/SLC22A1) plays important roles in the
hepatic uptake of cationic drugs. The functional characteristics of this
transporter have been well evaluated, but molecular information regarding
transcriptional regulation is limited. In the present study, therefore, we
examined the gene regulation of OCT1 gene focusing on basal core expression. An
approximately 2.5-kb fragment of the OCT1 promoter region was isolated, and
promoter activity was measured by luciferase assay in the human liver cell lines 
Huh7 and HepG2. Deletion analysis suggested that the region spanning -141/-69 was
essential for the basal core transcriptional activity and that this region
contained the sequence of a cognate E-box (CACGTG). The E-box is known to be
bound by the basal transcription factors, upstream stimulating factors (USFs),
and the functional involvements of USF1 and USF2 were confirmed by a
transactivation effect, a mutational analysis of the E-box, and an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The transactivation effect of USFs on the
OCT1 promoter was further stimulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, a
liver-enriched transcription factor. There were no polymorphisms in the proximal 
promoter region (about 400 bp) of OCT1 gene (n = 109). These findings indicated
that both USF1 and USF2 bind to an E-box sequence located in the OCT1 core
promoter region and are required for the basal gene expression of this
transporter.

PMID: 18845576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Circ Res. 2008 Oct 24;103(9):940-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180653. Epub 2008
Sep 18.

Upstream stimulatory factor is required for human angiotensinogen expression and 
differential regulation by the A-20C polymorphism.

Dickson ME(1), Tian X, Liu X, Davis DR, Sigmund CD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Medical Scientist Training Programs, Roy J and Lucille A Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Among naturally occurring polymorphisms in the 5' flanking region of the human
angiotensinogen (AGT) gene, the -20 and -217 polymorphisms have the strongest
effects on AGT regulation in AGT-expressing cells derived from liver, kidney,
brain, and fat. These polymorphisms may affect allele-specific transcription
factor binding, and the high-expressing alleles are both relatively common. We
show herein that the -20C allele has higher transcriptional activity than -20A,
and the -20A allele confers no additional transactivation potential beyond that
of a mutated vector. Gel-shift assays show that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF)1 and USF2 preferentially bind the -20C allele, whereas the -20A allele
retains a low affinity USF binding site. Plasmid immunoprecipitation assays
confirmed preferential association of USF1 with the -20C allele in transfected
HepG2 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that USF1 binds to the
endogenous AGT -20C allele in CCF cells, the only cell line tested that carries
the -20C allele, and to the human AGT promoter in liver and adipose tissue from
transgenic mice. Transduction of AGT-expressing cells with short hairpin RNAs
specifically targeting USF1 or USF2, resulted in cell- and allele-specific
attenuation of AGT promoter activity. In vivo, knockdown of USF expression in the
liver of transgenic mice expressing the -20C allele of AGT resulted in lower AGT 
expression, a decrease in circulating human AGT protein but no change in
expression of GAPDH or hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha. We conclude that USF1
functionally and differentially regulates AGT expression via the -20 polymorphism
and that the differential expression exhibited by -20 can be accounted for by
differential association with USF1.

PMCID: PMC2678906
PMID: 18802024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Nov 14;376(2):347-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.08.155. Epub 2008 Sep 7.

Interaction of USF1/USF2 and alpha-Pal/Nrf1 to Fmr-1 promoter increases in mouse 
brain during aging.

Prasad S(1), Singh K.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Lab, CAS in Zoology, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 221005, India. drsprasad_bhu@yahoo.co.uk

Fragile X syndrome is caused due to silencing of FMR-1 gene transcription leading
to loss of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). To investigate whether
the transcriptional mechanism is linked to aging, we have studied interaction of 
the transcription factors USF1/USF2 and alpha-Pal/Nrf1 to E-box and GC-box,
respectively, in Fmr-1 promoter in the brain of young, adult, and old mouse using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Our data reveal that the interaction
of these transcription factors to their respective promoter sequences increases
in mouse brain as a function of age. The finding on the interaction of the above 
transcription factors to their cognate sequences is novel as the current
investigation has been carried out in intact and aging mouse. The present finding
is important in respect to age- and FMRP-dependent brain function.

PMID: 18782566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jan;80(1):24-33. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070037. Epub 2008 
Sep 3.

USF1/2 transcription factor DNA-binding activity is induced during rat Sertoli
cell differentiation.

Wood MA(1), Walker WH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Reproductive Physiology, Department of Cell Biology and
Molecular Physiology, Magee Women's Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Each Sertoli cell can support a finite number of developing germ cells. During
development of the testis, the cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and the
onset of differentiation determine the final number of Sertoli cells and, hence, 
the number of sperm that can be produced. We hypothesize that the transition from
proliferation to differentiation is facilitated by E-box transcription factors
that induce the expression of differentiation-promoting genes. The relative
activities of E-box proteins were studied in primary Sertoli cells isolated from 
5-, 11-, and 20-day-old rats, representing proliferating, differentiating, and
differentiated cells, respectively. E-box DNA-binding activity is almost
undetectable 5 days after birth but peaks with initiation of differentiation 11
days after birth and remains elevated. Upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1
and USF2) were found to be the predominant E-box proteins present within
DNA-protein complexes formed after incubating E-box-containing probes with
nuclear extracts from developing Sertoli cells. The known potentiator of Sertoli 
cell differentiation, thyroxine, increases USF DNA-binding activity in Sertoli
cells before differentiation (5-day-old Sertoli cells) but not after
differentiation is initiated (11- and 20-day-old Sertoli cells). The
developmental-specific increase in USF1 and USF2 DNA-binding activity may
facilitate the switch from proliferation to differentiation and, thus, determine 
the ultimate number of Sertoli cells present within the testes and the upper
limit of fertility.

PMCID: PMC2804807
PMID: 18768914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Mol Biol. 2008 Nov 14;383(3):502-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.036. Epub 2008 
Aug 22.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate OSCAR gene expression in RANKL-mediated
osteoclast differentiation.

Kim JH(1), Kim K, Jin HM, Youn BU, Song I, Choi HS, Kim N.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Regulation of Bone Metabolism and Disease,
Research Institute Medical Sciences, Chonnam National University Medical School, 
Dong-Ku, Gwangju 501-746, Korea.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand (RANKL) induces osteoclast
differentiation from hematopoietic precursors via regulation of various
transcription factors. Here, we show that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs),
which are basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factors, are
involved in RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis and regulation of
osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR) gene expression, which is an important
costimulatory receptor for osteoclast differentiation. USF-1 and USF-2 are
expressed in hematopoietic osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts.
Interestingly, down-regulation of USF-1 by RNA interference or overexpression of 
a dominant-negative form of USF-1 attenuates osteoclast formation and expression 
of OSCAR during osteoclastogenesis. Promoter analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal that USFs bind directly to an E-box site in the
OSCAR promoter region and activate OSCAR. In addition, USFs interact and
cooperate with nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 in regulating OSCAR gene
expression. Taken together, our results indicate that USFs serve as modulators in
the induction of OSCAR and RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis.

PMID: 18762192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Diabetologia. 2008 Nov;51(11):2078-87. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1125-6. Epub 2008 
Aug 30.

Glucose increases hepatic lipase expression in HepG2 liver cells through
upregulation of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2.

van Deursen D(1), Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR, Erasmus MC, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Elevated hepatic lipase (HL, also known as LIPC) expression is a
key factor in the development of the atherogenic lipid profile in type 2 diabetes
and insulin resistance. Recently, genetic screens revealed a possible association
of type 2 diabetes and familial combined hyperlipidaemia with the USF1 gene.
Therefore, we investigated the role of upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) in the
regulation of HL.
METHODS: Levels of USF1, USF2 and HL were measured in HepG2 cells cultured in
normal- or high-glucose medium (4.5 and 22.5 mmol/l, respectively) and in livers 
of streptozotocin-treated rats.
RESULTS: Nuclear extracts of cells cultured in high glucose contained 2.5 +/-
0.5-fold more USF1 and 1.4 +/- 0.2-fold more USF2 protein than cells cultured in 
normal glucose (mean +/- SD, n = 3). This coincided with higher DNA binding of
nuclear proteins to the USF consensus DNA binding site. Secretion of HL (2.9 +/- 
0.5-fold), abundance of HL mRNA (1.5 +/- 0.2-fold) and HL (-685/+13) promoter
activity (1.8 +/- 0.3-fold) increased in parallel. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, the proximal HL promoter region was
immunoprecipitated with anti-USF1 and anti-USF2 antibodies. Co-transfection with 
USF1 or USF2 cDNA stimulated HL promoter activity 6- to 16-fold. USF and glucose 
responsiveness were significantly reduced by removal of the -310E-box from the HL
promoter. Silencing of the USF1 gene by RNA interference reduced glucose
responsiveness of the HL (-685/+13) promoter region by 50%. The hyperglycaemia in
streptozotocin-treated rats was associated with similar increases in USF
abundance in rat liver nuclei, but not with increased binding of USF to the rat
Hl promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Glucose increases HL expression in HepG2 cells via
elevation of USF1 and USF2. This mechanism may contribute to the development of
the dyslipidaemia that is typical of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18758746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Brain Res. 2008 Oct 21;1236:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.007. Epub 2008 
Aug 13.

Role of upstream stimulating factors in the transcriptional regulation of the
neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter KCC2.

Markkanen M(1), Uvarov P, Airaksinen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, Viikinkaari 4, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

The neuron-specific K-Cl cotransporter (KCC2) maintains a low intracellular Cl(-)
concentration in neurons and is necessary for fast hyperpolarizing responses to
GABA and glycine. The mammalian KCC2 gene (alias Slc12a5) generates two
neuron-specific isoforms by using alternative promoters and first exons.
Expression of the major isoform, KCC2b, is strongly upregulated during neuronal
maturation, and is modulated by neuronal activity, trauma, and neurotrophic
factors. In the present study, we have focused on the regulatory influence of the
upstream stimulating factors USF1 and USF2 via an E-box control element in the
KCC2b promoter (E-boxKCC2b). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay in cell lines
and chromatin immunoprecipitation in neurons demonstrated binding of endogenous
USF1 and USF2 to the E-box(KCC2b) element. Mutation of the E-boxKCC2b site
resulted in reduced KCC2b promoter activity in cell lines and cortical neurons.
Overexpression of a dominant-negative form of USF confirmed the involvement of
endogenous USF proteins in the regulation of the KCC2b gene. The results suggest 
that binding of USF proteins to the E-boxKCC2b may contribute to the upregulation
of KCC2b gene expression in developing brain.

PMID: 18755167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Aug;16(4):960-3.

[Mechanisms underlying the expression regulation of HOXB4 transcription in
hematopoietic stem cells - review].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation, Affiliated Hospital,
Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 100071, China.

As a member of the hox gene family, hoxB4 gene encodes a class of DNA-dependent
homeobox domain nucleoprotein, which is a specific transcription factor, playing 
an important role in regulating the balance between self-renewal and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Therefore, it is important to
understand the mechanisms involved in regulating expression of hoxB4 in the HSC. 
Previous studies have suggested that some hoxB4 upstream regulatory factors, such
as USF-1 (upstream activating factor -1), USF-2 (upstream activating factor -2)
and NF-Y complex, as well as hematopoietic cytokines, such as platelet growth
factor (TPO) and Wnt3a protein, play important regulatory roles in the expression
of hoxB4 in hematopoietic stem cells. In this review the structure and biological
characteristics of hoxB4, mechanisms involved in regulating expression of hoxB4
in the HSC are summarized.

PMID: 18718100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(18):5777-84. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00106-08. Epub 2008 Jul 
21.

Diadenosine tetraphosphate hydrolase is part of the transcriptional regulation
network in immunologically activated mast cells.

Carmi-Levy I(1), Yannay-Cohen N, Kay G, Razin E, Nechushtan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, P.O.
Box 12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

We previously discovered that microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) and
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) each forms a complex with its inhibitor
histidine triad nucleotide-binding 1 (Hint-1) and with lysyl-tRNA synthetase
(LysRS). Moreover, we showed that the dinucleotide diadenosine tetraphosphate
(Ap(4)A), previously shown to be synthesized by LysRS, binds to Hint-1, and as a 
result the transcription factors are released from their suppression. Thus,
transcriptional activity is regulated by Ap(4)A, suggesting that Ap(4)A is a
second messenger in this context. For Ap(4)A to be unambiguously established as a
second messenger, several criteria have to be fulfilled, including the presence
of a metabolizing enzyme. Since several enzymes are able to hydrolyze Ap(4)A, we 
provided here evidence that the "Nudix" type 2 gene product, Ap(4)A hydrolase, is
responsible for Ap(4)A degradation following the immunological activation of mast
cells. The knockdown of Ap(4)A hydrolase modulated Ap(4)A accumulation, resulting
in changes in the expression of MITF and USF2 target genes. Moreover, our
observations demonstrated that the involvement of Ap(4)A hydrolase in gene
regulation is not a phenomenon exclusive to mast cells but can also be found in
cardiac cells activated with the beta-agonist isoproterenol. Thus, we have
provided concrete evidence establishing Ap(4)A as a second messenger in the
regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2546939
PMID: 18644867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jul;8(6):376-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2008.05.003. Epub
2008 May 25.

Upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2 are differentially expressed during
Xenopus embryonic development.

Fujimi TJ(1), Aruga J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Behavioral and Developmental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2 are members of the basic
helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factor family. They are considered 
to play critical roles in cell-cycle regulation and chromatin remodeling. Their
gene expression patterns are considered ubiquitous but have not been fully
investigated in terms of embryogenesis. We examined the expression of the genes
encoding USF1 and USF2 in Xenopus laevis during embryonic development. Expression
of both genes was first detected as maternal transcripts and was observed
continuously throughout development. However, in situ hybridization analysis
revealed that the two genes were expressed differentially. In the late blastula, 
both genes were expressed in the blastocoel roof and marginal zone. At the
gastrula stage, USF2 was strongly expressed in the sensorial layer of the
ectoderm and in the mesoderm, whereas USF1 expression was hardly detectable. From
the neurula stage onward, expression of both genes was markedly enhanced in the
neural tissues, neural crest, eye and otic vesicle. However, spatial expression
of the genes within the neural tube differed in that the strongest USF1 signals
were observed in the lateral region of the basal plate and the strongest USF2
ones in the dorsal region of the neural tube. Expression of the two genes
occurred in different mesoderm derivatives at the tailbud stage (USF1, somite;
USF2, pronephros and lateral plate mesoderm of the tail region). USF1 was
expressed in the notochord of the early neurula, but was lost at the stage.

PMID: 18585979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Mol Biol. 2008 Jul 25;380(5):789-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.04.057. Epub 2008 
Apr 30.

Glucose regulates the expression of the apolipoprotein A5 gene.

Nowak M(1), Helleboid-Chapman A, Jakel H, Moitrot E, Rommens C, Pennacchio LA,
Fruchart-Najib J, Fruchart JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Lille, Département d'Athérosclérose, Lille, France.

The apolipoprotein A5 gene (APOA5) is a key player in determining triglyceride
concentrations in humans and mice. Since diabetes is often associated with
hypertriglyceridemia, this study explores whether APOA5 gene expression is
regulated by alteration in glucose homeostasis and the related pathways.
d-Glucose activates APOA5 gene expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
hepatocytes, and the glycolytic pathway involved was determined using d-glucose
analogues and metabolites. Together, transient transfections, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that this
regulation occurs at the transcriptional level through an increase of USF1/2
binding to an E-box in the APOA5 promoter. We show that this phenomenon is not
due to an increase of mRNA or protein expression levels of USF. Using protein
phosphatases 1 and 2A inhibitor, we demonstrate that d-glucose regulates the
APOA5 gene via a dephosphorylation mechanism, resulting in an enhanced
USF1/2-promoter binding. Last, subsequent suppressions of USF1/2 and phosphatases
mRNA through siRNA gene silencing abolished the regulation. We demonstrate that
the APOA5 gene is up regulated by d-glucose and USF through phosphatase
activation. These findings may provide a new cross-talk between glucose and lipid
metabolism.

PMID: 18572192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Endocrinology. 2008 Oct;149(10):5297-306. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1199. Epub 2008
Jun 19.

In vivo regulation of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor by the transcription 
factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 and upstream stimulatory factor 2 is cell
specific.

Hermann BP(1), Hornbaker K, Rice DA, Sawadogo M, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Pituitary FSH promotes pubertal timing and normal gametogenesis by binding its
receptor (FSHR) located on Sertoli and granulosa cells of the testis and ovary,
respectively. Studies on Fshr transcription provide substantial evidence that
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and USF2, basic helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper proteins, regulate Fshr through an E-box within its promoter. However,
despite the strong in vitro support for USF1 and USF2 in Fshr regulation, there
is currently no in vivo corroborating evidence. In the present study, chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated specific binding of USF1 and USF2 to the Fshr
promoter in both Sertoli and granulosa cells, in vivo. Control cells lacking Fshr
expression showed no USF-Fshr promoter binding, thus correlating USF-promoter
binding to gene activity. Evaluation of Fshr expression in Usf1 and Usf2 null
mice further explored USF's role in Fshr transcription. Loss of either gene
significantly reduced ovarian Fshr levels, whereas testis levels were unaltered. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of USF-Fshr promoter binding in Usf-null
mice indicated differences in the composition of promoter-bound USF dimers in
granulosa and Sertoli cells. Promoter-bound USF dimer levels declined in
granulosa cells from both null mice, despite increased USF2 levels in Usf1-null
ovaries. However, compensatory increases in promoter-bound USF homodimers were
evident in Usf-null Sertoli cells. In summary, this study provides the first in
vivo evidence that USF1 and USF2 bind the Fshr promoter and revealed differences 
between Sertoli and granulosa cells in compensatory responses to USF loss and the
USF dimeric composition required for Fshr transcription.

PMCID: PMC2582914
PMID: 18566134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 24;27(32):4446-55. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.85. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

The transcription-repression domain of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein targets
p300 at the promoter.

Green M(1), Panesar NK, Loewenstein PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63104, USA. green@slu.edu

Extensive mutational/functional analysis of the transcription-repression domain
encoded in the N-terminal 80 amino acids of the adenovirus E1A 243R oncoprotein
suggests a model for the molecular mechanism of E1A repression: E1A accesses
transcriptional co-activators such as p300 on specific promoters and then
interacts with TBP to disrupt the TBP-TATA complex. In support of this model, as 
reported here, a basal core promoter activated by tethering p300 is repressible
by E1A at the promoter level as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis. Sequestration of p300 by E1A does not play a significant role, as
indicated by dose-response measurements. Furthermore, when the core promoter is
transcriptionally activated by tethering activation domains of several
transcription factors that can recruit p300 (p65, MyoD, cMyb and TFE3),
transcription is repressible by E1A. However, when the core promoter is activated
by factors not known to recruit p300 (USF1 and USF2), transcription is resistant 
to E1A repression. Finally, tethering p300 to the non-repressible adenovirus
major late promoter (MLP) renders it repressible by E1A. ChIP analysis shows that
E1A occupies the repressed MLP. These findings provide support for the hypothesis
that p300 can serve as a scaffold for the E1A repression domain to access
specific cellular gene promoters involved in growth regulation.

PMID: 18408753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genome Res. 2008 Mar;18(3):380-92. doi: 10.1101/gr.6880908. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Whole-genome maps of USF1 and USF2 binding and histone H3 acetylation reveal new 
aspects of promoter structure and candidate genes for common human disorders.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Ameur A, Kapranov P, Enroth S, Komorowski J, Gingeras TR,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden

Transcription factors and histone modifications are crucial regulators of gene
expression that mutually influence each other. We present the DNA binding
profiles of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1, USF2) and acetylated
histone H3 (H3ac) in a liver cell line for the whole human genome using ChIP-chip
at a resolution of 35 base pairs. We determined that these three proteins bind
mostly in proximity of protein coding genes transcription start sites (TSSs), and
their bindings are positively correlated with gene expression levels. Based on
the spatial and functional relationship between USFs and H3ac at protein coding
gene promoters, we found similar promoter architecture for known genes and the
novel and less-characterized transcripts human mRNAs and spliced ESTs.
Furthermore, our analysis revealed a previously underestimated abundance of genes
in a bidirectional conformation, where USFs are bound in between TSSs. After
taking into account this promoter conformation, the results indicate that H3ac is
mainly located downstream of TSS, and it is at this genomic location where it
positively correlates with gene expression. Finally, USF1, which is associated to
familial combined hyperlipidemia, was found to bind and potentially regulate
nuclear mitochondrial genes as well as genes for lipid and cholesterol
metabolism, frequently in collaboration with GA binding protein transcription
factor alpha (GABPA, nuclear respiratory factor 2 [NRF-2]). This expands our
understanding about the transcriptional control of metabolic processes and its
alteration in metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2259102
PMID: 18230803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 29;283(9):5441-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708662200. Epub 2007
Dec 31.

Control of the calcitonin gene-related peptide enhancer by upstream stimulatory
factor in trigeminal ganglion neurons.

Park KY(1), Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA.

The neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a key player in
migraine. However, the transcription factors controlling CGRP expression in the
migraine-relevant trigeminal ganglion neurons are unknown. Previous in vitro
studies demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and USF2 bind to
the CGRP neuroendocrine-specific 18-bp enhancer, yet discrepant overexpression
results in cell lines, and the ubiquitous nature of the USF cast doubts about its
role. To test the functional role of USF, we first demonstrated that small
interfering RNAs directed against USF1 and USF2 reduced endogenous CGRP RNA and
preferentially targeted the USF binding site at the 18-bp enhancer in the
neuronal-like CA77 cell line. In cultured rat trigeminal ganglion neurons,
knockdown of either USF1 or USF2 reduced CGRP promoter activity. Conversely,
overexpression of USF1 or USF2 increased promoter activity. The activation was
even greater upon cotransfection with an upstream activator of mitogen-activated 
protein kinases and was synergistic in a heterologous cell line. To begin to
address the paradox of how ubiquitous USF proteins might direct neuronal-specific
activity, we examined USF expression and used a series of adenoviral reporters in
the cultured ganglia. Unexpectedly, there was more intense USF immunostaining in 
neurons than nonneuronal cells. Importantly, the 18-bp USF enhancer driving a
minimal promoter was sufficient for neuronal specificity, although it was not the
only site that directed neuronal expression. These results demonstrate that USF1 
and USF2 are important contributors to neuronal-specific and mitogen-activated
protein kinase regulation of the CGRP gene in trigeminal ganglion neurons.

PMID: 18167349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;22(4):904-14. doi: 10.1210/me.2006-0302. Epub 2007 Dec
28.

Upstream stimulatory factor-2 regulates steroidogenic factor-1 expression in
endometriosis.

Utsunomiya H(1), Cheng YH, Lin Z, Reierstad S, Yin P, Attar E, Xue Q, Imir G,
Thung S, Trukhacheva E, Suzuki T, Sasano H, Kim JJ, Yaegashi N, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Local estrogen biosynthesis is a major factor in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Aberrant expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) and aromatase in endometriotic tissue leads to an up-regulation of
estrogen production. The transcription factor steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1)
activates the promoters of both StAR and aromatase in endometriotic tissue. We
investigated differences in SF-1 expression in endometriotic tissue and normally 
located endometrium to elucidate the mechanism underlying increased StAR and
aromatase activities in endometriosis. Serial deletion and site-directed mutants 
of the SF-1 promoter showed that an E-box sequence was critical for its activity 
in endometriotic stromal cells. EMSAs showed that the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) 1 and 2 in nuclear extracts from endometrial and endometriotic stromal
cells bound to the E-box. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation-PCR assay, however,
demonstrated in intact cells that binding activity of USF2 to the SF-1 promoter
was strikingly higher than that of USF1 in endometriotic stromal cells and that
USF1 or USF2 binding activity was hardly detectable in endometrial stromal cells.
Moreover, knockdown of USF2 but not USF1 resulted in robust and consistent
down-regulation of SF-1 and its target genes StAR and aromatase in endometriotic 
stromal cells. USF2 but not USF1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly
higher in endometriotic vs. endometrial stromal cells. In vivo, USF2 mRNA and
immunoreactive USF2 levels in endometriotic tissues were strikingly higher than
those in endometrium. Taken together, the elevated levels of USF2 in
endometriosis account for, in part, the aberrant expression of SF-1 and its
target gene StAR and aromatase.

PMCID: PMC2276471
PMID: 18165439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Apr 15;103(6):1952-61.

High glucose levels upregulate upstream stimulatory factor 2 gene transcription
in mesangial cells.

Shi L(1), Liu S, Nikolic D, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky 40536, USA.

Previously, we demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) mediates
high glucose-induced thrombospondin1 (TSP1) gene expression and TGF-beta activity
in glomerular mesangial cells and plays a role in diabetic renal complications.
In the present studies, we further determined the molecular mechanisms by which
high glucose levels regulate USF2 gene expression. In primary rat mesangial
cells, we found that glucose treatment time and dose-dependently up-regulated
USF2 expression (mRNA and protein). By using cycloheximide to block the de novo
protein synthesis, similar rate of USF2 degradation was found under either normal
glucose or high glucose conditions. USF2 mRNA stability was not altered by high
glucose treatment. Furthermore, high glucose treatment stimulated USF2 gene
promoter activity. By using the luciferase-promoter deletion assay, site-directed
mutagenesis, and transactivation assay, we identified a glucose-responsive
element in the USF2 gene promoter (-1,740 to -1,620, relative to the
transcription start site) and demonstrated that glucose-induced USF2 expression
is mediated through a cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-dependent
transactivation of the USF2 promoter. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated CREB knock down
abolished glucose-induced USF2 expression. Taken together, these data indicate
that high glucose levels up-regulate USF2 gene transcription in mesangial cells
through CREB-dependent transactivation of the USF2 promoter.

PMID: 17955499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Biol Rep. 2008 Dec;35(4):677-84. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Differential expression of Fmr-1 mRNA and FMRP in female mice brain during aging.

Singh K(1), Prasad S.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry & Molecular Biology laboratory, CAS in Zoology, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, 221005, India.

Fragile X syndrome is caused by silencing of FMR-1 gene due to unusual expansion 
of CGG repeats (>200 repeats) and their hypermethylation in 5'-UTR. As a
consequence, the expression of the RNA binding protein FMRP is stopped. Absence
of this protein leads to several morphological and neurological symptoms. The
symptoms of the syndrome in males are different than that in the females. We have
previously reported that the Fmr1 gene is down regulated in males as a function
of age. In the present communication, we have investigated expression of Fmr-1
mRNA, FMRP and analysis of interaction of trans-acting factors with E- and GC
boxes in Fmr-1 promoter in female mouse brain as a function of age. Our Northern 
and Western blots data reveal that the level of Fmr-1 transcript decreases in
adult as compared to young mouse but significantly increases in old age and that 
of FMRP decreases in brain of female old mouse as compared to young and adult
age. The immunohistochemical analysis supported the results obtained from Western
blot studies. Our EMSA data reveal that the intensity of USF1/USF2-E Box complex 
gradually increases during aging having significantly highest intensity in old
age mouse whereas the intensity of alpha-Pal/Nrf1- GC-Box complex gradually
decreases as a function of age. The increased intensity of the complex in old age
mouse is correlated to higher level of Fmr-1 transcript in old age. The elevated 
level of Fmr-1 transcript in old mouse brain may be attributed to USF1/USF2
dependent increased transcription of Fmr-1 gene in old age and decrease in FMRP
to altered translation of the transcript or high turn over of FMRP during aging. 
The present finding indicates age and sex as factors affecting the expression of 
Fmr-1 gene in mouse brain.

PMID: 17899445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):F1727-35. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Overexpression of upstream stimulatory factor 2 accelerates diabetic kidney
injury.

Liu S(1), Shi L, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Kentucky, Wethington
Bldg. Rm 517, 900 S. Limestone St., Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Diabetic nephropathy is the most common cause of end-stage renal failure in the
United States. Hyperglycemia is an important factor in the pathogenesis of
diabetic nephropathy. Hyperglycemia upregulates the expression of transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), which stimulates extracellular matrix deposition
in the kidney, contributing to the development of diabetic nephropathy. Our
previous studies demonstrated that the transcription factor, upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2), was upregulated by high glucose, which bound to an 18-bp
sequence in the thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) gene promoter and regulated high
glucose-induced TSP1 expression and TGF-beta activity in mesangial cells,
suggesting that USF2 might play a role in the development of diabetic
nephropathy. In the present studies, we examined the effect of overexpression of 
USF2 on the development of diabetic nephropathy. Type 1 diabetes was induced in
USF2 transgenic mice [USF2 (Tg)] and their wild-type littermates (WT) by
injection of streptozotocin. Four groups of mice were studied: control WT,
control USF2 (Tg), diabetic WT, and diabetic USF2 (Tg). Mice were killed after 15
wk of diabetes onset. At the end of studies, control USF2 (Tg) mice (
approximately 6 mo old) exhibited increased urinary albumin excretion. These mice
also exhibited glomerular hypertrophy, accompanied by increased TSP1, active
TGF-beta, fibronectin accumulation in the glomeruli compared with control WT
littermates. Type 1 diabetes onset further augmented the urinary albumin
excretion and glomerular hypertrophy in the USF2 (Tg) mice. These findings
suggest that overexpression of USF2 accelerates the development of diabetic
nephropathy.

PMID: 17881461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 28;361(3):775-81. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

First functional polymorphism in CFTR promoter that results in decreased
transcriptional activity and Sp1/USF binding.

Taulan M(1), Lopez E, Guittard C, René C, Baux D, Altieri JP, DesGeorges M,
Claustres M, Romey MC.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U827, Laboratoire de Génétique de Maladies Rares, Montpellier, France. 
magali.taulan@montp.inserm.fr

Growing evidences show that functionally relevant polymorphisms in various
promoters alter both transcriptional activity and affinities of existing
protein-DNA interactions, and thus influence disease progression in humans. We
previously reported the -94G>T CFTR promoter variant in a female CF patient in
whom any known disease-causing mutation has been detected. To investigate whether
the -94G>T could be a regulatory variant, we have proceeded to in silico analyses
and functional studies including EMSA and reporter gene assays. Our data indicate
that the promoter variant decreases basal CFTR transcriptional activity in
different epithelial cells and alters binding affinities of both Sp1 and USF
nuclear proteins to the CFTR promoter. The present report provides evidence for
the first functional polymorphism that negatively affects the CFTR
transcriptional activity and demonstrates a cooperative role of Sp1 and USF
transcription factors in transactivation of the CFTR gene promoter.

PMID: 17678620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endocrinology. 2007 Nov;148(11):5147-61. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Expression of a tumor-related gene network increases in the mammalian
hypothalamus at the time of female puberty.

Roth CL(1), Mastronardi C, Lomniczi A, Wright H, Cabrera R, Mungenast AE, Heger
S, Jung H, Dubay C, Ojeda SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Oregon
Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2007 Nov;148(11):5145-6.

Much has been learned in recent years about the central mechanisms controlling
the initiation of mammalian puberty. It is now clear that this process requires
the interactive participation of several genes. Using a combination of high
throughput, molecular, and bioinformatics strategies, in combination with a
system biology approach, we singled out from the hypothalamus of nonhuman
primates and rats a group of related genes whose expression increases at the time
of female puberty. Although these genes [henceforth termed tumor-related genes
(TRGs)] have diverse cellular functions, they share the common feature of having 
been earlier identified as involved in tumor suppression/tumor formation. A
prominent member of this group is KiSS1, a gene recently shown to be essential
for the occurrence of puberty. Cis-regulatory analysis revealed the presence of a
hierarchically arranged gene set containing five major hubs (CDP/CUTL1, MAF, p53,
YY1, and USF2) controlling the network at the transcriptional level. In turn,
these hubs are heavily connected to non-TRGs involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the pubertal process. TRGs may be expressed in the mammalian
hypothalamus as components of a regulatory gene network that facilitates and
integrates cellular and cell-cell communication programs required for the
acquisition of female reproductive competence.

PMID: 17615149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Regul Pept. 2007 Dec 4;144(1-3):25-33. Epub 2007 May 26.

An upstream CRE-E-box element is essential for gastrin-dependent activation of
the cyclooxygenase-2 gene in human colon cancer cells.

Ansorge N(1), Jüttner S, Cramer T, Schmidt WE, Höcker M, Schmitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik I, St. Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany.
n.ansorge@gmx.net

Cyclooxygenase-2, the inducible enzyme of arachidonic acid metabolism and
prostaglandin synthesis, is over expressed in colorectal cancer. Inhibition of
COX-1/-2 by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is associated with a decreased 
risk for these malignancies, whereas high serum gastrin levels elevate this risk.
As gastrin exhibits trophical effects on colonic epithelium we sought to explore 
whether it is capable to induce COX-2 expression in a human colon cancer cell
line. The aim of this study is the description of the gastrin evoked effects on
the transcriptional activity of the COX-2 gene in colorectal cancer cells and the
identification of regulatory promoter elements. Reporter gene assays were
performed with the gastrin-stimulated human colorectal cancer cell-line Colo-320,
which was stable transfected with the human cholecystokinin-B/gastrin receptor
cDNA and COX-2-promoter-luciferase constructs containing different segments of
the 5'-region of the COX-2 gene or with mutated promoter constructs.
Transcription factors were characterized with electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. Gastrin-dependent induction of COX-2 mRNA was shown using "real-time"
PCR. Resulting elevated Prostaglandin E2-levels were measured using ELISA.
Gastrin stimulated the PGE2-generation and COX-2-mRNA expression in human
Colo-320-B cells potently, obviously by transactivating the COX-2-promoter using 
a region between - 68 bp and + 70 bp. Further examinations identified a CRE-E-box
element between - 56 bp and - 48 bp mediating the gastrin-effects on the COX-2
gene. Transcription factors binding to this promoter element were USF-1 und -2.
These results show the necessity to perform succeeding studies, which could
describe possible mechanisms in which gastrin and COX-2 contribute to the
induction of colorectal carcinomas.

PMID: 17604853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Virus Genes. 2007 Oct;35(2):215-23. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Induction of chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTR requires RBF-2 (USF/TFII-I) and
Ras/MAPK signaling.

Malcolm T(1), Chen J, Chang C, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Molecular Epigenetics, LSI, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, Canada 
V6T 1Z3.

The HIV-1 LTR is regulated by multiple signaling pathways responsive to T cell
activation. In this study, we have examined the contribution of the MAPK,
calcineurin-NFAT and TNFalpha-NF-kappaB pathways on induction of chromosomally
integrated HIV-1 LTR reporter genes. We find that induction by T-cell receptor
(CD3) cross-linking and PMA is completely dependent upon a binding site for RBF-2
(USF1/2-TFII-I), known as RBEIII at -120. The MAPK pathway is essential for
induction of the wild type LTR by these treatments, as the MEK inhibitors PD98059
and U0126 block induction by both PMA treatment and CD3 cross-linking.
Stimulation of cells with ionomycin on its own has no effect on the integrated
LTR, indicating that calcineurin-NFAT is incapable of causing induction in the
absence of additional signals, but stimulation with both PMA and ionomycin
produces a synergistic response. In contrast, stimulation of NF-kappaB by
treatment with TNFalpha causes induction of both the wild type and RBEIII mutant 
LTRs, an effect that is independent of MAPK signaling. USF1, USF2 and TFII-I from
unstimulated cells are capable of binding RBEIII in vitro, and furthermore can be
observed on the LTR in vivo by chromatin imunoprecipitation from untreated cells.
DNA binding activity of USF1/2 is marginally stimulated by PMA/ ionomycin
treatment, and all three factors appear to remain associated with the LTR
throughout the course of induction. These results implicate major roles for the
MAPK pathway and RBF-2 (USF1/2-TFII-I) in coordinating events necessary for
transition of latent integrated HIV-1 to active transcription in response to T
cell signaling.

PMID: 17546494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Endocrinology. 2007 Jul;148(7):3507-17. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates constitutive expression and hormonal
suppression of the 90K (Mac-2BP) protein.

Grassadonia A(1), Tinari N, Fiorentino B, Nakazato M, Chung HK, Giuliani C,
Napolitano G, Iacobelli S, Howcroft TK, Singer DS, Kohn LD; Consorzio
Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Bioncologia.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Section, Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. grassadonia@unich.it

We previously reported that hormones important for the normal growth and function
of FRTL-5 rat thyroid cells, TSH, or its cAMP signal plus insulin or IGF-I, could
transcriptionally suppress constitutive and gamma-interferon (IFN)-increased
synthesis of the 90K protein (also known as Mac-2BP). Here we cloned the
5'-flanking region of the rat 90K gene and identified a minimal promoter
containing an interferon response element and a consensus E-box or upstream
stimulator factor (USF) binding site, which are highly conserved in both the
human and murine genes. We show that suppression of constitutive and
gamma-IFN-increased 90K gene expression by TSH/cAMP plus insulin/IGF-I depends on
the ability of the hormones to decrease the binding of USF to the E-box, located 
upstream of the interferon response element. This site is required for the
constitutive expression of the 90K gene. Transfection with USF1 and USF2 cDNAs
increases constitutive promoter activity, attenuates the ability of TSH/cAMP plus
insulin/IGF-I to decrease constitutive or gamma-IFN-increased 90K gene expression
but does not abrogate the ability of gamma-IFN itself to increase 90K gene
expression.

PMID: 17446190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biochem J. 2007 Jul 15;405(2):359-67.

Transcriptional regulation of the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase
gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta/Foxa2 and upstream stimulatory factors in
insulinoma cells.

Boonsaen T(1), Rojvirat P, Surinya KH, Wallace JC, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

PC (pyruvate carboxylase) plays a crucial role in intermediary metabolism
including glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. In the present 
study, we identified two regions of the 1.2 kb distal promoter, the -803/-795
site and the -408/-403 E-box upstream of the transcription start site, as the
important cis-acting elements for transcriptional activation of the luciferase
reporter gene. Site-directed mutagenesis of either one of these sites in the
context of this 1.2 kb promoter fragment, followed by transient transfections in 
the insulinoma cell line, INS-1, abolished reporter activity by approx. 50%.
However, disruption of either the -803/-795 or the -408/-403 site did not affect 
reporter gene activity in NIH 3T3 cells, suggesting that this promoter fragment
is subjected to cell-specific regulation. The nuclear proteins that bound to
these -803/-795 and -408/-403 sites were identified by gel retardation assays as 
HNF3beta (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta)/Foxa2 (forkhead/winged helix
transcription factor box2) and USFs (upstream stimulatory factors), USF1 and
USF2, respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using antisera against
HNF3beta/Foxa2, USF1 and USF2 demonstrated that endogenous HNF3beta/Foxa2 binds
to the -803/-795 Foxa2 site, and USF1 and USF2 bind to the -408/-403 E-box
respectively in vivo, consistent with the gel retardation assay results. Although
there are weak binding sites located at regions -904 and -572 for PDX1
(pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1), a transcription factor that controls expression
of beta-cell-specific genes, it did not appear to regulate PC expression in INS-1
cells in the context of the 1.2 kb promoter fragment. The results presented here 
show that Foxa2 and USFs regulate the distal promoter of the rat PC gene in a
cell-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC1904523
PMID: 17408383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Endocr J. 2007 Apr;54(2):275-85. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

USF inhibits cell proliferation through delay in G2/M phase in FRTL-5 cells.

Jung HS(1), Kim KS, Chung YJ, Chung HK, Min YK, Lee MS, Lee MK, Kim KW, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Korea.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) has a negative effect on the cell proliferation
in some cell types. However, its effect on thyrocytes is not clear. Therefore, we
investigated the effects of USF on the proliferation and function of thyroid
follicular cells. Complementary DNAs of the USF-1 and USF-2 were synthesized
using RT-PCR from FRTL-5 cells, and each was transfected to FRTL-5 cells and
papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) production and
[methyl-3H] thymidine uptake after thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) treatment
were measured in FRTL-5 cells. In the carcinoma cell lines,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) uptake was assayed to evaluate cell proliferation.
Apoptosis was tested by Hoechst staining and cell cycle analysis was done using a
fluorescence activated cell sorting. Expression of cell cycle regulating genes
was evaluated by Northern and Western blotting. Overexpression of USF-1 and USF-2
significantly suppressed TSH-stimulated [methyl-3H] thymidine uptake (p<0.05),
while it maintained TSH-stimulated cAMP production in FRTL-5 cells.
Overexpression of USF significantly suppressed BrdU uptake in each carcinoma cell
line, NPA and TPC-1 cells (p<0.05). It induced delay of cell cycle at the G2/M
phase, but did not increase apoptosis in FRTL-5 cells. It was accompanied by a
decrease of cyclin B1 and cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-1, and an increase of p27
expression. USF-1 and USF-2 suppressed cell proliferation of normal thyrocytes
and thyroid carcinoma cells. However, they retained the ability to produce cAMP
after TSH stimulation. Their inhibitory effect on cell proliferation might be
caused partly by the delay in G2/M phase.

PMID: 17379962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 1;16(9):1058-71. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Comparative genomic and functional analyses reveal a novel cis-acting PTEN
regulatory element as a highly conserved functional E-box motif deleted in Cowden
syndrome.

Pezzolesi MG(1), Zbuk KM, Waite KA, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue,
NE-50, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Germline mutations in PTEN, encoding a phosphatase on 10q23, cause Cowden
syndrome (CS) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS). Approximately, 10% of
CS-related PTEN mutations occur in the PTEN promoter and 11% of BRRS-related
mutations include large deletions, often favoring the gene's 5' end (exon 1,
promoter). In order to better understand the mechanism(s) underlying the
deregulation of PTEN in these syndromes, it is important that functional
cis-regulatory elements be identified. We employed a comparative genomic approach
combined with molecular genetic techniques to identify a highly conserved
sequence upstream of the PTEN promoter, sharing 80% sequence identity among Homo 
sapiens, Mus musculus and Rattus norvegicus. Within this region, we identified a 
canonical E-box sequence (CACGTG) located at position -2181 to -2176,
approximately 800 bp upstream of the PTEN core promoter and more than 1.1 kb
upstream of its minimal promoter region (located at -958 to -821). In vitro
assays suggest that this motif is recognized by members of the basic
region-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper (bHLH-LZ) transcription factor family,
USF1 and USF2, and reporter assays indicate that this novel E-box is involved in 
mediating PTEN transcriptional activation. Four of 30 CS/CS-like patients,
without previously identified PTEN mutations, were found with germline deletions 
of the E-box element. Of the four, three had deletions stretching to exon 1, but 
not 3' of it; importantly, one classic CS patient harbored a germline deletion
localizing to this E-box region, further affirming the role of this element in
PTEN's regulation and deregulation, and its contribution to the pathogenesis of
CS.

PMID: 17341483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 9;354(2):517-21. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate the C/EBP alpha gene during differentiation
of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes.

Kim JW(1), Monila H, Pandey A, Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

During adipocyte differentiation, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha) functions as a pleiotropic transcriptional activator of numerous
adipocyte genes. The promoter of the C/EBPalpha gene has an E-box upstream of
C/EBP binding site. Deletion or mutation of the E-box decreases promoter
activity, suggesting that the E-box participates in the regulation of C/EBPalpha 
expression. Protein binding to the E-box during the adipocyte differentiation is 
increased as indicated by EMSA and UV cross-linking. Purification of the E-box
binding proteins from differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes, showed that USF and AP-4 
are associated with the E-box. Supershift analysis showed that USF1 and USF2 bind
to this element as heterodimers, whereas the addition of anti-AP-4 antibody
enhanced the binding complex, suggesting that AP-4 negatively regulates the
promoter activity. The expression of AP-4 is reciprocally regulated with USF-1
during adipocyte differentiation. These findings suggest that USF-1 and 2 play
roles in C/EBPalpha expression, whereas the AP-4 represses it.

PMID: 17239350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 16;282(7):4719-27. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Lysyl-tRNA synthetase-generated lysyl-adenylate is a substrate for histidine
triad nucleotide binding proteins.

Chou TF(1), Wagner CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicinal Chemistry and Chemistry, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Histidine triad nucleotide binding proteins (Hints) are the most ancient members 
of the histidine triad protein superfamily of nucleotidyltransferases and
hydrolyases. Protein-protein interaction studies have found that complexes of the
transcription factors MITF or USF2 and lysyl-tRNA synthetase (LysRS) are
associated with human Hint1. Therefore, we hypothesized that lysyl-AMP or the
LysRS.lysyl-AMP may be a native substrate for Hints. To explore the biochemical
relationship between Hint1 and LysRS, a series of catalytic radiolabeling,
mutagenesis, and kinetic experiments was conducted with purified LysRSs and Hints
from human and Escherichia coli. After incubation of the E. coli or human LysRS
with Hints and [alpha-(32)P]ATP, but not [alpha-(32)P]GTP, (32)P-labeled Hints
were observed. By varying time and the concentrations of lysine, Mg(2+), or
LysRS, the adenylation of Hint was found to be dependent on the formation of
lysyl-AMP. Site-directed mutagenesis studies of the active site histidine triad
revealed that Hint labeling could be abolished by substitution of either His-101 
of E. coli hinT or His-112 of human Hint1 by either alanine or glycine. Ap(4)A,
believed to be synthesized by LysRS in vivo, and Zn(2+) were shown to inhibit the
formation of Hint-AMP with an IC(50) value in the low micromolar range.
Consistent with pyrophosphate being an inhibitor for aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase,
incubations in the presence of pyrophosphatase resulted in enhanced formation of 
Hint-AMP. These results demonstrate that the lysyl-AMP intermediate formed by
LysRS is a natural substrate for Hints and suggests a potential highly conserved 
regulatory role for Hints on LysRS and possibly other aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.

PMID: 17158446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cells. 2006 Oct 31;22(2):127-32.

Translation and transcription: the dual functionality of LysRS in mast cells.

Yannay-Cohen N(1), Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, P.O.B
12272, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

In the post genome project era, it is well established that the human genome
contains a smaller number of genes than expected. The complexity found in higher 
organisms can be explained if proteins are multifunctional. Indeed, recent
studies are continuing to reveal proteins that are capable of a broad repertoire 
of functions. A good paradigm for multifunctionality can be found in the
amino-acyl tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), an ancient conserved family of proteins.
This unique family, which is comprised of 20 different enzymes, is well known for
its participation in protein synthesis. Several studies have described numerous
examples of these "housekeeping" proteins taking part in extensive critical
cellular activities. In this review, we focus on a member of that family,
lysyl-tRNA synthetase (LysRS), which has been shown to have a dual functionality.
In addition to its contribution to the translation process, LysRS also takes part
in the regulation of MITF and USF2 target genes. This phenomenon was first
described in mast cells.

PMID: 17085962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 2;260-262:100-8. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Transcriptional regulation of the FSH receptor: new perspectives.

Hermann BP(1), Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

The cell-surface receptor for the gonadotropin follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
is expressed exclusively on Sertoli cells of the testis and granulosa cells of
the ovary. FSH signal transduction through its receptor (Fshr) is critical for
the timing and maintenance of normal gametogenesis in the mammalian gonad. In the
13 years since the gene encoding Fshr was first cloned, the mechanisms
controlling its transcription have been extensively examined, but a clear
understanding of what drives its unique cell-specificity remains elusive. Current
knowledge of basal Fshr transcription highlights the role of an E-box in the
proximal promoter which is bound by the basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors upstream stimulatory factor 1 (Usf1) and Usf2. Recent studies utilizing
knockout mice and chromatin immunoprecipitation validated the importance of Usf
to Fshr transcription and demonstrated a sexually dimorphic requirement for the
Usf proteins to maintain normal Fshr expression. Studies have also shown that the
promoter region itself is insufficient for appropriate Fshr expression in
transgenic mice, indicating Fshr transcription depends on regulatory elements
that lie outside of the promoter. Identification of such elements has been
propelled by recent availability of genome sequence data, which facilitated
studies using comparative genomics, DNase I hypersensitivity mapping, and
transgenic analysis with large fragments of DNA. This review will focus on the
current understanding of transcriptional regulatory processes that control
expression of rat Fshr, including recent advances from our laboratory.

PMCID: PMC3682414
PMID: 17084019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biol Reprod. 2007 Jan;76(1):85-95. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

The proximal Gata4 promoter directs reporter gene expression to sertoli cells
during mouse gonadal development.

Mazaud Guittot S(1), Tétu A, Legault E, Pilon N, Silversides DW, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la Reproduction,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laval University, Québec City, Québec,
Canada G1K 7P4.

The GATA4 transcription factor is an important developmental determinant for many
organs, such as the heart, gut, and testis. Despite this pivotal role, our
understanding of the transcriptional mechanisms that control the proper
spatiotemporal expression of the GATA4 gene remains limited. We have generated
transgenic mice expressing a green fluorescent protein (GFP) marker under the
control of rat Gata4 5' flanking sequences. Several GATA4-expressing organs
displayed GFP fluorescence, including the heart, intestine, and pancreas. In the 
gonads, while GATA4 is expressed in pregranulosa, granulosa, and theca ovarian
cells, and Sertoli, Leydig, and peritubular testicular cells, the first 5 kb of
Gata4 regulatory sequences immediately upstream of exon 1 were sufficient to
direct GFP reporter expression only in testis and, specifically, in Sertoli
cells. Onset of GFP expression occurred after Sertoli cell commitment and was
maintained in these cells throughout development to adulthood. In vitro studies
revealed that the first 118 bp of the Gata4 promoter is sufficient for full basal
activity in several GATA4-expressing cell lines. Promoter mutagenesis and
DNA-binding experiments identified two GC-box motifs and, particularly, one E-box
element within this -118-bp region that are crucial for its activity. Further
analysis revealed that members of the USF family of transcription factors,
especially USF2, bind to and activate the Gata4 promoter via this critical E-box 
motif.

PMID: 17021344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Exp Mol Pathol. 2006 Dec;81(3):202-10. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Transcriptional networks in a rat model for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: a
microarray analysis.

Sharma MR(1), Polavarapu R, Roseman D, Patel V, Eaton E, Kishor PB, Nanji AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, A-414 VA Medical Center, Woodland Avenue,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. prasunsh@mail.med.upenn.edu
<prasunsh@mail.med.upenn.edu>

BACKGROUND: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common hepatic
condition that may progress to end-stage liver disease. High-fat diets in animals
reproduce many of the features found in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
OBJECTIVE: To understand how various dietary or genetic factors influence the
development of fatty liver and consequently NAFLD, we performed microarray-based 
expression profiling of genes, induced by fish oil and dextrose diet, a putative 
mediator of alcohol-like effects on the liver of the female rat.
DESIGN: Male and age-matched female rats were fed fish oil and dextrose for 4
weeks. Hepatic RNA from each sample was extracted and used for microarray
analysis.
RESULTS: A large number of genes underwent significant changes in the female
liver as compared to male controls. In the female rat liver, biological theme
analysis demonstrated a shift in the transcriptional program which included
upregulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism, chaperone activity,
mitochondrial and oxidoreductase activity combined with downregulation of genes
involved in nucleic acid metabolism. The differential expression of genes of
interest identified by microarray technique was validated by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Ingenuity computational pathway analysis
tools were used to identify specific regulatory networks of genes operative in
promoting liver injury.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of networks stated above allowed us to identify genes
involved in cell death, apoptosis, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha-regulated lipid metabolism and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathways.

PMID: 16949573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Blood. 2006 Dec 15;108(13):4237-45. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Cis and trans regulation of hepcidin expression by upstream stimulatory factor.

Bayele HK(1), McArdle H, Srai SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University College London, NW3
2PF, United Kingdom.

Hepcidin is the presumed negative regulator of systemic iron levels; its
expression is induced in iron overload, infection, and inflammation, and by
cytokines, but is suppressed in hypoxia and anemia. Although the gene is
exquisitely sensitive to changes in iron status in vivo, its mRNA is devoid of
prototypical iron-response elements, and it is therefore not obvious how it may
be regulated by iron flux. The multiplicity of effectors of its expression also
suggests that the transcriptional circuitry controlling the gene may be very
complex indeed. In delineating enhancer elements within both the human and mouse 
hepcidin gene promoters, we show here that members of the basic helix-loop-helix 
leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) family of transcriptional regulators control hepcidin
expression. The upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), previously linked to
hepcidin through gene ablation in inbred mice, appears to exert a polar or
cis-acting effect, while USF1 may act in trans to control hepcidin expression. In
mice, we found variation in expression of both hepcidin genes, driven by these
transcription factors. In addition, c-Myc and Max synergize to control the
expression of this hormone, supporting previous findings for the role of this
couple in regulating iron metabolism. Transcriptional activation by both
USF1/USF2 and c-Myc/Max heterodimers occurs through E-boxes within the promoter. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of these elements rendered the promoter unresponsive to
USF1/USF2 or c-Myc/Max. Dominant-negative mutants of USF1 and USF2 reciprocally
attenuated promoter transactivation by both wild-type USF1 and USF2. Promoter
occupancy by the transcription factors was confirmed by DNA-binding and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. Taken together, it would appear that synergy between 
these members of the bHLH-ZIP family of transcriptional regulators may subserve
an important role in iron metabolism as well as other pathways in which hepcidin 
may be involved.

PMID: 16902156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Lipid Res. 2006 Nov;47(11):2482-91. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

ChREBP binding to fatty acid synthase and L-type pyruvate kinase genes is
stimulated by glucose in pancreatic beta-cells.

da Silva Xavier G(1), Rutter GA, Diraison F, Andreolas C, Leclerc I.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories for Integrated Cell Signalling, Department of
Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction is central to the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes and may involve secretory failure through glucolipotoxity. The relative 
importance of the transcription factors carbohydrate-responsive element binding
protein (ChREBP), sterol-responsive element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), and
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) in the induction of lipogenic genes by glucose 
remains unclear. By confocal imaging, we show that ChREBP translocates to the
nucleus in MIN6 beta cells in response to glucose. Both ChREBP and SREBP-1c were 
required for the induction of the fatty acid synthase (FAS) promoter by glucose, 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that glucose induced the 
binding of both ChREBP and SREBP-1c to the FAS promoter without affecting USF2
binding. By contrast, ChIP assay revealed that high glucose prompted direct
binding of ChREBP, but not SREBP-1c or USF2, to the liver-type pyruvate kinase
(L-PK) promoter. This event was indispensable for the induction of the L-PK gene 
by glucose, as demonstrated by RNA silencing, single-cell promoter analysis, and 
quantitative real-time PCR. We conclude that ChREBP is a critical regulator of
lipogenic genes in the beta cell and may play a role in the development of
glucolipotoxicity and beta cell failure through alteration of gene expression in 
type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16891625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2006 Jul;61(7):660-2.

Genetic association between USF 1 and USF 2 gene polymorphisms and Japanese
Alzheimer's disease.

Shibata N(1), Ohnuma T, Higashi S, Higashi M, Usui C, Ohkubo T, Watanabe T,
Kawashima R, Kitajima A, Ueki A, Nagao M, Arai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine. 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421 Japan. nobuto.shibata@nifty.ne.jp

To investigate the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and 2 genes on the onset of Alzheimer's
disease (AD), a case-control study was performed. The SNPs were genotyped by a
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP)
method in 236 AD patients and 120 age-matched controls of Japanese descent. We
observed no significant association between the three SNPs of the USF 1 gene and 
AD in our Japanese participants. In addition, the SNPs studied did not affect
plasma cholesterol levels in our AD cases. For the USF 2 gene, the two SNPs did
not show significant association with onset of AD. Our study suggests that the
three SNPs of the USF 1 gene and two SNPs of the USF 2 gene presented here are
not associated with onset of AD.

PMID: 16870626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Bioinformatics. 2006 Sep 15;22(18):2210-6. Epub 2006 Jun 29.

A mixture model-based discriminate analysis for identifying ordered transcription
factor binding site pairs in gene promoters directly regulated by estrogen
receptor-alpha.

Li L(1), Cheng AS, Jin VX, Paik HH, Fan M, Li X, Zhang W, Robarge J, Balch C,
Davuluri RV, Kim S, Huang TH, Nephew KP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Medicine, Indiana University School
of Medicine Indianapolis, IN 47405, USA. lali@iupui.edu

MOTIVATION: To detect and select patterns of transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) which distinguish genes directly regulated by estrogen receptor-alpha
(ERalpha), we developed an innovative mixture model-based discriminate analysis
for identifying ordered TFBS pairs.
RESULTS: Biologically, our proposed new algorithm clearly suggests that TFBSs are
not randomly distributed within ERalpha target promoters (P-value < 0.001). The
up-regulated targets significantly (P-value < 0.01) possess TFBS pairs, (DBP,
MYC), (DBP, MYC/MAX heterodimer), (DBP, USF2) and (DBP, MYOGENIN); and
down-regulated ERalpha target genes significantly (P-value < 0.01) possess TFBS
pairs, such as (DBP, c-ETS1-68), (DBP, USF2) and (DBP, MYOGENIN). Statistically, 
our proposed mixture model-based discriminate analysis can simultaneously perform
TFBS pattern recognition, TFBS pattern selection, and target class prediction;
such integrative power cannot be achieved by current methods.
AVAILABILITY: The software is available on request from the authors.
CONTACT: lali@iupui.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMID: 16809387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Nov;292(1-2):79-88. Epub 2006 Jun 20.

Identification of USF2 as a key regulator of Runx2 expression in mouse
pluripotent mesenchymal D1 cells.

Wang C(1), Lee G, Hsu W, Yeh CH, Ho ML, Wang GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Runx2 is one of the most important transcription factors directing the
osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblastic functions. It is likely
that the factors controlling Runx2 expression would trigger the early steps of
osteoblast differentiation. By using a reporter gene assay for 4.5 kb Runx2
promoter, it was found that the first 305 bp of Runx2 promoter are active in D1
cells. Within this region, electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) delineated a 6 bp
of CACATG bound specifically by the proteins from D1 cell nuclear extract.
Antibody super-shift and DNA-coupling magnetic bead pull-down assay indicated
that the protein bound to this sequence is USF2. Site-specific mutagenesis
revealed that this sequence contributed to the activity of 305 bp Runx2 promoter.
Thus, we suggest that USF2 might be one of the regulators for the expression of
the Runx2 gene in D1 cells.

PMID: 16786196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biol Res. 2006;39(1):191-3.

Regulation of transepithelial transport of iron by hepcidin.

Mena NP(1), Esparza AL, Núñez MT.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department and Cell Dynamics and Biotechnology Research Center,
Faculty of Sciences, Universidad de Chile, Santiago.

Hepcidin (Hepc) is a 25 amino acid cationic peptide with broad antibacterial and 
antifungal actions. A likely role for Hepc in iron metabolism was suggested by
the observation that mice having disruption of the gene encoding the
transcription factor USF2 failed to produce Hepc mRNA and developed spontaneous
visceral iron overload. Lately, Hepc has been considered the "stores regulator," 
a putative factor that signals the iron content of the body to intestinal cells. 
In this work, we characterized the effect of Hepc produced by hepatoma cells on
iron absorption by intestinal cells. To that end, human Hepc cDNA was cloned and 
overexpressed in HepG2 cells and conditioned media from Hepc-overexpressing cells
was used to study the effects of Hepe on intestinal Caco-2 cells grown in
bicameral inserts. The results indicate that Hepc released by HepG2 inhibited
apical iron uptake by Caco-2 cells, probably by inhibiting the expression of the 
apical transporter DMT1. These results support a model in which Hepc released by 
the liver negatively regulates the expression of transporter DMT1 in the
enterocyte.

PMID: 16629180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Blood. 2006 Aug 15;108(4):1402-5. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Targeted disruption of the hepcidin 1 gene results in severe hemochromatosis.

Lesbordes-Brion JC(1), Viatte L, Bennoun M, Lou DQ, Ramey G, Houbron C, Hamard G,
Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département de Génétique, Développement et Pathologie
Moléculaire, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U567,
Paris, France.

We previously reported that mice made deficient for the transcriptional factor
USF2 fail to express hepcidin 1 and hepcidin 2 genes as a consequence of targeted
disruption of the Usf2 gene lying just upstream in the locus. These mice
developed an iron overload phenotype with excess iron deposition in parenchymal
cells and decreased reticuloendothelial iron. At that time, although the role of 
USF2 was still confounding, we proposed for the first time the role of hepcidin
as a negative regulator of iron absorption and iron release from macrophages.
Accordingly, we subsequently demonstrated that hyperexpression of hepcidin 1, but
not hepcidin 2, resulted in a profound hyposideremic anemia. To analyze the
consequences of hepcidin 1 deletion on iron metabolism without any disturbance
due to USF2 deficiency, we disrupted the hepcidin 1 gene by targeting almost all 
the coding region. Confirming our prior results, Hepc1(-/-) mice developed early 
and severe multivisceral iron overload, with sparing of the spleen macrophages,
and demonstrated increased serum iron and ferritin levels as compared with their 
controls.

PMID: 16574947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10849-55. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

Human prolyl-4-hydroxylase alpha(I) transcription is mediated by upstream
stimulatory factors.

Chen L(1), Shen YH, Wang X, Wang J, Gan Y, Chen N, Wang J, LeMaire SA, Coselli
JS, Wang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Adult Cardiothoracic Service, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Prolyl-4-hydroxylase alpha(I) (P4Halpha(I)) is the rate-limiting subunit for P4H 
enzyme activity, which is essential for procollagen hydroxylation and secretion. 
In the current study, we have characterized the human P4Halpha(I) promoter for
transcription factors and DNA elements regulating P4Halpha(I) expression. Using a
progressive deletion cloning approach, we have constructed pGL3-P4Halpha(I)
recombinant plasmids. We have identified a positive regulatory region at the
positions of bp -184 to -97 responsible for approximately 80% of the P4Halpha(I) 
promoter efficiency. Three E-boxes were located within this region, and the E-box
at position bp -135 explains most of the regulatory capacity. Upstream
stimulatory factors (USF1/USF2) were shown to bind on the E-box using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Suppression of USF1 and/or USF2 using specific short
interference RNA resulted in a significant reduction in P4Halpha(I) promoter
activity, and overexpressed USF1 or USF2 increased P4Halpha(I) promoter activity 
significantly. Although transforming growth factor beta1 increased the
USF1/USF2-E-box binding and P4Halpha(I) promoter activity, this up-regulatory
effect can be largely prevented by USF1/USF2-specific short interference RNA. On 
the other hand, cigarette smoking extracts, which have been shown to suppress
P4Halpha(I) expression, inhibited the binding between the USF1/USF2 and E-box,
resulting in a reduced P4Halpha(I) promoter activity. Furthermore, the E-box on
the P4Halpha(I) promoter appeared to indiscriminately bind with either USF1 or
USF2, with a similar outcome on the promoter efficiency. In conclusion, our study
shows that USF1/USF2 plays a critical role in basal P4Halpha(I) expression, and
both positive (transforming growth factor beta1) and negative (cigarette smoking 
extract) regulators appear to influence the USF-E-box interaction and affect
P4Halpha(I) expression.

PMCID: PMC2819823
PMID: 16488890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Jan;22(1):62-7.

[USF as a key regulatory element of gene expression].

[Article in French]

Corre S(1), Galibert MD.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6061, Laboratoire de génétique et développement, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Rennes 1, France.

Upstream stimulating factors, USF-1 and -2, are members of the evolutionary
conserved basic-Helix-Loop-Helix-Leucine Zipper transcription factor family. The 
ubiquitously expressed USF-1 and -2 proteins of respectively 43 kDa and 44 kDa
interact with high affinity to cognate E-box regulatory elements (CANNTG) which
are particularly represented over the genome. The USF transcription factors are
key regulatory elements of the transcriptional machinery mediating recruitment of
chromatin remodelling enzymes, interacting with co-activators and members of the 
pre-initiation complex (PIC). Furthermore, transcriptionnal activity and
DNA-binding of the USF proteins can be modulated by multiple ways including
phosphorylation by distinct kinases (p38, protein kinase A and C, cdk1 and
PI3Kinase), homo or heterodimerization formation and DNA modification of the
E-box binding motif (methylation, SNP). Taken together, these parameters render
very complex the understanding of the USF-dependent gene expression regulation.
USF transcription factors have thus been involved as key regulators of a wide
number of gene regulation network including stress and immune response, cell
cycle and proliferation. This review will thus focus on general aspect of the USF
transcription factors and their implications in some regulatory networks.

PMID: 16386222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 3;281(5):2999-3005. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Cell type-dependent regulation of the hypoxia-responsive plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 gene by upstream stimulatory factor-2.

Dimova EY(1), Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of
Kaiserslautern, D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany. edimova@gwdg.de

Transcriptional regulation of the plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) 
gene is an important issue since PAI-1 plays a crucial role in various
pathological conditions. The transcription factor USF-2 was shown to be a
negative regulator for rat PAI-1 expression, and therefore it was the aim of this
study to evaluate the role of USF-2 for human PAI-1 expression. We found in human
hepatoma cells (HepG2) that USF-2 induced human PAI-1 expression via two
classical E-boxes and the hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) within the promoter.
Gel-shift analyses showed that E-box 4 and E-box 5 bound USFs, and although the
HRE contributed to the USF-dependent effects, it did not bind them. By contrast, 
USF-2 inhibited PAI-1 promoter activity in primary rat hepatocytes suggesting
that PAI-1 expression depends on either the promoter context or USF activity
which might be cell type-specific. Cotransfection of human or rat PAI-1 promoter 
luciferase constructs with expression vectors for wild-type USF-2 or USF-2
mutants in human HepG2 and rat H4IIE cells as well as in primary rat hepatocytes 
revealed that the effects of USF on PAI-1 expression depend on the cell type
rather than the promoter context and that the USF-specific region domain of USF
accounts for the observed cell type-specific effects.

PMID: 16330554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Gynecol Oncol. 2006 Apr;101(1):62-70. Epub 2005 Nov 11.

Gene regulation profiles by progesterone and dexamethasone in human endometrial
cancer Ishikawa H cells.

Davies S(1), Dai D, Pickett G, Leslie KK.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Molecular Biology Laboratory, Division of Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131-5286, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Progesterone and glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone mediate
distinct biological functions, yet they bind to receptors that recognize the same
consensus DNA response element. In breast cancer, progestins are associated with 
the incidence and progression of tumors, whereas glucocorticoids are
growth-suppressive in mammary cancer cells; the differential effects of these two
steroids are less well understood in the hormone-dependent disease cancer of the 
uterine endometrium. We set out to identify genes that are regulated by
progesterone through progesterone receptors and dexamethasone through
glucocorticoid receptors in a well-differentiated human endometrial cancer cell
line.
METHODS: PR- and GR-positive Ishikawa H endometrial cancer cells were treated
with vehicle, dexamethasone (100 nM) or progesterone (100 nM) for 2 h, 6 h, 12 h 
and 24 h, and RNA was isolated. Affymetrix microarrays were performed using the
human HG-U133A chip, querying the expression of 22,000 genes. Expression of genes
of particular interest was confirmed by real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Expression analysis demonstrated that dexamethasone and progesterone
regulate overlapping but distinct sets of genes and presumably exert many similar
but also unique biological effects. Using real-time RT-PCR, we confirmed three
particular genes of interest: the transcript for cysteine 1 (legumain), a gene
associated with metastasis, that is strongly downregulated by progesterone,
upstream c-fos relating transcription factor-2 (USF-2), an anti-proliferative
factor that is induced by both progesterone and dexamethasone and N-cadherin, a
cellular adhesion molecule downregulated by dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: These studies provide new insight into the effects of progesterone
and dexamethasone in endometrial cancer cells and provide an extensive list of
regulated pathways which can be assessed in the future as biomarkers and
molecular targets for new therapies. Taken together, our findings indicate that
progesterone and dexamethasone are primarily growth inhibitors in Ishikawa H
endometrial cancer cells.

PMID: 16289307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Apr 1;97(5):1017-24.

Binding and functional characteristics of two E-box motifs within the S100A6
(calcyclin) gene promoter.

Lesniak W(1), Kuznicki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.
w.lesniak@nencki.gov.pl

S100A6 (calcyclin) is a small calcium-binding protein of the S100 family often
associated with cancer and metastasis. We have previously shown that the E-box
sequence at position -283/-278 of the S100A6 gene promoter interacts with USF
transcription factor and contributes to promoter transcriptional activity. We now
present evidence that a second E-box motif at position -593/-588 of the promoter 
also binds USF and that the USF1/USF2 heterodimer is the prevailing dimeric form 
of the transcription factor bound. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay 
(ChIP), we show that USF is bound in vivo to the E-box regulatory element(s).
Depletion of the endogenous USF pool by means of a decoy oligonucleotide evokes a
severe inhibition of S100A6 gene promoter activity. Furthermore, we show that
S100A6 gene promoter activity can be stimulated by palmitate and that mutation of
the -283/-278 E-box sequence completely blocks this stimulation.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16288473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8904-12.

Nonconventional involvement of LysRS in the molecular mechanism of USF2
transcriptional activity in FcepsilonRI-activated mast cells.

Lee YN(1), Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Reports of the biological multifunctional activity of various aminoacyl tRNA
synthetases have recently accumulated in the literature. The primary function of 
these critical enzymes is to charge various tRNAs with their appropriate amino
acids, thus producing the building blocks of protein synthesis. We have
previously shown that lysyl tRNA synthetase (LysRS) associates with
microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF) and regulates its activity by
synthesis of Ap(4)A in mast cells. Here, we show for the first time that LysRS
associates with another transcription factor, USF2, which unlike MITF, is
ubiquitously expressed in eukaryotic cells. Using mast cells, we have found that 
USF2 is negatively regulated by Hint and Ap(4)A acts as a positive regulator of
USF2 by a molecular mechanism similar to that described for MITF. Since USF2
plays a significant role in a variety of cellular functions, our finding suggests
that LysRS and Ap(4)A may be involved in general regulation of gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1265770
PMID: 16199869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8824-33.

O2 enhancement of human trophoblast differentiation and hCYP19 (aromatase) gene
expression are mediated by proteasomal degradation of USF1 and USF2.

Jiang B(1), Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, 75390, USA.

When cultured in 20% O(2), human cytotrophoblasts fuse to form the
syncytiotrophoblast with marked induction of hCYP19 (aromatase) gene expression. 
When cultured in 2% O(2), cytotrophoblast fusion and induced hCYP19 expression
are prevented. These effects of hypoxia are mediated by increased expression of
mammalian achaete/scute homologue-2 (Mash-2), which increases levels of upstream 
stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1/2) and their binding as heterodimers to E-boxes
surrounding the hCYP19 promoter. In studies to define mechanisms for O(2)
regulation of syncytiotrophoblast differentiation, we found that hypoxia and
overexpression of Mash-2 markedly increased cyclin B1 levels in cultured
trophoblasts and the proportion of cells at the G(2)/M transition. Unlike USF
proteins, USF1/2 mRNA levels are unaffected by O(2) tension. To determine whether
increased O(2) might enhance proteasomal degradation of USF1/2, human
trophoblasts were cultured in 2% or 20% O(2) with or without proteasome
inhibitors. In cells cultured in 20% O(2), proteasome inhibitors increased USF1/2
protein levels and blocked spontaneous induction of hCYP19 expression, cell
fusion, and differentiation. Like hypoxia, inhibitory effects of proteasome
inhibitors on hCYP19 expression were mediated by increased binding of USF1/2 to
the E-boxes. In human trophoblast cells cultured in 20% O(2), increased
polyubiquitylation of USF1/2 proteins was observed. Thus, early in gestation when
the placenta is relatively hypoxic, increased USF1/2 may block trophoblast
differentiation and hCYP19 gene expression. In the second trimester, increased
O(2) tension promotes proteasomal degradation of USF1/2, resulting in
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of hCYP19 expression.

PMCID: PMC1265767
PMID: 16199862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005 Oct 15;39(8):1030-40.

Identification of an E-box motif as a transcriptional repressor element in the
proximal promoter region of the GCLC gene in rat lung epithelial L2 cells.

Cheng LL(1), Li B, Luo JD, Tu HB, Liu QC, Ran P.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510182, People's Republic of China.

Glutathione (GSH) is a critical antioxidant for protecting the airway epithelium 
from oxidant injury and its levels are mainly controlled by glutamate-cysteine
ligase (GCL), which is the rate-limiting enzyme in GSH synthesis. A full
understanding of the gene regulation mechanism of this important enzyme may
disclose the role it plays in respiratory diseases. GCL is made up of two
differentially regulated subunits, a catalytic or heavy subunit (GCLC) and a
modifier or light subunit (GCLM). Many studies in this field led to the findings 
of important positive regulatory regions of the GCLC promoter. For a detailed
analysis of this gene regulation in the respiratory system, we cloned a 1.76-kb
5'-flanking region of the rat GCLC gene, inserted into a luciferase reporter
vector. Exonuclease III was used to cut the 5'-flanking region of the rat GCLC
gene unidirectionally into deletion mutants of different lengths. Sequential
deletion analysis revealed that regions from -403 to -111 and from -705 to -613
are involved in positive regulation and the region from -745 to -705 is involved 
in negative regulation of the GCL gene in rat lung epithelial L2 cells. Specific 
proteins binding to these regions were confirmed by electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) and antibody supershift assays. An E-box motif was 
found in the negative regulatory region -745 to -705. Site-directed mutagenesis
proved that the functional element in this negative regulatory region was a
putative E-box element. EMSA and supershift assays showed that USF1 and USF2 can 
specifically bind to the E-box element. Overexpression of USFs in L2 cells led to
a decreased activity of the GCLC promoter. Western blotting demonstrated that the
expression of GCLC protein was decreased in the retroviral USFs-expressing cells 
than in nontransfected (no DNA added) cells, suggesting that USF binding to the
E-box at -729/-724 serves to trans-repress GCLC gene expression. These findings
indicate that the E-box is an important transcriptional suppressor element in the
GCLC promoter in rat lung epithelial L2 cells. Inhibition of interaction between 
the E-box and the USF may provide an effective means of ameliorating oxidant
injury of the lung.

PMID: 16198230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 26;25(4):579-87.

Tumor-suppression function of transcription factor USF2 in prostate
carcinogenesis.

Chen N(1), Szentirmay MN, Pawar SA, Sirito M, Wang J, Wang Z, Zhai Q, Yang HX,
Peehl DM, Ware JL, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, 77030, USA. nanchen@mdanderson.org

Although the transcription factor USF2 has been implicated in the regulation of
cellular growth and proliferation, it is unknown whether alterations in USF2
contribute to tumorigenesis and tumor development. We examined the role of USF2
in prostate tumorigenesis. Western blot analysis revealed markedly decreased USF2
levels in three androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines, PC-3, DU145, and
M12, as compared to nontumorigenic prostate epithelial cells or the
androgen-dependent cell line, LNCaP. Ectopic expression of USF2 in PC-3 cells did
not affect the cell proliferation rate of PC-3 cells on plastic surfaces.
However, it dramatically decreased anchorage-independent growth of PC-3 cells in 
soft agar (90-98% inhibition) and the invasion capability (80% inhibition) of
PC-3 cells in matrix gel assay. Importantly, expression of USF2 in PC-3 cells
inhibited the tumorigenicity of PC-3 cells in an in vivo nude mice xenograft
model (80-90% inhibition). These results suggest that USF2 has tumor-suppression 
function. Consistent with its function in tumor suppression, we found that the
USF2 protein is present in normal prostate epithelial cells but absent in 18 of
42 (43%) human prostate cancer tissues (P = 0.015). To further examine the
functional role of USF2 in vivo, we generated mice with genetic deletion of USF2 
gene. We found that USF2-null mice displayed marked prostate hyperplasia at a
young age, suggesting that USF2 is involved in the normal growth and
differentiation of prostate. Together, these studies demonstrate that USF2 has
tumor-suppressor function and plays a role in prostate carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16186802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Nov;44(3):183-92.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) as a transcriptional suppressor of human
telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) in oral cancer cells.

Chang JT(1), Yang HT, Wang TC, Cheng AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

Telomerase activity is suppressed in normal human somatic tissues but is
activated in cancer cells and immortal cell lines. The reverse transcriptase (RT)
subunit human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) is the key regulator of
telomerase activity. The hTERT promoter contains E-box elements and may allow
upstream stimulatory factor (USF), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) leucine zipper
family proteins, to bind and regulate the expression. In this study, we
investigated whether and how USF effect on hTERT. Through luciferase reporter
assays, we found that both USF1 and USF2 possess a comparable effect on the
inhibition of hTERT expression. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and immunoblotting (IB) 
analysis reveal that the suppression of hTERT by USF was not through the
interaction of USF with c-myc or mad, nor disturbed the cellular protein levels
of those. In gel mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assays, 
we found that the USF suppression is through direct binding at the E-box site of 
hTERT promoter and rendering the effect actively. Analysis on clinical normal and
tumor tissues reveal that the expression of USF1 and USF2 was lower in the tumor 
tissues, correlated with hTERT expression and telomerase activity. Taking
together, our results demonstrate that USF is a negative transcriptional
repressor for hTERT in oral cancer cells. It is possible that USF lose the
inhibitory effect on hTERT expression leading to telomerase reactivation and oral
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 16010690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Diabetes. 2005 Jul;54(7):1976-84.

Role of upstream stimulatory factors in regulation of renal transforming growth
factor-beta1.

Zhu Y(1), Casado M, Vaulont S, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Dorrance Hamilton Research
Laboratories, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

We previously identified an E-box to be implicated in high-glucose-induced
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) gene stimulation in murine mesangial
cells. In the present study, we evaluated the role of upstream stimulatory
factors (USFs) in mediating glucose-induced stimulation of TGF-beta1. Mesangial
cells cultured in glucose concentrations exceeding 2.7 mmol/l D-glucose exhibited
increased levels of USF1 and USF2 protein by Western analysis and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA). An E-box element from the murine TGF-beta1 promoter 
revealed USF1 and USF2 binding by EMSA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
revealed in vivo binding of USF1 to a glucose-responsive region of the TGF-beta1 
promoter. Transient cotransfection studies of 293 cells with USF1 led to a
twofold increase in TGF-beta1 promoter activity and a 46% increase in secreted
TGF-beta1 protein levels. Wild-type and USF2 knockout mice exhibited a 2.5-fold
stimulation of renal TGF-beta1 expression upon fasting and refeeding with a
carbohydrate-rich diet, whereas USF1 knockout mice exhibited only a minimal
increase of renal TGF-beta1 upon refeeding. USF1 mRNA levels were increased in
mouse kidneys with carbohydrate refeeding, and USF1 protein was increased in
diabetic rat kidneys compared with controls. We conclude that USF1 is stimulated 
by modest increases in glucose concentration in murine mesangial cells, bind to
the murine TGF-beta1 promoter, contribute to carbohydrate-induced renal TGF-beta1
expression, and may play a role in diabetes-related gene regulation in the
kidney.

PMID: 15983197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Mar 2;85(8):560-3.

[Experimental study of E-box, a transcriptional suppressor element in gamma-GCS
gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng LL(1), Li B, Tu HB, Liu QC, Ran PX.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Medical College,
Guangzhou 510182, China.

OBJECTIVE: To validate that the E-box element in the -745-705 region of rat
gamma-GCS catalytic subunit gene (GCLC gene), already found to be a negative
regulatory region, is an important transcriptional suppressor element.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and antibody supershift
assay were used to confirm the specific binding of USF, a transcription factor
that binds the regulatory sequence -745 - 705, and E-box element. Rat alveolar
epidermal cells of the line CCL-149 were cultured and then divided into 4 groups:
group 1 to be transfected with GCLC-Luc, group 2 to be co-transfected with
pGCLC-Luc and pCMV-USF1, group 3 to be co-transfected with pGCLC-Luc and
pCMV-USF2, and group 4 to be co-transfected with pGCLC-Luc and blank vector pCMV.
Recombinant retrovirus vector PLXSN-USF1 and recombinant retrovirus vector
PLXSN-USF2 were constructed. Another CCL-149 cells were divided into 4 groups:
group A to be infected with recombinant USF1 virus, group B to be infected with
recombinant USF2 virus, group C to be infected with blank vector, and group D not
to be infected with any plasmid. Western blotting was used to detect the
concentrations of GCLC protein.
RESULTS: EMSA showed that only the probes with complete E-box element could be
bound by the USFs. Supershift assay showed that the transcription factor binding 
the probe was USF. The luciferase activity of the CCL-149 cells co-transfected
with pCMV-USF1/USF2 and GCLC-Luc were decreased by 66.4% and 63.2% respectively
in comparison with those transfected with GCLC-Luc only (both P < 0.05) and
decreased by 54.5% and 61.1% respectively in comparison with those of the cells
of the blank vector group (both P < 0.05). Western blotting showed that the
expression of GCLC protein of the CCL-149 cells transfected with PLXSN-USF1 and
PLXSN-USF2 were decreased in comparison with that of the control cells.
CONCLUSION: The interaction between E-box and USF suppresses the expression of
GCLC gene. E-box is an important transcriptional suppressor element of gamma-GCS 
gene.

PMID: 15949339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 12;280(32):28885-93. Epub 2005 May 31.

Role of upstream stimulatory factor phosphorylation in the regulation of the
prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 promoter in granulosa cells.

Sayasith K(1), Lussier JG, Sirois J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale and the Département de Biomédecine
Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.

To investigate the role of USF phosphorylation in the regulation of the PGHS-2
promoter in granulosa cells, promoter activity assays were performed in primary
cultures of bovine granulosa cells transfected with the chimeric PGHS-2
promoter/luciferase (LUC) construct -149/-2PGHS-2.LUC. Transfections were done in
the absence or presence of forskolin; the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H-89; 
or an expression vector encoding USF1, USF2, the catalytic subunit of PKA (cPKA),
or a PKA inhibitor protein (PKI). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were
performed to study USF/DNA interactions using granulosa cell nuclear extracts and
a 32P-labeled proximal PGHS-2 promoter fragment containing the E-box element. The
results show that forskolin stimulation and cPKA overexpression caused a marked
and significant increase in USF-dependent DNA binding and PGHS-2 promoter
activities (p < 0.05). In contrast, both activities were decreased by H-89
treatment or PKI overexpression. Reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed that
these treatments had similar effects on endogenous PGHS-2 mRNA levels in
granulosa cells. Cotransfection studies with a USF2 mutant lacking N-terminal
activation domains (U2Delta1-220) repressed forskolin-, cPKA-, and USF-dependent 
PGHS-2 promoter activities. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that
U2Delta1-220 was able to compete with full-length USF proteins and to saturate
the E-box element. Immunoprecipitation/Western blot analyses revealed an increase
in the levels of phosphorylated USF1 and USF2 after forskolin treatment, whereas 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that binding of USF proteins to the
endogenous PGHS-2 promoter was stimulated by forskolin. Site-directed mutagenesis
of a consensus PKA phosphorylation site within USF proteins abolished their
transactivating capacity. Collectively, these results characterize the role of
USF phosphorylation in PGHS-2 expression and identify the
phosphorylation-dependent increase in USF binding to the E-box as a putative
molecular basis for the increase in PGHS-2 promoter transactivation in granulosa 
cells.

PMID: 15927963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biomed Sci. 2005;12(1):65-77.

Down-regulation of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor in non-small cell lung
carcinoma: correlation with dysregulated expression of the transcription factors 
USF and AP2.

Khattar NH(1), Lele SM, Kaetzel CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) mediates transport of IgA and IgM
antibodies across mucosal and glandular epithelia. Several studies have utilized 
immunohistochemistry to demonstrate that PIGR expression varies in different
types of lung carcinoma, and is down-regulated during tumor progression. We have 
previously shown in cultured tumor cell-lines that basal transcription of the
PIGR gene is regulated by the transcription factors USF1, USF2 and AP2. To
examine the mechanism by which PIGR expression is down-regulated in lung
carcinoma, RNA was microdissected from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung
carcinomas (14 adenocarcinomas and 8 squamous cell carcinomas). Levels of PIGR,
USF1, USF2 and AP2-alpha mRNA were quantified by real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and normalized to mRNA for the
housekeeping gene GAPDH. PIGR mRNA levels were decreased in adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas relative to adjacent non-tumor tissue, and were
inversely correlated with stage of differentiation. USF1 and USF2 mRNA levels
were reduced in adenocarcinomas relative to non-tumor tissue, while AP2-alpha
levels were elevated. Multivariate regression analysis demonstrated that reduced 
USF2 mRNA and increased AP2-alpha mRNA levels were predictive of down-regulated
PIGR mRNA expression in the majority of adenocarcinomas and in moderately
differentiated squamous cell carcinomas.

PMID: 15864740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):21820-9. Epub 2005 Apr 15.

Heme oxygenase-1 gene activation by the NAD(P)H oxidase inhibitor
4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride via a protein kinase B, p38-dependent
signaling pathway in monocytes.

Wijayanti N(1), Kietzmann T, Immenschuh S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Immunologie und Transfusionsmedizin,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Langhanstrasse 7, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

Heme oxygenase (HO)-1 is the inducible isoform of the rate-limiting enzyme of
heme degradation and modulates the inflammatory immune response. Because HO-1 is 
up-regulated by NAD(P)H oxidase activators such as lipopolysaccharide and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in monocytic cells, we investigated the gene
regulation of HO-1 by the chemical NAD(P)H oxidase inhibitor 4-(2-aminoethyl)
benzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF). Unexpectedly, AEBSF induced endogenous gene
expression and promoter activity of HO-1 in cell cultures of human and mouse
monocytes. Inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PKB)
pathway by pharmacological inhibitors and cotransfection of an expression vector 
for a dominant negative mutant of PKB reduced the AEBSF-dependent induction of
HO-1 gene transcription. Accordingly, overexpressed constitutively active PKB
markedly up-regulated HO-1 promoter activity. AEBSF activated the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) JNK and p38. Inhibition of p38alpha and 
p38beta, but not that of JNK or p38gamma and p38delta, prevented the induction of
HO-1 gene expression by AEBSF. p38 was stimulated by AEBSF in a PKB-dependent
manner as demonstrated by a luciferase assay with a Gal4-CHOP fusion protein.
Finally, AEBSF- and PKB-dependent induction of HO-1 promoter activity was reduced
by simultaneous mutation of an E-box motif (-47/-42) and a cAMP response
element/AP-1 element (-664/-657) of the proximal HO-1 gene promoter.
Overexpression of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor USF2 and
coactivator p300 enhanced the AEBSF-dependent response of the HO-1 promoter. The 
data suggest that the transcriptional induction of HO-1 gene expression by AEBSF 
is mediated via activation of a PKB, p38 MAPK signaling pathway.

PMID: 15833736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4396-406.

TFII-I regulates induction of chromosomally integrated human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 long terminal repeat in cooperation with USF.

Chen J(1), Malcolm T, Estable MC, Roeder RG, Sadowski I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) replication is coupled to T-cell
activation through its dependence on host cell transcription factors. Despite the
enormous sequence variability of these factors, several cis elements for host
factors are highly conserved within the 5' long terminal repeats (LTRs) of
viruses from AIDS patients; among these is the RBEIII upstream element for the
Ras response element binding factor 2 (RBF-2). Here we show that RBF-2 is
comprised of a USF1/USF2 heterodimer and TFII-I, which bind cooperatively to
RBEIII. Recombinant USF1/USF2 binds to the RBEIII core sequence 160-fold less
efficiently than it binds to an E box element, but the interaction with RBEIII is
stimulated by TFII-I. Chromosomally integrated HIV-1 LTRs bearing an RBEIII
mutation have slightly elevated basal transcription in unstimulated Jurkat cells 
but are unresponsive to cross-linking of the T-cell receptor or stimulation with 
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin. Induction is inhibited by dominant
interfering USF and TFII-I but not by the dominant negative I-kappaB protein.
USF1, USF2, and TFII-I bind to the integrated wild-type LTR in unstimulated cells
and become phosphorylated during the induction of transcription upon stimulation 
with PMA. These results demonstrate that USF1/USF2 and TFII-I interact
cooperatively at the upstream RBEIII element and are necessary for the induction 
of latent HIV-1 in response to T-cell activation signals.

PMCID: PMC1061576
PMID: 15767439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Jun;288(6):G1118-26. Epub 2005 Feb 
3.

Role of USF1 and USF2 as potential repressor proteins for human intestinal
monocarboxylate transporter 1 promoter.

Hadjiagapiou C(1), Borthakur A, Dahdal RY, Gill RK, Malakooti J, Ramaswamy K,
Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Illinois at Chicago, Medical Research Service (600/151 Jesse Brown VA
Medical Center, 820 South Damen Ave., Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Nov;289(5):G977; author reply
G977-9.

Butyrate, a short-chain fatty acid, is the major energy fuel for the colonocytes.
We have previously reported that monocarboxylate transporter isoform 1 (MCT1)
mediates uptake of butyrate by human colonic Caco-2 cells. To better understand
the mechanisms of MCT1 expression and regulation in the human intestine, we
examined the activity and regulation of MCT1 promoter in Caco-2 cells. The
transcription initiation site in the MCT1 promoter was identified as a guanine
nucleotide 281 bp upstream from the translation initiation site and is surrounded
by a guanine-cytosine-rich area. The promoter was found to be highly active when 
transfected into Caco-2 cells, and its activity decreased with deletions at its
5'-end. Gel mobility shift experiments showed binding of the transcription
factors upstream stimulatory factor (USF)1 and 2 to the site -114 to -119 of the 
MCT1 promoter. With the use of site-directed mutagenesis and promoter activity in
Caco-2 cells, the USF proteins appeared to have a repressor role on the MCT1
promoter, which was further confirmed by cotransfecting expression vectors
encoding USF1 and 2 in Caco-2 cells and determining endogenous MCT1 expression in
USF2 overexpressed cells. The two potential SP1 binding sites found in the same
region of the promoter were found not to be involved in its regulation.

PMID: 15691871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1537-48.

Insulin-mediated down-regulation of apolipoprotein A5 gene expression through the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway: role of upstream stimulatory factor.

Nowak M(1), Helleboid-Chapman A, Jakel H, Martin G, Duran-Sandoval D, Staels B,
Rubin EM, Pennacchio LA, Taskinen MR, Fruchart-Najib J, Fruchart JC.

Author information: 
(1)Parc Eurasanté-Université de Lille 2, 885 Ave. Eugène Avinée, 59120 Loos,
France.

The apolipoprotein A5 gene (APOA5) has been repeatedly implicated in lowering
plasma triglyceride levels. Since several studies have demonstrated that
hyperinsulinemia is associated with hypertriglyceridemia, we sought to determine 
whether APOA5 is regulated by insulin. Here, we show that cell lines and mice
treated with insulin down-regulate APOA5 expression in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, we found that insulin decreases human APOA5 promoter activity, and
subsequent deletion and mutation analyses uncovered a functional E box in the
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that this APOA5 E box binds upstream stimulatory factors (USFs).
Moreover, in transfection studies, USF1 stimulates APOA5 promoter activity, and
the treatment with insulin reduced the binding of USF1/USF2 to the APOA5
promoter. The inhibition of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway
abolished insulin's effect on APOA5 gene expression, while the inhibition of the 
P70 S6 kinase pathway with rapamycin reversed its effect and increased APOA5 gene
expression. Using an oligonucleotide precipitation assay for USF from nuclear
extracts, we demonstrate that phosphorylated USF1 fails to bind to the APOA5
promoter. Taken together, these data indicate that insulin-mediated APOA5 gene
transrepression could involve a phosphorylation of USFs through the PI3K and P70 
S6 kinase pathways that modulate their binding to the APOA5 E box and results in 
APOA5 down-regulation. The effect of exogenous hyperinsulinemia in men showed a
decrease in the plasma ApoAV level. These results suggest a potential
contribution of the APOA5 gene in hypertriglyceridemia associated with
hyperinsulinemia.

PMCID: PMC548024
PMID: 15684402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:161-9. Epub 2004 Nov 19.

Characterization of the promoter of 1A6/DRIM, a novel cancer-related gene and
identification of its transcriptional activator.

Xing X(1), Du X, Lu Z, Ning T, Su X, Ke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, School of Oncology, Peking University, 
No. 1 Da Hong Luo Chang St., West District, Beijing 100034, P.R. China.

1A6/DRIM (Down-regulated in Metastasis) has been reported to express at a high
level in the gastric cancer tissues and the premalignant lesions implicating the 
involvement of 1A6/DRIM in cell transformation. Although the information
regarding the putative functions and distribution of the 1A6/DRIM in different
tissues and cell lines has been increasing recently, its promoter and
promoter-regulating factors remain unknown. In this study, the transcription
initiation site of 1A6/DRIM was confirmed to be located at 147 bp upstream of the
ATG codon using the primer extension analysis. The minimal promoter region of the
1A6/DRIM is located between -47 and +42 of the transcription initiation site
measured by luciferase reporter assays using a set of deletion constructs. In
addition, an E-box is shown to be an essential element for transcriptional
regulation of 1A6/DRIM demonstrated by luciferase assay with different deletion
and mutation constructs. Finally, a transcription factor, upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2) was found to be an activator of the 1A6/DRIM through binding to
the E-box demonstrated by luciferase reporter assay, electrophoretic mobility
shift assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. The structural
analysis of the 1A6/DRIM promoter and the identification of its potential
regulatory effecter may help us to understand its biological functions in
regulating cancer development.

PMID: 15656982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2004 Jul;19(1):9-17.

Human follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSH-R) promoter/enhancer activity is
inhibited by transcriptional factors, from the upstream stimulating factors
family, via E-box and newly identified initiator element (Inr) in FSH-R
non-expressing cells.

Putowski LT(1), Schillings WJ, Lee CM, Reddy EP, Jakowicki JA.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Gynecology, University School of Medicine, Lublin,
Poland.

To localize the regulatory elements in the human follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor (FSH-R) promoter/enhancer and to determine the role of upstream
stimulatingfactors (USFs) in these elements, we transiently transfected
constructs of FSH-R promoter/enhancer in pGL3 luciferase reporter plasmids into
Chinese hamster ovary cells and the activities were determined by measuring
luciferase luminescence of the cell lysates. The 5'-flanking regions of the human
FSH-R gene from nt -1485 to -1 with respect to the gene translation start site
were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subcloned in pGL3. Deletion
mutants were created using PCR or restriction enzyme digestion. Mutation in the
E-box sequence from nt -124 to -119 (E-box 3), in the construct from -224 to nt
-1 or in the Inr element, which encompasses the transcriptional start site at nt 
-99, resulted in a substantial reduction in the human FSH-R promoter/enhancer
activity. Overexpression of upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) suppresses the
activity of the human FSH-R promoter/enhancer via Inr and E-box elements.
Upstream stimulating factor-2 (USF2) decreases FSH-R promoter/enhancer activity
by acting on E-box 3. The results indicate that E-box 3 and the Inr element are
important elements of the human FSH-R promoter/ enhancer. USF family members
inhibit FSH-R gene activity by acting via these elements. USF1 and USF2 suppress 
human FSH-R promoter/enhancer activity by acting on E-box 3. USF1 also decreases 
activity by interacting with the Inr element.

PMID: 15625767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Jan 1;302(1):1-10.

Decreased tumorigenicity of c-Myc-transformed fibroblasts expressing active USF2.

Choe C(1), Chen N, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF is a small family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-zip)
transcription factors with DNA binding specificities similar to that of the c-Myc
oncoprotein. Evidence for a role of USF in growth control includes inhibition of 
c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation in vitro and loss of USF transcriptional 
activity in many cancer cell lines. However, a direct effect of USF on the
tumorigenicity of an established cell line has never been demonstrated. Here,
cell lines derived from rat embryo fibroblasts transformed by c-Ha-Ras and either
c-Myc or E1A were used as model system to investigate the tumor suppression
ability of USF. Overexpression of USF2 stimulated transcription and inhibited
colony formation in c-Myc-transformed, but not E1A-transformed, fibroblasts.
Stable clones expressing high USF2 levels were constructed from c-Myc-transformed
fibroblasts. In two of these clones, overexpressed USF2 did not activate
transcription, and there was no significant change in the transformed phenotype. 
In contrast, a clone that expressed transcriptionally active USF2 exhibited
altered morphology and a strongly decreased ability to proliferate in semisolid
medium. The ability of these cells to form tumors in nude mice was also decreased
by a factor of more than 30 as compared to the parental cell line or cells
overexpressing transcriptionally inactive USF2. Cotransfection assays with USF-
or Myc-specific dominant-negative mutants indicated that active USF2 inhibited
cellular transformation by preventing transcriptional repression by c-Myc.

PMID: 15541720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochem J. 2005 Mar 1;386(Pt 2):297-303.

The roles of Sp1, Sp3, USF1/USF2 and NRF-1 in the regulation and
three-dimensional structure of the Fragile X mental retardation gene promoter.

Kumari D(1), Gabrielian A, Wheeler D, Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0830, USA.

Expansion of a CGG.CCG-repeat tract in the 5'-untranslated region of the FMR1
(Fragile X mental retardation 1) gene causes its aberrant transcription. This
produces symptoms ranging from premature ovarian failure and Fragile X associated
tremor and ataxia syndrome to FMR syndrome, depending on the size of the
expansion. The promoter from normal alleles shows four protein-binding regions in
vivo. We had previously shown that in mouse brain extracts two of these sites are
bound by USF1/USF2 (upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2) heterodimers and NRF-1 
(nuclear respiratory factor-1). We also showed that these sites are involved in
the positive regulation of FMR1 transcription in neuronally derived cells. In the
present study, we show that Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and Sp3 are also strong
positive regulators of FMR1 promoter activity. We also show that, like Sp1 and
E-box-binding proteins such as USF1 and USF2, NRF-1 causes DNA bending, in this
case producing a bend of 57 degrees towards the major groove. The combined effect
of the four protein-induced bends on promoter geometry is the formation of a
highly compact arch-like structure in which the 5' end of the promoter is brought
in close proximity to the 3' end. We had previously shown that while point
mutations in the GC-boxes decrease promoter activity, deletion of either one of
them leads to an increase in promoter activity. We can reconcile these
observations with the positive effect of Sp1 and Sp3 if protein-induced bending
acts, at least in part, to bring together distally spaced factors important for
transcription initiation.

PMCID: PMC1134794
PMID: 15479157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2004;554:229-51.

Genetic manipulation of mammary gland development and lactation.

Hadsell DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. dhadsell@bcm.tmc.edu

The mammalian genome is believed to contain some 30,000 to 40,000 different
genes. Of these an estimated 42% have no known function. Genetically engineered
mouse models (GEMM) have been a powerful tool available for determining gene
function in vivo. In the mammary gland, a variety of genetic engineering
approaches have been applied successfully to understanding the importance of
specific gene products to mammary gland development and lactation. Our own
laboratory has applied genetically engineered mice to facilitate understanding of
the regulation of mammary gland development and lactation by insulin-like growth 
factors (IGF) and by the transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor
(USF-2). Our studies on transgenic mice that overexpress IGF-I have demonstrated 
the importance of IGF-dependent signaling pathways to maintenance of mammary
epithelial cells during the declining phase of lactation. Our analysis of early
developmental processes in mammary tissue from mice that carry a targeted
mutation in the IGF-I receptor gene suggests that IGF-dependent stimulation of
cell cycle progression is more important to early mammary gland development than 
potential antiapoptotic effects. Lastly, our studies on mice that carry a
targeted mutation of the Usf2 gene have demonstrated that this gene is necessary 
for normal lactation and have highlighted the importance of this gene to the
maintenance of protein synthesis. These studies, as well as studies of others,
have highlighted both the strengths and limitations inherent in the use of GEMM. 
Limitations serve as the driving force behind development of new experimental
strategies and genetic engineering schemes that will allow for a full
understanding of gene function within the mammary gland.

PMID: 15384580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Gene. 2004 Aug 4;337:199-206.

Isolation of a novel USF2 isoform: repressor of cathepsin B expression.

Yan S(1), Sloane BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
syan@med.wayne.edu

We previously demonstrated that upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2
regulate transcription of cathepsin B. Here, we have cloned a novel transcript
variant of USF2 from a human DU145 prostate cancer cell line by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). This new transcript variant,
designated USF2c, results from alternative splicing of the primary USF2
transcript using a cryptic splicing acceptor site within exon 6. As a
consequence, USF2c is missing exons 4, 5, and part of exon 6. USF2c can be
transcribed and translated to a protein of approximately 29 kDa in vitro, and the
resulting USF2c protein can bind as a homodimer to the E-box of the cathepsin B
promoter. USF2c is expressed in two other prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP,
PC3), and U87 human glioblastoma cells as are USF2a and USF2b, two previously
identified isoforms of USF2. Cotransfection experiments in DU145 and U87 cells
demonstrate that USF2c can down-regulate expression of cathepsin B. These results
suggest that USF2c regulates expression of cathepsin B by binding to the E box
element in the cathepsin B promoter as a repressor.

PMID: 15276216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):209-18.

Upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2, bind to the human haem oxygenase-1
proximal promoter in vivo and regulate its transcription.

Hock TD(1), Nick HS, Agarwal A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1530 3rd Avenue South, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The human HO-1 (haem oxygenase-1) gene encodes a microsomal enzyme responsible
for the breakdown of haem, and is also cytoprotective in response to various
cellular insults. HO-1 transcription is induced by a vast array of compounds
including, but certainly not limited to, haem and heavy metals such as cadmium.
In the present study, we show that upstream stimulatory factors, USF1 and USF2,
ubiquitous proteins belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper family
of transcription factors, constitutively bind to the class B E-box located in the
proximal promoter of the human HO-1 gene and are responsible for the enhancement 
of HO-1 gene transcription in human renal proximal tubular epithelial cells.
Dimethylsulphate in vivo footprinting studies have identified three protected
guanine residues in the E-box of the HO-1 proximal promoter. One of these guanine
contact points is essential for USF binding, and when mutated mimics a deletion
mutation of the entire E-box palindrome sequence encompassing all three guanine
contact points. Binding of USF1 and USF2 to the HO-1 E-box was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel-shift assays. Furthermore, we show that
overexpression of USF1 or USF2 enhances the basal expression of HO-1 and that
expression of a USF dominant negative form reduces its expression. These results 
demonstrate for the first time that USF proteins bind to the human HO-1 promoter 
in vivo and are required for high-level expression of HO-1 by haem and cadmium in
human renal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1134061
PMID: 15242350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 12;23(36):6125-35.

Evidence for a cancer-specific switch at the CDK4 promoter with loss of control
by both USF and c-Myc.

Pawar SA(1), Szentirmay MN, Hermeking H, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF and c-Myc are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors with similar
DNA-binding specificities, but antagonistic effects on cellular transformation.
In order to determine how these opposite functions correlate with the
transcriptional activities of the two factors on particular downstream targets,
we investigated the roles of USF and c-Myc in expression of CDK4, a known direct 
target of c-Myc. Overexpression of either c-Myc or USF2, but not USF1, stimulated
the expression of CDK4 promoter-driven reporter genes in the non-tumorigenic
mammary epithelial MCF-10A cells. Dominant-negative mutants specific to either
Myc or USF family proteins inhibited reporter gene activity as well as endogenous
CDK4 expression, demonstrating involvement of both USF and Myc in CDK4
transcriptional control. In contrast, in two different breast cancer cell lines
where USF is transcriptionally inactive and c-Myc is overexpressed, CDK4 promoter
activity was no longer responsive to either transcription factor. Accordingly,
chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed significantly lower levels of both USF and
c-Myc bound to the endogenous CDK4 promoter in breast cancer cells than in
MCF-10A cells, with a concomitant decrease in associated histone H3 acetylation. 
These results suggest that a major switch in the transcriptional control of CDK4 
occurs during breast carcinogenesis, with likely alteration of cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 15208653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Blood. 2004 Oct 1;104(7):2027-34. Epub 2004 Jun 8.

Upstream stimulatory factors stimulate transcription through E-box motifs in the 
PF4 gene in megakaryocytes.

Okada Y(1), Matsuura E, Tozuka Z, Nagai R, Watanabe A, Matsumoto K, Yasui K,
Jackman RW, Nakano T, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka,
Japan.

Platelet factor 4 (PF4) is expressed during megakaryocytic differentiation. We
previously demonstrated that the homeodomain proteins (myeloid ecotropic
integration site 1 [MEIS1], Pbx-regulating protein 1 [PREP1], and pre-B-cell
leukemia transcription factors [PBXs]) bind to the novel regulatory element
tandem repeat of MEIS1 binding element [TME] and transactivate the rat PF4
promoter. In the present study, we investigated and identified other TME binding 
proteins in megakaryocytic HEL cells using mass spectrometry. Among identified
proteins, we focused on upstream stimulatory factor (USF1) and USF2 and
investigated their effects on the PF4 promoter. USF1 and 2 bound to the E-box
motif in the TME and strongly transactivated the PF4 promoter. Furthermore,
physiologic bindings of USF1 and 2 to the TME in rat megakaryocytes were
demonstrated by the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Interestingly,
the E-box motif in the TME was conserved in TME-like sequences of both the human 
and mouse PF4 promoters. USF1 and 2 also bound to the human TME-like sequence and
transactivated the human PF4 promoter. Expressions of USF1 and 2 were detected by
reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the human
megakaryocytes derived from CD34+ cells. Thus, these studies demonstrate that the
novel TME binding transcription factors, USF1 and 2, transactivate rat and human 
PF4 promoters and may play an important role in megakaryocytic gene expression.

PMID: 15187018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34311-22. Epub 2004 Jun 7.

Glucose up-regulates thrombospondin 1 gene transcription and transforming growth 
factor-beta activity through antagonism of cGMP-dependent protein kinase
repression via upstream stimulatory factor 2.

Wang S(1), Skorczewski J, Feng X, Mei L, Murphy-Ullrich JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, The
Cell Adhesion and Matrix Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, USA.

Thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) transcription is stimulated by glucose, resulting in
increased TGF-beta activation and matrix protein synthesis. We previously showed 
that inducible expression of the catalytic domain of cGMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKG) inhibits glucose-regulated TSP1 transcription and transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta activity in stably transfected rat mesangial cells
(RMCs(tr/cd)). However, the molecular mechanisms by which PKG represses
glucose-regulated TSP1 transcription are unknown. Using a luciferase-promoter
deletion assay, we now identify a single region of the human TSP1 promoter (-1172
to -878, relative to the transcription start site) that is responsive to glucose.
Further characterization of this region identified an 18-bp sequence that
specifically binds nuclear proteins from mesangial cells. Moreover, binding is
significantly enhanced by high glucose treatment and is reduced by increased PKG 
activity. Gel mobility shift and supershift assays show that the nuclear proteins
binding to the 18-bp sequence are USF1 and -2. USF1 and USF2 bound to the
endogenous TSP1 promoter using a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Glucose
stimulates nuclear USF2 protein accumulation through protein kinase C, p38 MAPK, 
and extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathways. Increased PKG activity
down-regulates USF2 protein levels and its DNA binding activity under high
glucose conditions, resulting in inhibition of glucose-induced TSP1 transcription
and TGF-beta activity. Overexpression of USF2 reversed the inhibitory effect of
PKG on glucose-induced TSP1 gene transcription and TGF-beta activity. Taken
together these data present the first evidence that USF2 mediates glucose-induced
TSP1 expression and TSP1-dependent TGF-beta bioactivity in mesangial cells,
suggesting that USF2 is an important transcriptional regulator of diabetic
complications.

PMID: 15184388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biol Chem. 2004 Mar-Apr;385(3-4):239-47.

Modulation of glucokinase expression by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and upstream
stimulatory factor 2 in primary rat hepatocytes.

Roth U(1), Jungermann K, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 
Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Glucokinase (GK) is the key enzyme of glucose utilization in liver and is
localized in the less aerobic perivenous area. Until now, the O2-responsive
elements in the liver-specific GK promoter are unknown, and therefore the aim of 
this study was to identify the O2-responsive element in this promoter. We found
that the GK promoter sequence -87/-80 matched the binding site for hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF). In primary rat 
hepatocytes we could show that venous pO2 enhanced HIF-1alpha and USF-2a levels, 
both of which activated GK expression. Furthermore, transfection experiments
revealed that the GK sequence -87/-80 mediated the HIF-1alpha- or USF-2-dependent
activation of the GK promoter. The binding of HIF-1 and USF to the GK-HRE was
corroborated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). However, the maximal
response to HIF-1alpha or USF was only achieved when constructs with the -87/-80 
sequence in context with a 3'-36 bp native GK promoter sequence containing a
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) binding site were used. HIF-1alpha and HNF-4 
additively activated the GK promoter, while USF-2 and HNF-4 together did not show
this additive activation. Thus, HIF-1 and USF may play differential roles in the 
modulation of GK expression in response to O2.

PMID: 15134337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Prostate. 2004 May 1;59(2):190-202.

USF2 is connected to GAAAATATGATA element and associates with androgen
receptor-dependent transcriptional regulation in prostate.

Kivinen A(1), Patrikainen L, Kurkela R, Porvari K, Vihko P.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Research Center for Molecular Endocrinology, WHO
Collaborating Centre for Research of Reproductive Health, University of Oulu,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: We have previously identified a GAAAATATGATA binding site (pros) of a
transcription factor involved in prostatic and androgen-dependent gene
regulation. We now purified the potential factors interacting with the pros and
characterized their co-operation with the androgen receptor (AR).
METHODS: Sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography, mass-spectrometry,
electromobility shift assays, supershifts, glutathione-S-transferase pull-downs, 
and transient transfections.
RESULTS: Several proteins bound to the pros site, but only upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2) was confirmed to be part of the transcription factor complex.
Weak interaction was detected between AR and the transcription factor complex.
Physical proximity between the androgen response element (ARE) and the pros was
shown to be important for their co-operation. In the presence of pros and
androgen, AR achieves its maximal efficiency even at low concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The protein complex binding to the GAAAATATGATA site does not have a
significant independent function, but may interact with AR if GAAAATATGATA is
physically close to the ARE and enhances the transactivation function of AR.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 Feb 1;422(1):81-90.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-2 gene: hepatic expression, 
genomic structure, and promoter analysis.

Hirano S(1), Yamada K, Kawata H, Shou Z, Mizutani T, Shigematsu Y, Mayumi M,
Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Fukui Medical University, 910-1193 Fukui, Japan.

The rat enhancer of split- and hairy-related protein-2 (SHARP-2) is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor. The hepatic expression of SHARP-2 mRNA was
investigated under various conditions. The level was decreased in the
regenerating rat liver and malignant hepatoma cells. In contrast, the expression 
of SHARP-2 mRNA was induced in rat livers by feeding a high-carbohydrate diet. To
analyze the molecular mechanism involved in the regulation of the rat SHARP-2
gene expression, the gene was cloned. It was approximately 6-kb in length and
consists of five exons and four introns. To investigate the transcriptional
regulatory region of this gene, SHARP-2/firefly luciferase reporter plasmids were
transfected into hepatoma cells. A functional analysis of 5(')-deletion
constructs revealed that two E box sequences between -160 and -144 are mainly
responsible for promoter activity. Although upstream stimulatory factors (USFs)
bound to the element in vitro, USF2 failed to stimulate promoter activity from
the element using the co-transfection experiment. Therefore, other E box-binding 
transcription factors differing from USF proteins or USF-associated proteins are 
necessary for transcriptional stimulation of the rat SHARP-2 gene.

PMID: 14725860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):6327-36. Epub 2003 Dec 5.

Molecular characterization and role of bovine upstream stimulatory factor 1 and 2
in the regulation of the prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 promoter in granulosa
cells.

Sayasith K(1), Bouchard N, Sawadogo M, Lussier JG, Sirois J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale and the Département de Biomédecine
Vétérinaire, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, CP 5000,
Saint-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.

The transcriptional activation of the prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 (PGHS-2) gene 
in granulosa cells is required for ovulation. To directly study the ability of
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2 to trans-activate the bovine PGHS-2
promoter in granulosa cells, USF1 or USF2 expression vectors were cotransfected
with the PGHS-2/luciferase (LUC) chimeric construct, -149/-2PGHS-2.LUC. Results
revealed that overexpression of USF1 or USF2 caused a marked and significant
increase in basal and forskolin-inducible promoter activities (p<0.05), and these
effects were dependent on the presence of a consensus E-box cis-element within
the promoter fragment. Co-transfections with different N- and C-terminal
truncated USF mutants led to significant reductions in promoter activation, as
compared with full-length constructs (p<0.05), thus allowing identification of
putative bovine USF functional domains. Overexpression of a USF2 truncated mutant
lacking the first 220 residues (U2Delta1-220) acted as a dominant negative mutant
and blocked endogenous and USF-stimulated PGHS-2 promoter activation.
Interestingly, transfections with U2Delta1-220 blocked the forskolin-dependent
induction of PGHS-2 mRNA in granulosa cells, whereas transfections with
full-length USF2 increased PGHS-2 transcript levels. Immunoblot analyses
confirmed overexpression of full-length and truncated USF proteins, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and supershift EMSAs established
that the observed effects were dependent on specific interactions between USF
proteins and the consensus E-box cis-element. Stimulation of cells with forskolin
increased, whereas treatment of extracts with phosphatase decreased USF binding
activities to the E-box. Thus, this study presents for the first time direct
evidence for a role of USF proteins in the regulation of the PGHS-2 promoter in
preovulatory granulosa cells.

PMID: 14660559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Blood. 2004 Apr 1;103(7):2841-3. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Hepcidin, a candidate modifier of the hemochromatosis phenotype in mice.

Nicolas G(1), Andrews NC, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM 409, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Paris, France.

Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) type I is a disorder of iron metabolism caused by
a mutation in the HFE gene. Whereas the prevalence of the mutation is very high, 
its penetrance seems very low. The goal of our study was to determine whether
hepcidin, a recently identified iron-regulatory peptide, could be a genetic
modifier contributing to the HH phenotype. In mice, deficiency of either HFE
(Hfe(-/-)) or hepcidin (Usf2(-/-)) is associated with the same pattern of iron
overload observed in patients with HH. We intercrossed Hfe(-/-) and Usf2(+/-)
mice and asked whether hepcidin deficiency increased the iron burden in Hfe(-/-) 
mice. Our results showed that, indeed, liver iron accumulation was greater in the
Hfe(-/-)Usf2(+/-) mice than in mice lacking Hfe alone. This result, in agreement 
with recent findings in humans, provides a genetic explanation for some
variability of the HH phenotype.

PMID: 14656876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jan;40(10):695-708.

Upstream stimulatory factor but not c-Myc enhances transcription of the human
polymeric immunoglobulin receptor gene.

Bruno ME(1), West RB, Schneeman TA, Bresnick EH, Kaetzel CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Secretory antibodies protect mucosal surfaces from ingested, inhaled and sexually
transmitted pathogens. The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) transports
antibodies across mucosal epithelia into external secretions. We and others have 
identified a region of the human polymeric immunoglobulin receptor gene (locus
PIGR) that is sufficient for basal transcriptional activity. An E-Box motif,
which binds transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
(bHLH/zip) family, was identified as a major regulatory element in the PIGR gene 
promoter. Transient transfection of PIGR promoter reporter plasmids in intestinal
epithelial cell (IEC) lines suggested that the transcription factors upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) and c-Myc may exert opposing effects on PIGR promoter
activity. Mutations within and flanking the E-Box that favored USF binding
enhanced promoter activity, while mutations that favored c-Myc binding reduced
promoter activity. Ectopic expression of USF1 or USF2 enhanced PIGR promoter
activity, while exogenous c-Myc did not. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) demonstrated that USF1 and USF2 bound to the E-Box motif as homo- and
heterodimers. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated that USF proteins
bind the PIGR promoter in vivo, which is enriched in acetylated histones. E-Box
motifs are commonly observed in promoters of genes that are highly expressed in
the human colon. Genes that are down-regulated in colorectal cancer, including
PIGR, frequently have non-canonical E-Boxes, while genes that are up-regulated in
colorectal cancer generally have canonical E-Boxes. The results of our
experiments may shed light on the mechanisms of dysregulated expression of pIgR
in inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer, diseases associated with
aberrant expression of c-Myc.

PMID: 14644095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Dec 1;31(23):6710-21.

Dynamics of the metal-dependent transcription factor complex in vivo at the mouse
metallothionein-I promoter.

Daniels PJ(1), Andrews GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mail Stop 3030, University
of Kansas Medical Center, 39th and Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160-7421,
USA.

The in vivo association of transcription factors with the metallothionein-I
promoter was examined using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. The
results demonstrated that c-fos is rapidly recruited along with the metal
response element-binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) to this promoter in
response to zinc or cadmium, and that this recruitment is reversed in the
visceral yolk sac by a zinc-deficient diet in vivo, and in cultured cells after
lowering the zinc concentration in the medium or during prolonged zinc exposure. 
In contrast, the interactions of c-jun, USF-1, USF-2 and Sp1 with this promoter
are metal-independent. Studies of knockout cells revealed that the recruitment of
c-fos to the MT-I promoter requires MTF-1, but that c-fos is not essential for
recruitment of MTF-1 and metal-induction of MT-I gene expression. Studies of Hepa
cells stably-transfected with reporter genes driven by the MT-I promoter
suggested two in vivo binding sites for USF-1 and -2. In contrast, Sp1 was
apparently associated with a single binding site (upstream of -153 bp). In
addition, maximal recruitment of c-fos by metals required sequences and/or other 
proteins that interact upstream of -153 bp. In summary, these studies extend our 
understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the transcription factor complex 
that forms at the MT-I promoter in vivo in response to metals.

PMCID: PMC290280
PMID: 14627804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Gen Virol. 2003 Nov;84(Pt 11):2957-67.

Transcription factor USF, expressed during the entire phase of varicella-zoster
virus infection, interacts physically with the major viral transactivator IE62
and plays a significant role in virus replication.

Rahaus M(1), Desloges N, Yang M, Ruyechan WT, Wolff MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Virology, University of Witten/Herdecke,
Stockumer Str. 10, D-58448 Witten, Germany.

The expression of the genes of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is regulated by
self-encoded viral as well as cellular transcription factors. A potential
candidate with an ability to influence the transcription of VZV genes is USF
(upstream stimulatory factor), which recognizes the consensus E-box motif.
Quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblot assays indicate stable expression of both USF1
and USF2 throughout infection. It was also found that USF binds to a variety of
E-boxes (consensus and closely related motifs) within the promoters of ORF 8/9
(two elements), ORF 22 and ORF 67. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments and His-tag
protein affinity pull-down assays indicate that a direct physical interaction
occurs between USF and the major virus transactivator IE62. To study the general 
effects of USF in the replication of VZV, a cell line expressing a
dominant-negative form of USF (A-USF), which inhibits binding of USF to its
recognition sites, was created. A significant decrease in virus replication was
detected when this cell line was infected with cell-free virus, indicating that
USF is an important cellular factor that regulates the transcription of VZV
genes.

PMID: 14573800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Carcinog. 2003 Oct;38(2):85-96.

Novel consensus DNA-binding sequence for BRCA1 protein complexes.

Cable PL(1), Wilson CA, Calzone FJ, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Scully R, Livingston DM, Li 
L, Blackwell CB, Futreal PA, Afshari CA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

Increasing evidence continues to emerge supporting the early hypothesis that
BRCA1 might be involved in transcriptional processes. BRCA1 physically associates
with more than 15 different proteins involved in transcription and is
paradoxically involved in both transcriptional activation and repression.
However, the underlying mechanism by which BRCA1 affects the gene expression of
various genes remains speculative. In this study, we provide evidence that BRCA1 
protein complexes interact with specific DNA sequences. We provide data showing
that the upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) physically associates with BRCA1
and is a component of this DNA-binding complex. Interestingly, these DNA-binding 
complexes are downregulated in breast cancer cell lines containing wild-type
BRCA1, providing a critical link between modulations of BRCA1 function in
sporadic breast cancers that do not involve germline BRCA1 mutations. The
functional specificity of BRCA1 tumor suppression for breast and ovarian tissues 
is supported by our experiments, which demonstrate that BRCA1 DNA-binding
complexes are modulated by serum and estrogen. Finally, functional analysis
indicates that missense mutations in BRCA1 that lead to subsequent cancer
susceptibility may result in improper gene activation. In summary, these findings
establish a role for endogenous BRCA1 protein complexes in transcription via a
defined DNA-binding sequence and indicate that one function of BRCA1 is to
co-regulate the expression of genes involved in various cellular processes.

Published 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14502648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(18):9852-61.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 activates TERT gene transcription through
induction of c-Myc and release of USF-mediated repression.

McMurray HR(1), McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, 601
Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16), a DNA tumor virus, has a causal role in
cervical cancer, and the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 contribute to oncogenesis
in multiple ways. E6 increases telomerase activity in keratinocytes through
increased transcription of the telomerase catalytic subunit gene (TERT), but the 
factors involved in this have been elusive. We have found that mutation of the
proximal E box in the TERT promoter has an activating effect in luciferase
assays. This suggested that a repressive complex might be present at this site.
HPV-16 E6 activated the TERT promoter predominantly through the proximal E box,
and thus, might be acting on this repressive complex. This site is specific for
the Myc/Mad/Max transcription factors as well as USF1 and USF2. Addition of
exogenous USF1 or USF2 repressed activation of the TERT promoter by E6, dependent
on the proximal E box. Using siRNA against USF1 or USF2 allowed for greater
activation of the TERT promoter by E6. Conversely, loss of c-Myc function,
through a dominant-negative Myc molecule, reduced activation by E6. Chromatin
immunoprecipitations showed that in the presence of E6, there was a reduction in 
binding of USF1 and USF2 at the TERT promoter proximal E box, and a concomitant
increase in c-Myc bound to this site. This shows that a repressive complex
containing USF1 and USF2 is present in normal cells with little or no telomerase 
activity. In E6 keratinocytes, this repressive complex is replaced by c-Myc,
which corresponds to higher levels of TERT transcription and consequently,
telomerase activity.

PMCID: PMC224601
PMID: 12941894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6117-28.

USF1 and USF2 mediate inhibition of human trophoblast differentiation and CYP19
gene expression by Mash-2 and hypoxia.

Jiang B(1), Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.

In the human placental syncytiotrophoblast, C(19) steroids are converted to
estrogens by aromatase P450, product of the CYP19 gene. When human
cytotrophoblasts, which lack the capacity to express aromatase, are cultured in
20% O(2), they spontaneously fuse to form a multinuclear syncytiotrophoblast and 
CYP19 expression is markedly induced. On the other hand, when cytotrophoblasts
are cultured in 2% O(2), syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of
CYP19 expression are prevented. We previously observed that expression of the
transcription factor Mash-2 (mammalian achaete/scute homologue 2), which is
elevated in human cytotrophoblasts and maintained at elevated levels by hypoxia, 
declines with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation. Overexpression of Mash-2
prevents syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and induction of CYP19 expression.
In the present study, we observed that unexpectedly immunoreactive Mash-2 protein
was localized predominantly to the cytoplasm of human cytotrophoblasts. Elevated 
cytoplasmic levels of Mash-2 were maintained when trophoblasts were cultured in
2% O(2) and declined to undetectable levels upon culture in 20% O(2). Previously,
we found that Mash-2 inhibited CYP19 promoter activity through sequences within a
350-bp region upstream and within placenta-specific exon I.1 containing three E
boxes (E1 at -325 bp, 5'-CACTTG-3'; E2 at -58 bp, 5'-CACATG-3'; and E3 at +26 bp,
5'-CACGTG-3'). In this study, we found that trophoblast nuclear protein binding
to these E boxes declined with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation in 20% O(2)
and was induced by hypoxia; however, Mash-2 did not appear to bind to any of
these E boxes. On the other hand, the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
transcription factors upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2) did
bind to E2 and E3 but not E1. Nuclear levels of USF1 and USF2 and DNA-binding
activity declined with syncytiotrophoblast differentiation and were maintained at
elevated levels by hypoxia and overexpression of Mash-2, whereas USF1 mRNA levels
were unaffected. Finally, USF1 overexpression in cultured human trophoblasts
markedly inhibited endogenous CYP19 expression, differentiation of cultured human
trophoblast cells, and CYP19 promoter activity. These findings suggest that
increased protein levels and DNA binding of USF1 and USF2 mediate the inhibitory 
effects of hypoxia and of Mash-2 on CYP19 gene expression in human placenta.

PMCID: PMC180905
PMID: 12917334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Nov;17(11):2251-67. Epub 2003 Aug 7.

Diminished milk synthesis in upstream stimulatory factor 2 null mice is
associated with decreased circulating oxytocin and decreased mammary gland
expression of eukaryotic initiation factors 4E and 4G.

Hadsell DL(1), Bonnette S, George J, Torres D, Klimentidis Y, Gao S, Haney PM,
Summy-Long J, Soloff MS, Parlow AF, Sirito M, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture/Agricultural Research Service
Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA. dhadsell@bcm.tmc.edu.

Erratum in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2975. Klementidis, Yann [corrected to
Klimentidis, Yann].

Previous studies have suggested that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) regulate
genes involved with cell cycle progression. Because of the relationship of USFs
to an important oncogene in breast cancer, c-myc, we chose to determine the
importance of USF to normal mammary gland development in the mouse. Expression of
USF in the mammary gland throughout development demonstrated only modest changes.
Mutation of the Usf2 gene was associated with reduced fertility in females, but
had no effect on prepartum mammary gland development. However, lactation
performance in Usf2-/- females was only half of that observed in Usf2+/+ females,
and both lactose and nitrogen were decreased in milk from Usf2-/- dams. This
decrease was associated with diminished mammary tissue wet weight and luminal
area by d 9 of lactation and with a decreased protein-DNA ratio. This decrease
was associated with reduced abundance of the eukaryotic initiation factors eIF4E 
and eIF4G. Blood oxytocin concentrations on d 9 postpartum were also lower in
Usf2-/- mice than Usf2+/+ mice. In contrast, the mutation had no effect on blood 
prolactin concentrations, mammary cell proliferation or apoptosis, mammary tissue
oxytocin receptors, or milk protein gene expression. The mutation had only modest
effects on maternal behavior. These data support the idea that USF is important
to physiological processes necessary for the establishment and maintenance of
normal lactation and suggest that USF-2 may impact lactation through both
systemic and mammary cell-specific mechanisms.

PMID: 12907752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37231-40. Epub 2003 Jul 11.

The IGF2 receptor is a USF2-specific target in nontumorigenic mammary epithelial 
cells but not in breast cancer cells.

Szentirmay MN(1), Yang HX, Pawar SA, Vinson C, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The antiproliferative activities of the USF proteins and the frequent loss of USF
function in cancer cells suggest a role for these ubiquitous transcription
factors in tumor suppression. However, the cellular targets that mediate the
effects of USF on cellular proliferation and transformation remain
uncharacterized. IGF2R, with multiple functions in both normal growth and cancer,
was investigated here as a possible USF target in both nontumorigenic and
tumorigenic breast cell lines. The 5'-flanking sequences of the human IGF2R gene 
contain multiple, highly conserved E boxes almost identical to the consensus USF 
DNA-binding sequence. These E boxes were found to be essential for IGF2R promoter
activity in the nontumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line MCF-10A. USF1 and
USF2 bound the IGF2R promoter in vitro, and both USF1 and USF2, but not c-Myc,
were present within the IGF2R promoter-associated chromatin in vivo.
Overexpressed USF2, but not USF1, transactivated the IGF2R promoter, and IGF2R
mRNA was markedly decreased by expression of a USF-specific dominant negative
mutant, identifying IGF2R as a USF2 target. IGF2R promoter-driven expression was 
USF-independent in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines, suggesting
that a defect in USF function may contribute to down-regulation of IGF2R
expression in cancer cells.

PMID: 12857727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Int J Mol Med. 2003 Aug;12(2):161-7.

Cloning and characterization of a novel splicing isoform of USF1.

Saito T(1), Oishi T, Yanai K, Shimamoto Y, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research
Alliance (TARA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.
akif@tara.tsukuba.ac.jp

The ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor USFs encoded by two
distinct genes (USF1 and USF2) recognize a core motif, CACGTG, termed E box and
regulate the expression of a variety of genes. USF1 and USF2 proteins form homo- 
and heterodimers to bind the target core motif DNA. Here, we report the molecular
cloning and functional characterization of a novel alternative splicing variant
of human USF1 (hUSF1), termed USF1/BD. Compared with USF1 wild-type (wt), USF1/BD
lacks the N-terminal transactivation domain. Cloning and characterization of the 
hUSF1 genomic region revealed that USF1/BD is generated by excising the sequence 
corresponding to a part of exon 4. In transiently transfected cells, USF1/BD was 
localized in the nucleus and repressed the promoter activity of the human
angiotensinogen gene. In vitro translated USF1/BD possessed DNA binding activity 
as a homodimer and a heterodimer with USF1 (wt). These results suggest that
USF1/BD plays a role as a modulator of USF1 to control the expression of target
genes.

PMID: 12851711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Oncogene. 2003 May 1;22(17):2680-8.

cDNA microarray analysis of genes associated with ERBB2 (HER2/neu) overexpression
in human mammary luminal epithelial cells.

Mackay A(1), Jones C, Dexter T, Silva RL, Bulmer K, Jones A, Simpson P, Harris
RA, Jat PS, Neville AM, Reis LF, Lakhani SR, O'Hare MJ.

Author information: 
(1)LICR/UCL Breast Cancer Laboratory, University College London, London, UK.
alan.mackay@ucl.ac.uk

To investigate changes in gene expression associated with ERBB2, expression
profiling of immortalized human mammary luminal epithelial cells and variants
expressing a moderate and high level of ERBB2 has been carried out using cDNA
microarrays corresponding to approximately 6000 unique genes/ESTs. A total of 61 
significantly up- or downregulated (2.0-fold) genes were identified and further
validated by RT-PCR analysis as well as microarray comparisons with a
spontaneously ERBB2- overexpressing breast cancer cell line and ERBB2-positive
primary breast tumors. The expression and clinical relevance of proteins
predicted to be associated with ERBB2 overexpression in breast cancers were
analysed together with their clinical relevance by antibody screening using a
tissue array. Differentially regulated genes include those involved in
cell-matrix interactions including proline 4-hydroxylase (P4HA2), galectin 1
(LGALS1) and galectin 3 (LGALS3), fibronectin 1 (FN1) and p-cadherin (CDH3), and 
cell proliferation (CRIP1, IGFBP3) and transformation (S100P, S100A4). A number
of genes associated with MYC signalling were also differentially expressed,
including NDRG1, USF2 and the epithelial membrane proteins 1 and 3 (EMP1, EMP3). 
These data represent profiles of the transcriptional changes associated with
ERBB2-related pathways in the breast, and identify novel and potentially useful
targets for prognosis and therapy.

PMID: 12730682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. FEBS Lett. 2003 May 8;542(1-3):22-6.

Comparative analysis of mouse hepcidin 1 and 2 genes: evidence for different
patterns of expression and co-inducibility during iron overload.

Ilyin G(1), Courselaud B, Troadec MB, Pigeon C, Alizadeh M, Leroyer P, Brissot P,
Loréal O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U522, Hôpital Pontchaillou, 35033 Rennes, France.
guennadi.iline@rennes.inserm.fr

In contrast to the human genome, the mouse genome contains two HEPC genes
encoding hepcidin, a key regulator of iron homeostasis. Here we report a
comparative analysis of sequence, genomic structure, expression and iron
regulation of mouse HEPC genes. The predicted processed 25 amino acid hepcidin 2 
peptide share 68% identity with hepcidin 1 with perfect conservation of eight
cysteine residues. Both HEPC1 and HEPC2 genes have similar genomic organization
and have probably arisen from a recent duplication of chromosome 7 region,
including the HEPC ancestral gene and a part of the adjacent USF2 gene. Insertion
of a retroviral intracisternal A-particle element was found upstream of the HEPC1
gene. Both genes are highly expressed in the liver and to a much lesser extent in
the heart. In contrast to HEPC1, a high amount of HEPC2 transcripts was detected 
in the pancreas. Expression of both genes was increased in the liver during
carbonyl-iron and iron-dextran overload. Overall our data suggest that both HEPC1
and HEPC2 genes are involved in iron metabolism regulation but could exhibit
different activities and/or play distinct roles.

PMID: 12729891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 6;278(23):20603-11. Epub 2003 Mar 27.

Involvement of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 in RANKL-induced
transcription of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase gene during osteoclast
differentiation.

Liu Y(1), Shi Z, Silveira A, Liu J, Sawadogo M, Yang H, Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama 35294,
USA. xfeng@path.uab.edu

Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) plays an important role in bone
resorption. TRAP expression in osteoclasts is regulated by receptor activator of 
NF-kappaB (RANKL), a potent activator of osteoclast differentiation. However, the
molecular mechanism underlying the RANKL-induced TRAP expression remains unknown.
Here we show that two regions in the mouse TRAP promoter (one at -1858 to -1239
and the other at -1239 to -1039, relative to the translation start site) are
implicated in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription in RAW264.7 cells. A detailed
characterization of the region at -1239 to -1039 identifies a 12-bp sequence,
AGCCACGTGGTG, that specifically binds nuclear proteins from RAW264.7 cells and
primary bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). Moreover, the binding is significantly enhanced in EMSA with nuclear
extracts from RANKL-treated RAW264.7 cells and BMMs, suggesting that the 12-bp
sequence may be involved in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription. Various assays
reveal that nuclear proteins binding to the 12-bp sequence are upstream
stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2. Importantly, mutation of the USF-binding site 
partially blocks RANKL-induced TRAP transcription in RAW264.7 cells, confirming
that USF1 and USF2 are functionally involved in RANKL-induced TRAP transcription.
In summary, our data show that USF1 and USF2 play a functional role in
RANKL-dependent TRAP expression during osteoclast differentiation.

PMID: 12663664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochemistry. 2003 Mar 11;42(9):2656-63.

Transcriptional regulation of the nuclear gene encoding the alpha-subunit of the 
mammalian mitochondrial F1F0 ATP synthase complex: role for the orphan nuclear
receptor, COUP-TFII/ARP-1.

Jordan EM(1), Worley T, Breen GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
P. O. Box 830688, Richardson, Texas 75083-0688, USA.

Our laboratory has been studying the transcriptional regulation of the nuclear
gene (ATPA) that encodes the alpha-subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial F1F0
ATP synthase complex. We have previously determined that the regulatory factor,
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), can stimulate transcription of the ATPA
gene through the cis-acting regulatory element 1 in the upstream promoter of this
gene. In this study, we used the yeast one-hybrid screening method to identify
another factor, COUP-TFII/ARP-1, which also binds to the ATPA cis-acting
regulatory element 1. Binding of the orphan nuclear receptor, COUP-TFII/ARP-1, to
the ATPA regulatory element 1 was confirmed using electrophoretic mobility shift 
experiments, and COUP-TFII/ARP-1-containing complexes were detected in HeLa cell 
nuclear extracts. A mutational analysis indicated that the binding site for
COUP-TFII/ARP-1 in the ATPA regulatory element 1 is an imperfect direct repeat of
a nuclear receptor response element (A/GGGTCA) with a spacer of three
nucleotides. Functional assays in HeLa cells showed that COUP-TFII/ARP-1
represses the ATPA promoter activity in a dose- and sequence-dependent manner.
Furthermore, cotransfection assays demonstrated that COUP-TFII/ARP-1 inhibits the
USF2-mediated activation of the wild-type ATPA gene promoter but not a mutant
promoter that is defective in COUP-TFII/ARP-1-binding. Overexpression of USF2
reversed the COUP-TFII/ARP-1-mediated repression of the ATPA promoter. Mobility
shift assays revealed that COUP-TFII/ARP-1 and USF2 compete for binding to the
ATPA regulatory element 1. Thus, the ATPA gene is regulated by a multifunctional 
binding site through which the transcription factors, COUP-TFII/ARP-1 and USF2,
bind and exert their antagonistic effects.

PMID: 12614160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17263-8. Epub 2003 Feb 28.

Upstream stimulatory factor represses the induction of carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-Ibeta expression by PGC-1.

Moore ML(1), Park EA, McMillin JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, UT-Houston Health Science Center, The Texas Medical
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1beta (CPT-1beta) is
coordinated with contractile gene expression through cardiac-enriched
transcription factors, GATA4 and SRF. Metabolic modulation of CPT-1beta promoter 
activity has been described with the stimulation of gene expression by oleate
that is mediated through the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
pathway. The coactivator, peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator (PGC-1), enhances gene expression through interactions with nuclear
hormone receptors and the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) family. PGC-1 and
MEF2A synergistically activate CPT-1beta promoter activity. This stimulation is
enhanced by mutation of the E-box sequences that flank the MEF2A binding site.
These elements bind the upstream stimulatory factors (USF1 and USF2), which
activate transcription in CV-1 fibroblasts. However, overexpression of the USF
proteins in myocytes depresses CPT-1beta activity and significantly reduces MEF2A
and PGC-1 synergy. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate that PGC-1 and USF2
proteins can physically interact. Our studies demonstrate that PGC-1 stimulates
CPT-1beta gene expression through MEF2A. USF proteins have a novel role in
repressing the expression of the CPT-1beta gene and modulating the induction by
the coactivator, PGC-1.

PMID: 12611894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 15;31(4):1292-301.

Characterization of the human beta-globin downstream promoter region.

Leach KM(1), Vieira KF, Kang SH, Aslanian A, Teichmann M, Roeder RG, Bungert J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mammalian Genetics, Powell Gene Therapy Center, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
1600 SW Archer Road, PO 100245, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The human beta-globin gene is abundantly expressed specifically in adult
erythroid cells. Stage-specific transcription is regulated principally by
promoter proximal cis-regulatory elements. The basal promoter contains a
non-canonical TATA-like motif as well as an initiator element. These two elements
have been shown to interact with the TFII-D complex. Here we show that in
addition to the TATA and initiator elements, conserved E-box motifs are located
in the beta-globin downstream promoter. One of the E-box motifs overlaps the
initiator and this composite element interacts with USF1 and TFII-I in vitro.
Another E-box, located 60 bp 3' to the transcription initiation site, interacts
with USF1 and USF2. Mutations of either the initiator or the downstream E-box
impair transcription of the beta-globin gene in vitro. Mutations of a putative
NF-E2-binding site in the downstream promoter region do not affect transcription 
in vitro. USF1, USF2, TFII-I and p45 can be crosslinked to a beta-globin promoter
fragment in MEL cells in vivo, whereas only TFII-I and USF2 crosslink to the
beta-globin gene in K562 cells. The summary data demonstrate that in addition to 
the well-characterized interactions of the TFII-D complex with the basal
promoter, E-box motifs contribute to the efficient formation of transcription
complexes on the adult beta-globin gene.

PMCID: PMC150227
PMID: 12582249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Jun;284(6):L1027-36. Epub 2003 Feb 7.

Transcription factor USF2 is developmentally regulated in fetal lung and acts
together with USF1 to induce SP-A gene expression.

Gao E(1), Wang Y, Alcorn JL, Mendelson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.
cmende@biochem.swmed.edu

Expression of the pulmonary surfactant protein A (SP-A) gene is lung specific,
developmentally regulated, and enhanced by hormones and factors that increase
cAMP. We previously identified two E-box-like enhancers termed distal binding
element (DBE) and proximal binding element (PBE) in the 5'-flanking region of the
rabbit (r) SP-A gene that are essential for cAMP induction of rSP-A promoter
activity (Gao E, Alcorn JL, and Mendelson CR. J Biol Chem 268: 19697-19709,
1993). We also found that DBE and PBE serve as binding sites for the basic
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factor, upstream stimulatory
factor-1 (USF1) (Gao E, Wang Y, Alcorn JL, and Mendelson CR. J Biol Chem 272:
23398-23406, 1997). In the present study, PBE was used to screen a rabbit fetal
lung cDNA expression library; a cDNA insert encoding the structurally related
rabbit upstream stimulatory factor-2 (rUSF2) was isolated. The levels of rUSF2
mRNA reach peak levels in fetal rabbit lung at 28 days of gestation, in concert
with the time of maximal induction of SP-A gene transcription. In yeast
two-hybrid analysis, rUSF2 was found to preferentially form heterodimers,
compared with homodimers, with rUSF1. Binding complexes of nuclear proteins
isolated from fetal rabbit lung type II cells with the DBE and PBE were
supershifted by anti-rUSF2 antibodies. Binding activity was enriched in nuclear
proteins from type II cells compared with fibroblasts. Overexpression of rUSF2 in
transfected lung A549 cells increased rSP-A promoter activity and acted
synergistically with rUSF1. We suggest that heterodimers of USF2 and USF1 bound
to two E-box elements in the SP-A gene 5'-flanking region serve a key role in
developmental and hormonal regulation of SP-A gene expression in pulmonary type
II cells.

PMID: 12576297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2002 Nov-Dec;29(3):471-87.

Seeking candidate mutations that affect iron homeostasis.

Lee P(1), Gelbart T, West C, Halloran C, Beutler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, MEM215, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92014, USA.
plee@scripps.edu

Hereditary hemochromatosis is characterized by marked variation of expression of 
the defect: very few homozygotes with the C282Y/C282Y HFE genotype have
full-blown clinical disease, a larger number show biochemical stigmata of iron
overload, and some seem normal biochemically. The following candidate genes have 
been examined in detail to determine whether polymorphisms in them may be
responsible for this variation: transferrin, transferrin receptor 1, transferrin 
receptor 2, ferritin-L, ferritin-H, IRP1, IRP2, HFE, beta(2) microglobulin,
mobilferrin/calreticulin, ceruloplasmin, ferroportin, NRAMP1, NRAMP2 (DMT1),
haptoglobin, heme oxygenase-1, heme oxygenase-2, hepcidin, USF2, ZIRTL, duodenal 
cytochrome b ferric reductase (DCYTB), TNFalpha, keratin 8, and keratin 18. The
coding sequence, exon-intron junctions, and promoters of each of these genes was 
sequenced in DNA from 20 subjects: 5 HFE C282Y/C282Y with clinical disease, 5 HFE
C282Y/C282Y with normal/low ferritin levels and no disease, 5 wt/wt with high
ferritin and transferrin saturation, and 5 wt/wt normal controls. When coding or 
promoter polymorphisms were encountered, DNA from large numbers of ethnically
defined subjects was examined for these polymorphisms and a relationship between 
their existence and abnormalities of iron homeostasis was sought. Only in the
case of one transferrin mutation did we find a strong relationship between the
polymorphism and iron deficiency anemia. The putative genes that affect the
expression of HFE mutations remain elusive.

PMID: 12547238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3058-64. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Regulation of human beta 2-microglobulin transactivation in hematopoietic cells.

Gobin SJ(1), Biesta P, Van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

beta(2)-Microglobulin (beta(2)m) is a chaperone of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I (-like) molecules that play a central role in antigen
presentation, immunoglobulin transport, and iron metabolism. It is therefore of
importance that beta(2)m is adequately expressed in cells that perform these
functions, such as hematopoietic cells. In this study, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of beta(2)m in lymphoid and myeloid cell lines through
a promoter containing a putative E box, Ets/interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE), and kappa B site. Here we show that upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1) and USF2 bind to the E box and regulate beta(2)m transactivation. The
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) subunits p50 and p65 bind to the kappa B box 
and p65 transactivates beta(2)m. Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), IRF2,
IRF4, and IRF8, but not PU.1, bind to the Ets/ISRE, and IRF1 and IRF3 are strong 
transactivators of beta(2)m. Together, all 3 boxes are important for the
constitutive and cytokine-induced levels of beta(2)m expression in lymphoid and
myeloid cell types. As such, beta(2)m transactivation is under the control of
important transcriptional pathways, which are activated during injury, infection,
and inflammation.

PMID: 12480693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Oct;283(4):C1065-72.

USF-1 and USF-2 trans-repress IL-1beta-induced iNOS transcription in mesangial
cells.

Gupta AK(1), Kone BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical School at
Houston, 6431 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene
requires multiple interactions of cis elements and trans-acting factors. Previous
in vivo footprinting studies (Goldring CE, Reveneau S, Algarte M, and Jeannin JF.
Nucleic Acids Res 24: 1682-1687, 1996) of the murine iNOS gene demonstrated
lipopolysaccharide-inducible protection of guanines in the region -904/-883,
which includes an E-box motif. In this report, by using site-directed mutagenesis
of the -893/-888 E-box and correlating functional assays of the mutated iNOS
promoter with upstream stimulatory factor (USF) DNA-binding activities, we
demonstrate that the -893/-888 E-box motif is functionally required for iNOS
regulation in murine mesangial cells and that USFs are in vivo components of the 
iNOS transcriptional response complex. Mutation of the E-box sequence augmented
the iNOS response to interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) in transiently transfected
mesangial cells. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrated that USFs cannot bind to 
the -893/-888 E-box promoter region when the E-box is mutated. Cotransfection of 
USF-1 and USF-2 expression vectors with iNOS promoter-luciferase reporter
constructs suppressed IL-1beta-simulated iNOS promoter activity. Cotransfection
of dominant-negative USF-2 mutants lacking the DNA binding domain or cis-element 
decoys containing concatamers of the -904/-883 region augmented IL-1beta
stimulation of iNOS promoter activity. Gel mobility shift assays showed that only
USF-1 and USF-2 supershifted the USF protein-DNA complexes. These results
demonstrated that USF binding to the E-box at -893/-888 serves to trans-repress
basal expression and IL-1beta induction of the iNOS promoter.

PMID: 12225970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Immunol. 2002 Sep;38(16-18):1193-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the human high affinity IgE receptor alpha-chain
gene.

Takahashi K(1), Nishiyama C, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Advanced Medical
Research Center, Nihon University School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kamimachi,
Itabashi-ku, 173-8610, Tokyo, Japan.

Transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding human high affinity IgE receptor 
(Fc epsilon RI) alpha-chain was analyzed. Previously, we reported that GATA-1 and
Elf-1 recognition sites were necessary for cell type-specific activation of the
alpha-chain gene promoter. More detailed analysis revealed that other
transcription factors bound the regions close to the Elf-1 recognition site and
there was a more complex mechanism for the regulation of the promoter activity.
On the other hand, during a course of studies to find cis-elements over this
gene, CAGCTG sequence in the first intron was revealed to serve as an enhancer. A
complex composed of USF1 and USF2 activated the human alpha-chain gene expression
via this intronic element. Furthermore, we found two novel exons at 18.4 and
12.6kb upstream from the reported first exon and discovered an additional distal 
promoter.

PMID: 12217383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Virology. 2002 Aug 1;299(2):256-265.

Regulation of HIV-1 transcription in activated monocyte macrophages.

Yang Y(1), Tesmer VM, Bina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, 1393 Brown Building, West
Lafayette, IN 47907-1393, USA.

DNA-binding and functional assays examined the role played by NF-IL6 in
regulation of HIV-1 transcription in human monocyte/macrophages (U937 cells),
stimulated with LPS+PMA. When incubated with nuclear extracts from stimulated
cells, a region (-189/-147), containing the major NF-IL6-binding sequence and the
USF site, interacted selectively with USF1 and USF2. Anti-C/EBPbeta reacted
poorly with the complexes produced with the wild-type probe. In contrast, complex
formation with NF-IL6 was clearly evident in experiments analyzing a probe
containing an insertion in the USF site. In functional assays, increasing
concentrations of a decoy against NF-IL6 reduced gene expression from the LTR of 
the wild-type HIV-1 variant, supporting a critical role for NF-IL6 in regulation 
of HIV-1 transcription in stimulated monocyte/macrophages. The decoy also reduced
gene expression from a deletion construct lacking NF-IL6-binding sequences. The
results implied that in LPS+PMA-stimulated monocyte/macrophages, the endogenous
NF-IL6 could act via a site-independent pathway in upregulation of HIV-1
transcription. Analysis of a short DNA segment, containing the -189/-147 region, 
suggested functional interactions of NF-IL6 and USF. In activated cells exogenous
NF-IL6 enhanced dramatically gene expression through a short DNA segment
containing the NF-kappaB sites, supporting functional interactions of NF-IL6 and 
NF-kappaB.

PMID: 12202228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44485-96. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Osteopontin transcription in aortic vascular smooth muscle cells is controlled by
glucose-regulated upstream stimulatory factor and activator protein-1 activities.

Bidder M(1), Shao JS, Charlton-Kachigian N, Loewy AP, Semenkovich CF, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The expression of the matrix cytokine osteopontin (OPN) is up-regulated in aortic
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) by diabetes. OPN expression in cultured
VSMCs is reciprocally regulated by glucose and 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG; inhibitor of
cellular glucose metabolism). Systematic analyses of OPN promoter-luciferase
reporter constructs identify a CCTCATGAC motif at nucleotides -80 to -72 relative
to the initiation site that supports OPN transcription in VSMCs. The region -83
to -45 encompassing this motif confers basal and glucose- and 2-DG-dependent
transcription on an unresponsive promoter. Competition and gel mobility
supershift assays identify upstream stimulatory factor (USF; USF1:USF2) and
activator protein-1 (AP1; c-Fos:c-Jun) in complexes binding the composite
CCTCATGAC element. Glucose up-regulates both AP1 and USF binding activities
2-fold in A7r5 cells and selectively up-regulates USF1 protein levels. By
contrast, USF (but not AP1) binding activity is suppressed by 2-DG and restored
by glucose treatment. Expression of either USF or AP1 activates the proximal OPN 
promoter in A7r5 VSMCs in part via the CCTCATGAC element. Moreover, glucose
stimulates the transactivation functions of c-Fos and USF1, but not c-Jun, in
one-hybrid assays. Mannitol does not regulate binding, transactivation functions,
USF1 protein accumulation, or OPN transcription. Thus, OPN gene transcription is 
regulated by USF and AP1 in aortic VSMCs, entrained to changes in cellular
glucose metabolism.

PMID: 12200434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35920-31. Epub 2002 Jul 11.

Involvement of an upstream stimulatory factor as well as cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein in the activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
gene promoter I.

Tabuchi A(1), Sakaya H, Kisukeda T, Fushiki H, Tsuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toyama
Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Sugitani 2630, Toyama, Japan.

The use of different brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene promoters
results in the differential production of 5'-alternative transcripts, suggesting 
versatile functions of BDNF in neurons. Among four BDNF promoters I, II, III, and
IV (BDNF-PI, -PII, -PIII, and -PIV), BDNF-PI was markedly activated, as well as
BDNF-PIII, by Ca(2+) signals evoked via neuronal activity. However, little is
known about the mechanisms for the transcriptional activation of BDNF-PI. Using
rat cortical neurons in culture, we assigned the promoter sequences responsible
for the Ca(2+) signal-mediated activation of BDNF-PI and found that the
Ca(2+)-responsive elements were located in two separate (distal and proximal)
regions and that the DNA sequences in the proximal region containing
cAMP-responsive element (CRE), which is overlapped by the upstream stimulatory
factor (USF)-binding element, were largely responsible for the activation of
BDNF-PI. CRE-binding protein (CREB) family transcription factors and USF1/USF2
bind to this overlapping site, depending upon their preferred sequences which
also control the magnitude of the activation. Overexpression of dominant negative
CREB or USF reduced the BDNF-PI activation. These findings support that not only 
CREB but also USF1/USF2 contributes to Ca(2+) signal-mediated activation of
BDNF-PI through the recognition of an overlapping CRE and USF-binding element.

PMID: 12114522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32746-52. Epub 2002 Jun 26.

ChREBP rather than USF2 regulates glucose stimulation of endogenous L-pyruvate
kinase expression in insulin-secreting cells.

Wang H(1), Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

There is controversy whether or not upstream stimulatory factors (USF) regulate
the glucose responsiveness of L-pyruvate kinase (L-PK) promoter activity in
hepatocytes. It has been suggested that USF-2 is required for glucose stimulation
of L-PK promoter activity in single islet beta-cells and INS-1 cells (Kennedy, H.
J., Viollet, B., Rafiq, I., Kahn, A., and Rutter, G. A. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.
272, 20636-20640). In the present study, the tet-on system has been employed to
achieve tightly controlled and inducible expression of USF-1 and -2 and their
dominant-negative mutants DN-USF-1 (DeltabTDU1) and -2 (TDU2) in INS-1 cells.
Quantitative Northern blot analysis shows that neither basal level nor glucose
responsiveness of endogenous L-PK mRNA is affected by overexpression of USF-1 and
-2. Likewise, the L-PK expression is unaltered by dominant-negative suppression
of USF function. Western blotting demonstrates that USF-1 and -2 and DN-USF-1 and
-2 proteins are stably expressed in nuclear fractions of INS-1 cells.
Immunofluorescence staining indicates the uniform induction of these
transgene-encoded proteins in the cell nuclei. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using the L-PK promoter segment reveal that induction of USF-1 and -2
dramatically enhances the USF binding activity, whereas DN-USF-1 and -2 abolish
binding. DN-USF-1 and -2 exert their dominant-negative effect by forming
non-functional heterodimers with endogenous USF proteins. Carbohydrate response
element-binding protein (ChREBP) was recently shown to regulate the glucose
responsiveness of the L-PK promoter activity in hepatocytes. We now report the
presence of this transcription factor in rat islets and INS-1 cells. Glucose
stimulates ChREBP transcription in INS-1 cells, as shown by nuclear run-on
experiments. Overexpression of ChREBP in INS-1 cells using the tet-on system
results in a left shift of glucose responsiveness of L-PK expression and an
enhanced L-PK promoter activity. Both endogenous and doxycycline-induced ChREBP
proteins bind to the L-PK promoter in a glucose-dependent manner. These
unprecedented results suggest that ChREBP rather than USF mediates
glucose-promoted L-PK expression in insulin-secreting cells.

PMID: 12087089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Mol Biol. 2002 Jun 21;3:10. Epub 2002 Jun 21.

USF2 inhibits C/EBP-mediated transcriptional regulation of the RIIbeta subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase.

Dahle MK(1), Taskén K, Taskén KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Oslo, N-0317 Oslo, Norway. m.k.dahle@basalmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) plays a central role in
regulation of energy metabolism. Upon stimulation of testicular Sertoli cells by 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), glycolysis is activated to increase the
production of nutrients for the germ cells, and a new regulatory subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase, RIIbeta, is induced. We have previously shown that
production of the transcription factor C/EBPbeta is rapidly increased by FSH and 
cAMP in primary Sertoli cell cultures, and that C/EBPbeta induces the RIIbeta
promoter.
RESULTS: In this work we show that USF1, USF2 and truncated USF isoforms bind to 
a conserved E-box in the RIIbeta gene. Interestingly, overexpression of USF2, but
not USF1, led to inhibition of both cAMP- and C/EBPbeta-mediated induction of
RIIbeta. Furthermore, Western blots show that a novel USF1 isoform is induced by 
cAMP in Sertoli cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the expression of various USF isoforms
may be regulated by cAMP, and that the interplay between USF and C/EBPbeta is
important for cAMP-mediated regulation of RIIbeta expression. The counteracting
effects of USF2 and C/EBPbeta observed on the RIIbeta promoter is in accordance
with the hypothesis that C/EBP and USF play opposite roles in regulation of
glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC117135
PMID: 12086590  [PubMed]


188. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jun;269(12):3057-64.

Molecular mechanisms underlying SHP-1 gene expression.

Tsui HW(1), Hasselblatt K, Martin A, Mok SC, Tsui FW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular & Molecular Biology, Toronto Western Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

SHP-1, a protein-tyrosine phosphatase with two src-homology 2 domains, is
expressed predominantly in hematopoietic and epithelial cells and has been
implicated in numerous signaling pathways as a negative regulator. Two promoters 
direct the expression of human and murine SHP-1, and two types of transcripts (I)
and (II) SHP-1, are initiated from each of these promoters. The cDNA sequences of
(I)SHP-1 and (II)SHP-1 are identical except in the 5' untranslated region and in 
the first few coding nucleotides. In this report, we show that promoter usage is 
similar in mouse and human hematopoietic cells, but different in epithelial
cells. In human epithelial cells, only (I)SHP-1 transcripts were expressed. In
addition, 4beta-phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate up-regulates human (I)SHP-1
transcript expression in SKOV3 cells (an ovarian cancer cell line). Indirect
evidence suggests that nuclear factor-kappaB might play a role in this induction.
We also show that a 12-bp repeat in the distal SHP-1 promoter, which directs
(I)SHP-1 expression, is of functional relevance as deletion of one copy of this
E-box-containing 12-bp repeat resulted in a significant decrease in promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and supershift experiments showed
that the upstream stimulatory factors USF1 and USF2 hetero-dimerize and interact 
with this 12 bp repeat. Our results suggest that USFs which have
antiproliferative functions might regulate the expression of SHP-1, which itself 
is predominantly a negative growth regulator.

PMID: 12071971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jun 5;520(1-3):40-6.

Variant forms of upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) control the promoter
activity of hTERT, the human gene encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase.

Yago M(1), Ohki R, Hatakeyama S, Fujita T, Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Assembly, Department of Biological
Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

It is known that Myc regulates the expression of TERT, the telomerase catalytic
subunit gene, by binding to E box. Here we show that another E box-binding
protein, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), also regulates TERT expression.
Specifically, the N-terminally truncated form of USF2 is present in
telomerase-negative/resting human lymphocytes, but not in
telomerase-positive/phytohemagglutinin-activated lymphocytes. In electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay, both full-length and truncated USF2s bound to the TERT E
box. In a transient expression assay, the truncated USF had a dominant-negative
effect on both exogenous full-length USF and endogenous positive regulators for
activating TERT expression. These results suggest that the differential abundance
of truncated USF2 may regulate telomerase activity during lymphocyte activation.

PMID: 12044867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gene. 2002 Feb 20;285(1-2):127-39.

Genomic organization and promoter characterization of the gene encoding a
putative endoplasmic reticulum chaperone, ERp29.

Sargsyan E(1), Baryshev M, Backlund M, Sharipo A, Mkrtchian S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institute, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

ERp29 is a soluble protein localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of
eukaryotic cells, which is conserved in all mammalian species. The N-terminal
domain of ERp29 displays sequence and structural similarity to the protein
disulfide isomerase despite the lack of the characteristic double cysteine motif.
Although the exact function of ERp29 is not yet known, it was hypothesized that
it may facilitate folding and/or export of secretory proteins in/from the ER.
ERp29 is induced by ER stress, i.e. accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER. 
To gain an insight into the mechanisms regulating ERp29 expression we have cloned
and characterized the rat ERp29 gene and studied in details its distribution in
human tissues. Comparison with the murine and human genes and phylogenetic
analysis demonstrated common origin and close ortholog relationships of these
genes. Additionally, we have cloned approximately 3 kb of the 5'-flanking region 
of the ERp29 gene and functionally characterized its promoter. Such
characteristics of the promoter as GC-rich sequence, absence of TATA-box,
multiple transcription start sites taken together with the ubiquitous gene
expression, reaching maximum levels in the specialized secretory tissues,
indicate that ERp29 belongs to the group of the constitutively expressed
housekeeping genes. A 337 bp fragment of the 5' flank was identified as a core
promoter sufficient for the transcriptional activation of the gene. Gel mobility 
shift assay indicated interaction of the predicted GC and E box elements within
the core promoter with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2 transcription factors, respectively,
suggesting their key role in the basal expression of the gene.

PMID: 12039039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Mar 19;1574(2):175-86.

Functional analysis of the glucose response element of the rat glucagon receptor 
gene in insulin-producing INS-1 cells.

Portois L(1), Tastenoy M, Viollet B, Svoboda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Medical School, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, CP 611, 808 Route de Lennik, B-1070, Brussels, Belgium.

Glucose stimulates the transcription of the glucagon receptor gene in hepatocytes
and in pancreatic beta cells. We recently identified a glucose response element
in the immediate upstream non-coding region of the rat glucagon receptor gene. We
previously showed that this DNA element is centered on a palindromic sequence of 
19 nucleotides (termed as G box), containing two E boxes separated by three
nucleotides. In the present study, we further characterized the DNA sequence
requirements for the glucose induced expression of the rat glucagon receptor
gene. Transfection study realized in the insulin-producing INS-1 cells revealed
that a fragment of 49 nucleotides, centered on the G box, bears all the features 
required for the glucose activation. Mutations performed in the 5'-E box totally 
abolished the glucose responsiveness, whereas mutations or deletion of the 3'-E
box only had a limited effect. Deletions performed upstream from the G box
revealed that an accessory factor binding site, located in the region just
upstream from the G box, is required for full stimulation by glucose. Finally, by
using G box based probes in gel shift experiments, we demonstrated that USF1/USF2
transcription factors are part of the proteinic complex that binds to the glucose
response element of the rat glucagon receptor gene promoter. In conclusion, in
contrast to many other glucose regulated genes, only the 5'-E box appears to be a
crucial DNA element for the glucose transcriptional effect. However, an accessory
factor binding site located in the region just upstream from the G box is
required for a complete stimulation by glucose.

PMID: 11955627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4596-601.

Severe iron deficiency anemia in transgenic mice expressing liver hepcidin.

Nicolas G(1), Bennoun M, Porteu A, Mativet S, Beaumont C, Grandchamp B, Sirito M,
Sawadogo M, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Département de génétique, développement et Pathologie Moléculaire, Institut
Cochin, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, et Université René
Descartes, Faculté de Médecine Cochin-Port Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

We recently reported the hemochromatosis-like phenotype observed in our Usf2
knockout mice. In these mice, as in murine models of hemochromatosis and patients
with hereditary hemochromatosis, iron accumulates in parenchymal cells (in
particular, liver and pancreas), whereas the reticuloendothelial system is spared
from this iron loading. We suggested that this phenotypic trait could be
attributed to the absence, in the Usf2 knockout mice, of a secreted
liver-specific peptide, hepcidin. We conjectured that the reverse situation,
namely overexpression of hepcidin, might result in phenotypic traits of iron
deficiency. This question was addressed by generating transgenic mice expressing 
hepcidin under the control of the liver-specific transthyretin promoter. We found
that the majority of the transgenic mice were born with a pale skin and died
within a few hours after birth. These transgenic animals had decreased body iron 
levels and presented severe microcytic hypochromic anemia. So far, three mosaic
transgenic animals have survived. They were unequivocally identified by physical 
features, including reduced body size, pallor, hairless and crumpled skin. These 
pleiotropic effects were found to be associated with erythrocyte abnormalities,
with marked anisocytosis, poikylocytosis and hypochromia, which are features
characteristic of iron-deficiency anemia. These results strongly support the
proposed role of hepcidin as a putative iron-regulatory hormone. The animal
models devoid of hepcidin (the Usf2 knockout mice) or overexpressing the peptide 
(the transgenic mice presented in this paper) represent valuable tools for
investigating iron homeostasis in vivo and for deciphering the molecular
mechanisms of hepcidin action.

PMCID: PMC123693
PMID: 11930010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Lipid Res. 2002 Feb;43(2):297-306.

The E-box motif in the proximal ABCA1 promoter mediates transcriptional
repression of the ABCA1 gene.

Yang XP(1), Freeman LA, Knapper CL, Amar MJ, Remaley A, Brewer HB Jr,
Santamarina-Fojo S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Disease Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1666, USA.

To identify regulatory elements in the proximal human ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 (hABCA1) gene promoter we transfected RAW cells with plasmids
containing mutations in the E-box, AP1, and liver X receptor (LXR) elements as
well as the two Sp1 motifs. Point mutations in either Sp1 site or in the AP1 site
had only a minor effect whereas mutation of the LXR element decreased promoter
activity. In contrast, mutation or deletion of the E-box motif caused a 3-fold
increase in transcriptional activity under basal conditions. Gel shift and DNaseI
footprint analysis showed binding of a protein or protein complex to this region.
Preincubation of nuclear extracts with antibodies established that USF1, USF2,
and fos related antigen (Fra) 2 bind to DNA sequences in the human ABCA1 promoter
that contains the intact E-box but not the mutant or deleted E-box.
Co-transfection of USF1 and USF2 enhanced, but Fra2 repressed, ABCA1 promoter
activity. Thus, a complex consisting of USF1, USF2, and Fra2 binds the E-box
motif 147 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site and facilitates
repression of the human ABCA1 promoter. These combined studies identify a novel
site in the human ABCA1 promoter involved in the regulation of ABCA1 gene
expression.

PMID: 11861672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Diabetes. 2002 Feb;51(2):293-300.

Transcriptional regulation of adipocyte hormone-sensitive lipase by glucose.

Smih F(1), Rouet P, Lucas S, Mairal A, Sengenes C, Lafontan M, Vaulont S, Casado 
M, Langin D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 317, Institut Louis Bugnard, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 
Rangueil, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the
mobilization of fatty acids from adipose tissue, thus determining the supply of
energy substrates in the body. HSL mRNA was positively regulated by glucose in
human adipocytes. Pools of stably transfected 3T3-F442A adipocytes were generated
with human adipocyte HSL promoter fragments from -2,400/+38 to -31/+38 bp linked 
to the luciferase gene. A glucose-responsive region was mapped within the
proximal promoter (-137 bp). Electromobility shift assays showed that upstream
stimulatory factor (USF)-1 and USF2 and Sp1 and Sp3 bound to a consensus E-box
and two GC-boxes in the -137-bp region. Cotransfection of the -137/+38 construct 
with USF1 and USF2 expression vectors produced enhanced luciferase activity.
Moreover, HSL mRNA levels were decreased in USF1- and USF2-deficient mice.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the HSL promoter showed that the GC-boxes, although 
contributing to basal promoter activity, were dispensable for glucose
responsiveness. Mutation of the E-box led to decreased promoter activity and
suppression of the glucose response. Analogs and metabolites were used to
determine the signal metabolite of the glucose response. The signal is generated 
downstream of glucose-6-phosphate in the glycolytic pathway before the triose
phosphate step.

PMID: 11812735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2001 Nov-Dec;37(10):684-90.

Transcriptional regulation of the transforming growth factor-beta2 gene in
glioblastoma cells.

Kingsley-Kallesen M(1), Luster TA, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases and Department of 
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
68198-6805, USA.

The expression of transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) appears to play a 
strong role in the establishment and progression of glial tumors. In particular, 
elevated expression of TGF-beta2 appears to be responsible for the impaired
cell-mediated immunity often observed in patients with a glioblastoma. This study
examined the regulation of the TGF-beta2 at the transcriptional level in the
U87MG glioblastoma cell line. We demonstrate that a cAMP response
element/activating transcription factor (CRE/ATF) site and an E-box motif located
just upstream of the transcription start site are essential for the transcription
of the TGF-beta2 gene in U87MG cells. Gel mobility analysis determined that
activating transcription factor-1, and possibly cAMP-responsive element binding
protein, binds to the CRE/ATF site, and upsteam stimulatory factor (USF) 1 and
USF2 bind to the E-box motif. Interestingly, expression of a dominant negative
USF protein down-regulates TGF-beta2 activity by 80-95% in glioblastoma cells. We
conclude that the binding of transcription factors, in particular the USF
proteins, to the TGF-beta2 promoter is essential for its expression and possibly 
its up-regulation in glioblastomas.

PMID: 11776974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):8775-89. Epub 2001 Dec 10.

Upstream stimulatory factors binding to an E box motif in the R region of the
bovine leukemia virus long terminal repeat stimulates viral gene expression.

Calomme C(1), Nguyen TL, de Launoit Y, Kiermer V, Droogmans L, Burny A, Van Lint 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Service de Chimie Biologique, Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire,
Rue des Profs Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

The bovine leukemia virus (BLV) promoter is located in its 5'-long terminal
repeat and is composed of the U3, R, and U5 regions. BLV transcription is
regulated by cis-acting elements located in the U3 region, including three 21-bp 
enhancers required for transactivation of the BLV promoter by the virus-encoded
transactivator Tax(BLV). In addition to the U3 cis-acting elements, both the R
and U5 regions contain stimulatory sequences. To date, no transcription
factor-binding site has been identified in the R region. Here sequence analysis
of this region revealed the presence of a potential E box motif (5'-CACGTG-3').
By competition and supershift gel shift assays, we demonstrated that the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors USF1 and USF2 specifically interacted with
this R region E box motif. Mutations abolishing upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
binding caused a reproducible decrease in basal or Tax-activated BLV
promoter-driven gene expression in transient transfection assays of B-lymphoid
cell lines. Cotransfection experiments showed that the USF1 and USF2a
transactivators were able to act through the BLV R region E box. Taken together, 
these results physically and functionally characterize a USF-binding site in the 
R region of BLV. This E box motif located downstream of the transcription start
site constitutes a new positive regulatory element involved in the
transcriptional activity of the BLV promoter and could play an important role in 
virus replication.

PMID: 11741930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47658-63. Epub 2001 Oct 17.

Upstream stimulatory factors regulate aortic preferentially expressed gene-1
expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Chen YH(1), Layne MD, Watanabe M, Yet SF, Perrella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care and Cardiovascular Divisions, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The phenotypic modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) plays a central 
role in the pathogenesis of arteriosclerosis. Aortic preferentially expressed
gene-1 (APEG-1), a VSMC-specific gene, is expressed highly in differentiated but 
not in dedifferentiated VSMC. Previously, we identified an E-box element in the
mouse APEG-1 proximal promoter, which is essential for VSMC reporter activity. In
this study, we investigated the role of upstream stimulatory factors (USF) in the
regulation of APEG-1 transcription via this E-box element. By electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, recombinant USF1 and USF2 homo- and heterodimers bound
specifically to the APEG-1 E-box. Nuclear extracts prepared from primary cultures
of rat aortic smooth muscle cells exhibited specific USF1 and USF2 binding to the
APEG-1 E-box. To investigate the binding properties of USF during VSMC
differentiation, nuclear extracts were prepared from the neural crest cell line, 
MONC-1, which differentiates into VSMC in culture. Maximal USF1 and USF2 protein 
levels and binding to the APEG-1 E-box occurred 3 h after the differentiation of 
MONC-1 cells was initiated. Co-transfection experiments demonstrated that
dominant negative USF repressed APEG-1 promoter activity, and USF1, but not USF2,
transactivated the APEG-1 promoter. Our studies demonstrate that USF factors
contribute to the regulation of APEG-1 expression and may influence the
differentiation of VSMC.

PMID: 11606591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Endocrinology. 2001 Nov;142(11):4643-51.

Up-regulation of upstream stimulatory factors by protein malnutrition and its
possible role in regulation of the IGF-binding protein-1 gene.

Matsukawa T(1), Inoue Y, Oishi Y, Kato H, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Protein malnutrition drastically induces the expression of the IGF-binding
protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene. We have previously shown that the region between -77
and -112 bp upstream of the rat IGFBP-1 gene contributes to the response of this 
gene to amino acid limitation. In an attempt to elucidate the basis of the
responsiveness of this putative amino acid response unit (AARU), we searched the 
nucleus of the rat liver for a trans-acting factor whose binding to AARU was
dependent on protein nutrition. Liver nuclear extracts of rats fed a protein-free
diet and of those fed a control diet were compared by EMSA using the AARU as
probe. One of the protein-probe complexes underwent a drastic increase after
dietary protein deprivation. Assays using specific antibodies and several
competitor oligonucleotides led to identification of the protein composing the
complex as upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF) and USF-2. The binding site of the
USF proteins in the AARU turned out to be a CACGGG sequence that was homologous
to the consensus USF-binding sequence (E box; CANNTG). Further, Western blot
analyses showed that a protein-free diet caused significant increases in USF-1
and USF-2 levels. Thus, elevated expression of the IGFBP-1 gene under protein
malnutrition can be attributable to increased binding of USF to its promoter,
which results from increased USF levels. The data suggest that the changes in
these ubiquitously distributed transcription factors play an important role in
the nutritional regulation of expression of mammalian genes.

PMID: 11606429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):45530-8. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Critical roles of a cyclic AMP responsive element and an E-box in regulation of
mouse renin gene expression.

Pan L(1), Black TA, Shi Q, Jones CA, Petrovic N, Loudon J, Kane C, Sigmund CD,
Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Mouse As4.1 cells, obtained after transgene-targeted oncogenesis to induce
neoplasia in renal renin expressing cells, express high levels of renin mRNA from
their endogenous Ren-1(c) gene. We have previously identified a 242-base pair
enhancer (coordinates -2866 to -2625 relative to the CAP site) upstream of the
mouse Ren-1(c) gene. This enhancer, in combination with the proximal promoter
(-117 to +6), activates transcription nearly 2 orders of magnitude in an
orientation independent fashion. To further delimit sequences necessary for
transcriptional activation, renin promoter-luciferase reporter gene constructs
containing selected regions of the Ren-1(c) enhancer were analyzed after
transfection into As4.1 cells. These results demonstrate that several regions are
required for full enhancer activity. Sequences from -2699 to -2672, which are
critical for the enhancer activity, contain a cyclic AMP responsive element (CRE)
and an E-box. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that
transcription factors CREB/CREM and USF1/USF2 in As4.1 cell nuclear extracts bind
to oligonucleotides containing the Ren-1(c) CRE and E-box, respectively. These
two elements are capable of synergistically activating transcription from the
Ren-1(c) promoter. Moreover, mutation of either the CRE or E-box results in
almost complete loss of enhancer activity, suggesting the critical roles these
two elements play in regulating mouse Ren-1(c) gene expression. Although the
Ren-1(c) gene contains a CRE, its expression is not induced by cAMP in As4.1
cells. This appears to reflect constitutive activation of protein kinase A in
As4.1 cells since treatment with the protein kinase A inhibitor, H-89, caused a
significant reduction in Ren-1(c) gene expression and this reduction is mediated 
through the CRE at -2699 to -2688.

PMID: 11564732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. FEBS Lett. 2001 Sep 7;505(1):57-62.

Cell type-dependent regulation of human DNA topoisomerase III alpha gene
expression by upstream stimulatory factor 2.

Han SY(1), Kim JC, Suh JM, Chung IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Protein Network Research Center,
Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, South Korea.

Here, we report that an E-box element located within the human topoisomerase III 
alpha (hTOP3 alpha) gene promoter acts as a cell type-specific enhancer. The
upstream stimulatory factor (USF) was shown to specifically recognize the
mutationally sensitive E-box element. When assayed by transient transfection with
hTOP3 alpha promoter-dependent reporter genes, USF is transcriptionally active in
HeLa cells but lacks transcriptional activity in Saos-2 cells. The hTOP3 alpha
mRNA level in Saos-2 cells was reduced to about 30% of the level observed for
HeLa cells, suggesting that the inactivity of USF in hTOP3 alpha promoter
activity may be the cause of the marked reduction of hTOP3 alpha mRNA levels in
Saos-2 cells. Using transient transfection assays in HeLa cells, we demonstrated 
that ectopically expressed USF2, but not USF1, was capable of activating hTOP3
alpha transcription through the E-box element. However, USF2 did not stimulate
hTOP3 alpha promoter activity in Saos-2 cells. This cell type-specific regulation
of promoter activity by USF2 may provide a mechanism for the differential
expression of hTOP3 alpha in various tissues and during developmental stages.

PMID: 11557042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Biochemistry. 2001 Jul 31;40(30):8887-97.

TFEC can function as a transcriptional activator of the nonmuscle myosin II heavy
chain-A gene in transfected cells.

Chung MC(1), Kim HK, Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1762, USA.

Transcription of the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain-A (NMHC-A) gene is
regulated via multiple elements located in intron 1, including element F which
contains an E-box. In this study we have identified and characterized the factors
that are capable of binding to element F. Yeast one-hybrid screening using
element F allowed isolation of cDNAs encoding transcriptional factors TFEC, TFE3,
and USF2, each of which contains basic helix-loop-helix and leucine zipper
motifs. Furthermore, cDNA cloning by polymerase chain reaction yielded cDNAs for 
two TFEC isoforms, designated TFEC-l and TFEC-s, which are generated by
alternative pre-mRNA splicing. In addition to these four factors, USF1, which is 
known to share the same DNA binding elements with USF2, was isolated for
comparison. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and cotransfection studies of
the expression constructs with reporter gene constructs revealed that the above
five factors have different binding activities for element F with different
transactivation potencies. USF1 and USF2 demonstrate the highest binding activity
to element F, yet show the lowest element F-dependent transactivation. TFE3 has a
high transactivation potency but the lowest binding activity. TFEC-l demonstrates
a high binding activity with the highest transactivation potency, whereas TFEC-s 
has the same binding activity as TFEC-l with intermediate transactivation. We
also demonstrate that an N-terminal activation domain exists only in TFEC-l,
whereas a C-terminal activation domain is common to both the l and s isoforms.
This study provides the first evidence of TFEC being an activator of
transcription, with two separate activation domains.

PMID: 11467950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8780-5. Epub 2001 Jul 10.

Lack of hepcidin gene expression and severe tissue iron overload in upstream
stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) knockout mice.

Nicolas G(1), Bennoun M, Devaux I, Beaumont C, Grandchamp B, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale 129, Departement
Genetique Developpement et Pathologie Moléculaire, Institut Cochin de Genetique
Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine Cochin-Port Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jul 17;98(15):8160-2.

We previously reported the disruption of the murine gene encoding the
transcription factor USF2 and its consequences on glucose-dependent gene
regulation in the liver. We report here a peculiar phenotype of Usf2(-/-) mice
that progressively develop multivisceral iron overload; plasma iron overcomes
transferrin binding capacity, and nontransferrin-bound iron accumulates in
various tissues including pancreas and heart. In contrast, the splenic iron
content is strikingly lower in knockout animals than in controls. To identify
genes that may account for the abnormalities of iron homeostasis in Usf2(-/-)
mice, we used suppressive subtractive hybridization between livers from Usf2(-/-)
and wild-type mice. We isolated a cDNA encoding a peptide, hepcidin (also
referred to as LEAP-1, for liver-expressed antimicrobial peptide), that was very 
recently purified from human blood ultrafiltrate and from urine as a
disulfide-bonded peptide exhibiting antimicrobial activity. Accumulation of iron 
in the liver has been recently reported to up-regulate hepcidin expression,
whereas our data clearly show that a complete defect in hepcidin expression is
responsible for progressive tissue iron overload. The striking similarity of the 
alterations in iron metabolism between HFE knockout mice, a murine model of
hereditary hemochromatosis, and the Usf2(-/-) hepcidin-deficient mice suggests
that hepcidin may function in the same regulatory pathway as HFE. We propose that
hepcidin acts as a signaling molecule that is required in conjunction with HFE to
regulate both intestinal iron absorption and iron storage in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC37512
PMID: 11447267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 May;15(5):704-15.

Activation of the rat follicle-stimulating hormone receptor promoter by
steroidogenic factor 1 is blocked by protein kinase a and requires upstream
stimulatory factor binding to a proximal E box element.

Heckert LL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology The University of Kansas
Medical Center Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

The receptor for the pituitary glycoprotein hormone FSH (FSHR) and the nuclear
hormone receptor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) play important roles in control of
the hypothalamic-pituitary- gonadal axis. FSHR is essential for integrating the
pituitary FSH signal to gonadal response, while SF-1 is an important
transcriptional regulator of many genes that function within this axis and is
essential for the development of gonads and adrenal glands. Given the critical
role of SF-1 in regulation of the gonads and the coexpression of FSHR and SF-1 in
Sertoli and granulosa cells, we examined the ability of SF-1 to regulate
transcription of the FSHR gene. We found that SF-1 stimulated rat FSHR promoter
activity in a dose-dependent and promoter-specific manner. Examination of various
promoter deletion mutants indicated that SF-1 acts through the proximal promoter 
region and upstream promoter sequences. An E box element within the proximal
promoter is essential for activation of the FSHR promoter by SF-1. This element
binds the transcriptional regulators USF1 and USF2 (upstream stimulatory factors 
1 and 2) but not SF-1, as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In
addition, functional studies identified a requirement for the USF proteins in
SF-1 activation of FSHR and mapped an important regulatory domain within exons 4 
and 5 of USF2. Cotransfection studies revealed that activation of protein kinase 
A leads to inhibition of SF-1-stimulated transcription of FSHR, while it
synergized with SF-1 to activate the equine LH beta-promoter (ebeta). Thus,
stimulation of the cAMP pathway differentially regulates SF-1 activation of the
FSHR and ebeta-promoters.

PMCID: PMC1496918
PMID: 11328853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biol Reprod. 2001 May;64(5):1315-9.

Cloning and functional expression of an E box-binding protein from rat granulosa 
cells.

Yamada K(1), Mizutani T, Shou Z, Yazawa T, Sekiguchi T, Yoshino M, Inazu T,
Miyamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka,
Fukui 910-1193 and CREST, JST (Japan Science and Technology), Japan.
kazuya@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

Ovarian granulosa cells undergo cell growth and cytodifferentiation during
follicular maturation. In a number of tissues, the gene expression that is
responsible for the cytodifferentiation is largely dependent on E box(es) located
upstream of the responsible genes. In this study, we report on the cloning of
cDNA(s) encoding E box (5'-CACGTG-3')-binding protein from a rat granulosa cell
cDNA library using a yeast one-hybrid system. When multiple E box sequences were 
used as target, we obtained a positive clone that encodes the rat homologue of
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2). An analysis of the nucleotide sequence and 
its deduced amino acid sequence reveals that rat USF2 protein consists of 346
amino acid residues and belongs to the basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
protein family. Northern blot analysis shows that rat USF2 mRNA exists as
multiple forms between 1.6 and 2.2 kilobases. The size of the cloned insert was
identical to that of the transcript of maximal length. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that in vitro-translated rat USF2 specifically binds to the E
box. In addition, cotransfection experiments with luciferase-reporter constructs 
in HepG2 cells reveal that the overexpression of rat USF2 leads to an increase of
luciferase activity in the E box sequence-dependent manner. Thus, we report
molecular cloning, expression, and functional characterization of full-length rat
USF2 cDNA.

PMID: 11319134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2001 Jan;65(1):56-62.

Molecular cloning of rat USF2 cDNA and characterization of splicing variants.

Takahashi K(1), Nishiyama C, Okumura K, Ra C, Ohtake Y, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Foods and Pharmaceuticals Research and Development Laboratory, Asahi Breweries
Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan. kyoko.takahashi@asahibeer.co.jp

The complete nucleotide sequence of rat USF2 cDNA was determined. In addition to 
the full length clone (USF2FL), four isoforms (delta1, delta2, delta3, and
delta4) suggested to be generated by alternative splicing were isolated.
USF2delta1 and delta2 lacked 27 and 67 internal amino acid residues,
respectively. USF2delta3 and delta4 lacked most of the entire sequence but
encoded short peptides of an N-terminal portion of USF2FL. Overexpression of
USF2FL increased the transcription of the human high affinity IgE receptor
(FcepsilonRI) alpha chain gene through specific binding to the CAGCTG motif in
the first intron. On the other hand, overexpression of USF2delta1 or delta2
reduced the transcription of the human FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene. Both USF2FL 
and USF2delta1 bound to CACGTG as well as CAGCTG, while USF2delta2 bound to
CACGTG but not to CAGCTG. These results suggested the presence of a different and
definitive role of each variant in the expression of the alpha chain gene.

PMID: 11272846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Cell Biochem. 2001 Mar 26;81(2):262-77.

Upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) and USF2 bind to and activate the promoter
of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene.

Jaiswal AS(1), Narayan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene product is involved in cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis, and loss of function is associated with the development of 
colorectal carcinogenesis. Although it has been demonstrated that the APC gene is
inducible, its transcriptional regulation has not been elucidated. Therefore, we 
characterized the promoter region of the APC gene and transcription factors
required for basal expression. The APC gene has a TATA-less promoter and contains
consensus binding sites for Octamer, AP2, Sp1, a CAAT-box, and three nucleotide
sequences for E-box A, B, and M. The E-boxes are functional in several cancer
cell lines and upstream stimulating factor-1 (USF1) and USF2 interact with these 
sites, with a preferred sequence-specificity for the B site. Analysis of
activation of the cloned APC promoter by USF1 and USF2 in transient transfection 
assays in HCT-116 cells demonstrated that mutation of the E-box B site completely
abolished the basal promoter activity. Further, the ectopic USF1 and USF2
expression in HCT-116 cells with deletion mutations of E-box A, B, and M sites
showed that these E-boxes contribute to USF1- and USF2-mediated transcriptional
activation of the APC promoter, with maximum promoter activity being associated
with the E-box B site. Thus, USF1 and USF2 transcription factors are critical for
APC gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11241666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Feb;31(2):590-9.

A complex composed of USF1 and USF2 activates the human FcepsilonRI alpha chain
expression via a CAGCTG element in the first intron.

Takahashi K(1), Nishiyama C, Nishiyama M, Okumura K, Ra C, Ohtake Y, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Foods & Pharmaceuticals Research & Development Laboratory, Asahi Breweries
Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan. Kyoko.takahashi@asahibeer.co.jp

The high-affinity IgE receptor, FcepsilonRI, is a key regulatory molecule in the 
allergic reaction. During the course of studies to find cis-acting elements for
FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene expression, a CAGCTG sequence located in the first
intron was revealed to serve as a crucial enhancer element. Electromobility shift
assays using antibodies and in vitro translation products showed that the CAGCTG 
element was recognized by the USF1/USF2 complex. As was the case for other
intronic cis-elements, the CAGCTG element regulated the promoter in an
orientation- and position-dependent manner. Overexpression of USF2 antisense
repressed the FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene promoter and decreased the amount of
alpha chain mRNA in mast cell lines. All these results indicated that the
USF1/USF2 complex activates the human FcepsilonRI alpha chain gene expression via
the CAGCTG element in the first intron.

PMID: 11180124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Feb 14;172(1-2):91-103.

Transcriptional activation of cathepsin D gene expression by 17beta-estradiol:
mechanism of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated inhibition.

Wang F(1), Samudio I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A & M University, 
College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA.

17beta-estradiol (E2) induces cathepsin D gene expression in MCF-7 human breast
cancer cells and this response is inhibited by aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
agonists, such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Analysis of the
cathepsin D gene promoter initially identified a pentanucleotide GCGTG core
dioxin responsive element (DRE) that blocked E2 action by inhibiting formation of
a transcriptionally active estrogen receptor (ER)-Sp1 complex. A second
functional downstream inhibitory DRE (iDRE2) (-130 to -126) has now been
identified in the cathepsin D gene promoter and inhibition of E2-induced
transactivation involves inhibitory AhR crosstalk with the E2-responsive
adenovirus major late promoter element (MLPE) at -124 to -104 in the cathepsin D 
gene promoter. The MLPE site primarily binds USF1/USF2 and ERalpha, and gel
mobility shift and DNA footprinting assays show that the AhR complex decreases
binding of these transcription factors to the MLPE.

PMID: 11165043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):119-27.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 stimulates transcription through an initiator
element in the mouse cytochrome c oxidase subunit Vb promoter.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
P.O. Box 830688, Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
transcription factor that plays an important role in transcriptional activation
and cell proliferation. In this article, we demonstrate that the mouse cytochrome
c oxidase subunit Vb gene (Cox5b) can be transactivated by ectopic expression of 
USF2 through an initiator (Inr) element in the core promoter. Importantly, using 
a dominant-negative mutant of USF2, we demonstrate the role of endogenous USF2
proteins in the transcriptional activation of the Cox5b Inr. Domains of USF2
encoded by exon 4, exon 5 and the USF-specific region are important for maximum
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Using the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein, we show that
p300/CBP acts as a coactivator in the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr.
We also demonstrate that although expression of multifunctional regulatory
factor, Yin Yang 1 (YY1), can stimulate transcription of the Cox5b Inr to a
modest extent, expression of YY1 together with USF2 greatly reduces the level of 
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Furthermore, we show that the transcription factor, 
Sp1, represses both the YY1- and the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr, 
indicating competition among Sp1, YY1, and USF2.

PMID: 11118624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7811-9. Epub 2000 Dec 11.

A new mouse liver-specific gene, encoding a protein homologous to human
antimicrobial peptide hepcidin, is overexpressed during iron overload.

Pigeon C(1), Ilyin G, Courselaud B, Leroyer P, Turlin B, Brissot P, Loréal O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U522, CHRU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.
christelle.pigeon@rennes.inserm.fr

Considering that the development of hepatic lesions related to iron overload
diseases might be a result of abnormally expressed hepatic genes, we searched for
new genes up-regulated under the condition of iron excess. By suppressive
subtractive hybridization performed between livers from carbonyl iron-overloaded 
and control mice, we isolated a 225-base pair cDNA. By Northern blot analysis,
the corresponding mRNA was confirmed to be overexpressed in livers of
experimentally (carbonyl iron and iron-dextran-treated mice) and spontaneously
(beta(2)-microglobulin knockout mice) iron-overloaded mice. In addition,
beta(2)-microglobulin knockout mice fed with a low iron content diet exhibited a 
decrease of hepatic mRNA expression. The murine full-length cDNA was isolated and
was found to encode an 83-amino acid protein presenting a strong homology in its 
C-terminal region to the human antimicrobial peptide hepcidin. In addition, we
cloned the corresponding rat and human orthologue cDNAs. Both mouse and human
genes named HEPC are constituted of 3 exons and 2 introns and are located on
chromosome 7 and 19, respectively, in close proximity to USF2 gene. In mouse and 
human, HEPC mRNA was predominantly expressed in the liver. During both in vivo
and in vitro studies, HEPC mRNA expression was enhanced in mouse hepatocytes
under the effect of lipopolysaccharide. Finally, to analyze the intracellular
localization of the predicted protein, we used the green fluorescent protein
chimera expression vectors. The murine green fluorescent protein-prohepcidin
protein was exclusively localized in the nucleus. When the putative nuclear
localization signal was deleted, the resulting protein was addressed to the
cytoplasm. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that the product of the new 
liver-specific gene HEPC might play a specific role during iron overload and
exhibit additional functions distinct from its antimicrobial activity.

PMID: 11113132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Nov;14(11):1836-48.

The USF proteins regulate transcription of the follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor but are insufficient for cell-specific expression.

Heckert LL(1), Sawadogo M, Daggett MA, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

Expression of the FSH receptor (FSHR) is limited to granulosa cells of the ovary 
and Sertoli cells of the testis. Previous studies showed that an E box in the
proximal promoter of the FSHR gene is required for transcription and that the
predominant E box binding proteins are the ubiquitous transcription factors,
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2. Through cotransfection analysis,
we have shown that both wild-type and dominant negative forms of the USF proteins
regulate the rat FSHR promoter and that transcriptional activation of FSHR
required several domains within the amino-terminal portion of the USF proteins.
Analysis of the FSHR promoter region using in vivo genomic footprinting indicated
that the E box is occupied by proteins in Sertoli cells but not in cells that
fail to express the receptor, despite the presence of the USF proteins. To help
delineate the regions of the rat FSHR gene required for correct spatial and
temporal expression, transgenic mice harboring two constructs containing variable
amounts of 5'-flanking sequence (5,000 bp and 100 bp) were generated. Examination
of 16 different transgenic lines revealed varied transgene expression profiles
with multiple lines having different amounts of ectopic expression and two lines 
failing to express the transgene. In addition, little or no expression was
observed in Sertoli cells. These studies indicate that additional regulatory
sequences outside the region from -5,000 to +123 bp are needed for proper
expression in Sertoli cells.

PMCID: PMC1496886
PMID: 11075816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 9;276(6):4357-64. Epub 2000 Oct 31.

Interaction of the transcription factors USF1, USF2, and alpha -Pal/Nrf-1 with
the FMR1 promoter. Implications for Fragile X mental retardation syndrome.

Kumari D(1), Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Genomic Structure and Function, Laboratory of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0830, USA.

Hypermethylation of the FMR1 promoter reduces its transcriptional activity,
resulting in the mental retardation and macroorchidism characteristic of Fragile 
X syndrome. How exactly methylation causes transcriptional silencing is not known
but is relevant if current attempts to reactivate the gene are to be successful. 
Understanding the effect of methylation requires a better understanding of the
factors responsible for FMR1 gene expression. To this end we have identified five
evolutionarily conserved transcription factor binding sites in this promoter and 
shown that four of them are important for transcriptional activity in neuronally 
derived cells. We have also shown that USF1, USF2, and alpha-Pal/Nrf-1 are the
major transcription factors that bind the promoter in brain and testis extracts
and suggest that elevated levels of these factors account in part for elevated
FMR1 expression in these organs. We also show that methylation abolishes
alpha-Pal/Nrf-1 binding to the promoter and affects binding of USF1 and USF2 to a
lesser degree. Methylation may therefore inhibit FMR1 transcription not only by
recruiting histone deacetylases but also by blocking transcription factor
binding. This suggests that for efficient reactivation of the FMR1 promoter,
significant demethylation must occur and that current approaches to gene
reactivation using histone deacetylase inhibitors alone may therefore have
limited effect.

PMID: 11058604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem J. 2000 Oct 15;351 Pt 2:385-92.

Characterization of the human liver fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase gene promoter.

Herzog B(1), Waltner-Law M, Scott DK, Eschrich K, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Leipzig,
Liebigstrasse 16, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase; EC 3.1.3.11), an important gluconeogenic
enzyme, catalyses the hydrolysis of fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate to fructose
6-phosphate and P(i). Enzyme activity is mainly regulated by the allosteric
inhibitors fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate and AMP. Although some observations about
hormonal regulation of the enzyme have been published, the FBPase promoter has
not been studied in detail. Here we report an in vitro characterization of the
FBPase promoter with respect to the elements that are required for basal promoter
activity. Transient transfection of H4IIE rat hepatoma cells, combined with
site-directed mutagenesis, demonstrated that an enhancer box, three GC-boxes and 
a nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)-binding element are important for hepatic
FBPase promoter activity. These elements are found in the region located between 
-405 to +25 bp relative to the transcription start site.
Electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays and supershift analysis confirmed that
upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1)/USF2, specificity protein 1 (Sp1)/Sp3 and
NF-kappaB respectively bind to these sites. The present study provides the basis 
for a more comprehensive screening for mutations in FBPase-deficient patients and
for further studies of the transcriptional regulation of this gene.

PMCID: PMC1221374
PMID: 11023824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Jul;210(1-2):13-21.

An indirect role for upstream stimulatory factor in glucose-mediated induction of
pyruvate kinase and S14 gene expression.

Kaytor EN(1), Qian J, Towle HC, Olson LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

Transcription of the L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) and S14 genes is induced in
hepatocytes in response to increased glucose metabolism. The regulatory sequences
of these genes responsible for induction by glucose have been mapped to related
E-box containing motifs in the promoters. Similarly, L-PK promoter activity is
stimulated in a differentiated pancreatic beta-cell line, INS-1, in response to
elevated glucose. By mutational analysis, we demonstrate that the sequence
requirements for glucose induction in the INS-1 cell are identical to those
observed in the hepatocyte, suggesting that the same transcriptional factor(s) is
responsible for regulation of L-PK expression in the two cell types. One nuclear 
factor that binds to the glucose regulatory sequences of both of these genes is
the Upstream Stimulatory Factor (USF), a ubiquitous E-box binding protein. Mice
deleted for the USF2 gene display a severely delayed response to carbohydrate
feeding (Vallet et al. [26]). This observation, however, does not differentiate
between a direct and an indirect role for USF in the process. To gain further
insight into the possible involvement of USF in glucose signaling, we have used a
recombinant adenoviral construct that expresses a dominant negative form of USF. 
This dominant negative can dimerize with endogenous USF and is shown to inhibit
DNA binding of USF in hepatocytes and INS-1 cells. However, expression of the
dominant negative USF did not block the ability of glucose to stimulate L-PK or
S14 gene expression in hepatocytes or L-PK promoter activity in INS-1 cells. We
conclude that USF does not act by binding to the glucose regulatory sequences of 
the S14 or L-PK genes and the role of USF in the process of glucose induction is 
indirect.

PMID: 10976753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):28539-48.

Mitogen-induced expression of the fibroblast growth factor-binding protein is
transcriptionally repressed through a non-canonical E-box element.

Harris VK(1), Coticchia CM, List HJ, Wellstein A, Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, D. C. 20007, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39801.

The fibroblast growth factor-binding protein (FGF-BP) stimulates FGF-2-mediated
angiogenesis and is thought to play an important role in the progression of
squamous cell, colon, and breast carcinomas. 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) induction of the FGF-BP gene occurs through transcriptional mechanisms
involving Sp1, AP-1, and CCAATT/enhancer-binding protein sites in the proximal
FGF-BP gene promoter. The level of TPA induction, however, is limited due to the 
presence of a repressor element that shows similarity to a non-canonical E-box
(AACGTG). Mutation or deletion of the repressor element led to enhanced induction
by TPA or epidermal growth factor in cervical squamous cell and breast carcinoma 
cell lines. Repression was dependent on the adjacent AP-1 site, without
discernible alteration in the binding affinity or composition of AP-1. We
investigated the following two possible mechanisms for E-box-mediated repression:
1) CpG methylation of the core of the E-box element, and 2) binding of a distinct
protein complex to this site. Point mutation of the CpG methylation site in the
E-box showed loss of repressor activity. Conversely, in vitro methylation of this
site significantly reduced TPA induction. In vitro gel shift analysis revealed
distinct and TPA-dependent binding of USF1 and USF2 to the repressor element that
required nucleotides within the E-box. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay showed that USF, c-Myc, and Max proteins were associated with the FGF-BP
promoter in vivo. Overall, these findings suggested that the balance between
trans-activation by AP-1 and repression through the E-box is an important control
mechanism for fine-tuning the angiogenic response to growth factor-activated
pathways.

PMID: 10871606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Oncogene. 2000 May 25;19(23):2786-90.

The concerted regulatory functions of the transcription factors nuclear factor-1 
and upstream stimulatory factor on a composite element in the promoter of the
hepatocyte growth factor gene.

Jiang JG(1), Gao B, Zarnegar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburth, Pennsylvania, PA 15261, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is an important multifunctional cytokine whose
gene expression is regulated mainly at the transcriptional level. Previous
studies using transgenic mice as well as in vitro analyses showed that a
potential regulatory element(s) exists between -260 to -230 bp in the upstream
region of the HGF gene promoter. In the present study, we have discovered that
this region is a composite site through which members of the nuclear factor 1
(NF1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF) families bind to and regulate HGF
gene transcription. Gel mobility shift and supershift assays revealed that USF
and NF1 have high binding affinity for this region and that the binding sites of 
the two different transcription factor families overlap. Functional studies
showed that NF1 suppresses HGF gene promoter activity and that USF has an
activating function. We found that the NF1/X and NF1/Red1 isoforms strongly
suppressed HGF promoter activity while the NF1/L variant had no obvious effects. 
USF1, but not USF2, of the USF family stimulated HGF gene promoter activity. More
interestingly, during liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, a process
which activates the HGF gene, we noted that the binding activity of USF to the
HGF promoter element increased while that of NF1 decreased. These data provide
insight into the molecular mechanisms that govern HGF gene transcription.
Oncogene (2000).

PMID: 10851080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biol Reprod. 2000 Mar;62(3):670-9.

Expression of steroidogenic factor 1 in the testis requires an E box and CCAAT
box in its promoter proximal region.

Daggett MA(1), Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), also known as adrenal 4-binding protein, is a
member of the nuclear hormone receptor family that regulates transcription of
genes encoding hormones and steroidogenic enzymes important to the function of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. The mammalian Ftz-F1 gene encodes SF-1
and is required for development of adrenal glands and gonads. To better
understand the mechanisms regulating this gene in the gonads, we have examined
its expression in the testis and characterized the promoter region for SF-1 in
two testicular cell types. SF-1 promoter activity was examined in primary
cultures of Sertoli cells and cell lines representative of Sertoli and Leydig
cells. Deletion mutagenesis of the promoter identified several regions: both 5'
and 3' to the transcriptional start sites that are important for transcriptional 
activity. Two elements, an E box and a CCAAT box, were found to be important for 
SF-1 transcription in the testis. An oligodeoxynucleotide containing both of
these elements bound three specific protein complexes. The binding of one complex
required only sequences within the E box and cross-reacted with antibodies
against the basic helix-loop-helix ZIP proteins USF1 and USF2. A second specific 
complex required sequences within both the E box and CCAAT box for efficient
binding, while a third complex predominantly interacted with sequences within the
CCAAT motif. The presence of multiple protein complexes binding these sites
suggests that regulation through these elements may involve interactions with
different factors that depend on the state of the cell and its environment.

PMCID: PMC1586109
PMID: 10684809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34020-8.

Transcriptional regulation of the transforming growth factor-beta2 promoter by
cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB) and activating transcription
factor-1 (ATF-1) is modulated by protein kinases and the coactivators p300 and
CREB-binding protein.

Kingsley-Kallesen ML(1), Kelly D, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Transcription of the transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) gene is
dependent on a cAMP-response element/activating transcription factor (CRE/ATF)
site that is bound by CREB and ATF-1 as well as an E-box motif that is bound by
upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1 and USF2). To identify additional
factors involved in the expression of the TGF-beta2 gene, we employed F9
embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, which express TGF-beta2 only after the cells
differentiate. We show that overexpression of the transcription factors, CREB,
ATF-1, USF1, and USF2 dramatically increases TGF-beta2 promoter activity in
F9-differentiated cells. We further show that the coactivators p300 and CBP
up-regulate the TGF-beta2 promoter when CREB and ATF-1 are expressed in
conjunction with protein kinases that phosphorylate CREB on serine 133 and ATF-1 
on serine 63. Importantly, we identify the presence of serine 133-phosphorylated 
CREB in the nucleus of F9-differentiated cells but not in the nucleus of F9 EC
cells. This phosphorylated form is present in whole cell extracts of both the
parental and differentiated cells, suggesting that nuclear accumulation of serine
133-phosphorylated CREB is regulated during differentiation of F9 EC cells and is
likely to play an important role in the activation of the TGF-beta2 gene.

PMID: 10567368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov;265(1):170-6.

The E-box of the human glycophorin B promoter is involved in the
erythroid-specific expression of the GPB gene.

Camara-Clayette V(1), Rahuel C, Bertrand O, Cartron JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U76, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, 6, rue Alexandre
Cabanel, Paris, 75015, France.

Previous studies performed on the glycophorin B (GPB) expression demonstrated
that this gene is expressed in erythroid cells only and that the ubiquitous
factor Ku70 is involved in the process. Here, we investigated the contribution of
the -70 E-box sequence toward the GPB promoter expression. We found that the
E-box bound two factors, the USF1/USF2 protein and an unidentified ubiquitous
protein which was named factor U. Site-directed mutagenesis performed on the -70 
E-box showed that the USF factor had an activating effect in CAT assays.
Conversely, mutation of the -70 E-box that impaired the binding of factor U led
to a positive CAT activity in nonerythroid cells and thus to the loss of the
erythroid-specific expression of the GPB gene. This indicates that, in addition
to the Ku70 factor, the extinction of the GPB promoter expression in nonerythroid
cells depends also on the repressing effect of the factor U.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10548509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Oct 14;264(1):6-13.

Real-time study of interactions between a composite DNA regulatory region (HIV-1 
LTR NRE) and several transcription factors of nuclear extracts.

Galio L(1), Briquet S, Vaquero C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 0415, ICGM, 22 rue Méchain, Paris, 75014, France.

Here we describe the first real-time study of nuclear protein interaction with a 
composite DNA regulatory region. We studied the interplay between the three
target sites of the negative regulatory element (NRE) of HIV-1 LTR, comprising a 
noncanonical GATA site overlapping two negative regulatory regions, USF and
NFIL-6, and their corresponding transcription factors in nuclear extracts. By
bandshift analysis, no GATA binding activity could be detected between LTR NRE
and different nuclear extracts, although evidenced by in vitro footprinting.
Additionally, the LTR NRE and a USF oligonucleotide showed identical retarded
complexes. BIAcore study of these interactions revealed the binding of huGATA-3, 
as well as USF, to the immobilized LTR NRE oligonucleotide. Competition analyses,
performed with GATA, USF, and NFIL-6 oligonucleotides, clearly showed that this
regulatory region could bind both huGATA-3 and USF factors. Finally, the presence
of USF and huGATA-3 proteins in the complexes formed with LTR NRE was ascertained
using specific anti-huGATA-3 and anti-USF2 polyclonal antibodies.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10527831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5582-91.

Loss of USF transcriptional activity in breast cancer cell lines.

Ismail PM(1), Lu T, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, TX 77030, USA.

USF is a family of transcription factors that are structurally related to the Myc
oncoproteins and also share with Myc a common DNA-binding specificity. USF
overexpression can prevent c-Myc-dependent cellular transformation and also
inhibit the proliferation of certain transformed cells. These antiproliferative
activities suggest that USF inactivation could be implicated in carcinogenesis.
To explore this possibility, we compared the activities of the ubiquitous USF1
and USF2 proteins in several cell lines derived from either normal breast
epithelium or breast tumors. The DNA-binding activities of USF1 and USF2 were
present at similar levels in all cell lines. In the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A
cells, USF in general, and USF2 in particular, exhibited strong transcriptional
activities. In contrast, USF1 and USF2 were completely inactive in three out of
six transformed breast cell lines investigated, while the other three transformed
cell lines exhibited loss of USF2 activity. Analyses in cells cultured from
healthy tissue confirmed the transcriptional activity of USF in normal human
mammary epithelial cells. These results demonstrate that a partial or complete
loss of USF function is a common event in breast cancer cell lines, perhaps
because, like Myc overexpression, it favors rapid proliferation.

PMID: 10523835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Aug 5;1428(2-3):169-76.

Transcriptional activation of the F(1)F(0) ATP synthase alpha-subunit initiator
element by USF2 is mediated by p300.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, PO
Box 830688, Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

We have been studying the transcriptional regulation of the mammalian F(1)F(0)
ATP synthase alpha-subunit gene (ATPA), a TATA-less initiator-containing gene. We
have previously determined that the transcription factor, upstream stimulatory
factor 2 (USF2), can activate the ATPA gene through an initiator element in the
core promoter. Here, we demonstrate that the coactivator p300 interacts
functionally with USF2 proteins to potentiate the activation of the ATPA
initiator element by USF2. The physiological relevance of this interaction was
shown in vivo by expression of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. Wild-type E1A, but
not E1A mutants that lacked p300-binding sites, inhibited the USF2-dependent
transactivation of the ATPA initiator element. Furthermore, overexpression of
p300 could reverse the inhibitory effect of E1A. Collectively, our results
indicate that the USF2-dependent transcriptional activation of the ATPA initiator
element is mediated by p300.

PMID: 10434034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem J. 1999 Jul 15;341 ( Pt 2):315-22.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates Pdx-1 gene expression in differentiated
pancreatic beta-cells.

Qian J(1), Kaytor EN, Towle HC, Olson LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, 214 Giltner Hall, East
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

The homeobox gene Pdx-1 plays a key role in the development of the pancreas. In
the adult, however, expression of the Pdx-1 gene is restricted to pancreatic
beta-cells and endocrine cells of duodenal epithelium. Recently, the
transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor (USF), has been shown to bind
in vitro to a mutationally sensitive E-box motif within the 5'-flanking region of
the Pdx-1 gene [Sharma, Leonard, Lee, Chapman, Leiter and Montminy (1996) J.
Biol. Chem. 271, 2294-2299]. In the present study, we show that USF not only
binds to the Pdx-1 gene promoter but also functionally regulates the expression
of the Pdx-1 gene in differentiated pancreatic beta-cells. Adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of a dominant negative form of USF2 decreased binding of
endogenous USF to the E-box element by approximately 90%. This reduction in
endogenous USF binding led to a greater than 50% decrease in Pdx-1 gene promoter 
activity, which, in turn, resulted in marked reductions in Pdx-1 mRNA and protein
levels. Importantly, the lower Pdx-1 protein levels led to a greater than 50%
reduction in Pdx-1 binding activity to the A3 element on the insulin gene
promoter, and a significant reduction in insulin mRNA levels. Overall, our
results show that USF functionally regulates Pdx-1 gene expression in
differentiated pancreatic beta-cells and provide the first functional data for a 
role of USF in the regulation of a normal cellular gene.

PMCID: PMC1220362
PMID: 10393088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):4788-97.

Upstream stimulatory factor regulates major histocompatibility complex class I
gene expression: the U2DeltaE4 splice variant abrogates E-box activity.

Howcroft TK(1), Murphy C, Weissman JD, Huber SJ, Sawadogo M, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1360, USA. Howcrofk@Exchange.nih.gov

The tissue-specific expression of major histocompatibility complex class I genes 
is determined by a series of upstream regulatory elements, many of which remain
ill defined. We now report that a distal E-box element, located between bp -309
and -314 upstream of transcription initiation, acts as a cell type-specific
enhancer of class I promoter activity. The class I E box is very active in a
neuroblastoma cell line, CHP-126, but is relatively inactive in the HeLa
epithelial cell line. The basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper proteins upstream
stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) and USF2 were shown to specifically recognize the
class I E box, resulting in the activation of the downstream promoter. Fine
mapping of USF1 and USF2 amino-terminal functional domains revealed differences
in their abilities to activate the class I E box. Whereas USF1 contained only an 
extended activation domain, USF2 contained both an activation domain and a
negative regulatory region. Surprisingly, the naturally occurring splice variant 
of USF2 lacking the exon 4 domain, U2DeltaE4, acted as a dominant-negative
regulator of USF-mediated activation of the class I promoter. This latter
activity is in sharp contrast to the known ability of U2DeltaE4 to activate the
adenovirus major late promoter. Class I E-box function is correlated with the
relative amount of U2DeltaE4 in a cell, leading to the proposal that U2DeltaE4
modulates class I E-box activity and may represent one mechanism to fine-tune
class I expression in various tissues.

PMCID: PMC84277
PMID: 10373528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Immunol. 1999 May 15;162(10):5986-92.

USF/c-Myc enhances, while Yin-Yang 1 suppresses, the promoter activity of CXCR4, 
a coreceptor for HIV-1 entry.

Moriuchi M(1), Moriuchi H, Margolis DM, Fauci AS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Baltimore, MD
21201, USA.

Transcription factors USF1 and USF2 up-regulate gene expression (i.e. , HIV-1
long terminal repeats) via interaction with an E box on their target promoters,
which is also a binding site for c-Myc. The c-Myc oncoprotein is important in
control of cellular proliferation and differentiation, while Yin-Yang 1 (YY1) has
been shown to control the expression of a number of cellular and viral genes.
These two proteins physically interact with each other and mutually inhibit their
respective biological functions. In this study, we show that USF/c-Myc
up-regulates, while YY1 down-regulates the promoter activity of CXCR4, a
coreceptor for T cell-tropic HIV-1 entry. We have identified an E box around -260
and a YY1 binding site around -300 relative to the transcription start site.
Mutation of the E box abolished USF/c-Myc-mediated up-regulation of CXCR4
promoter activity, and mutation of the YY1 binding site was associated with
unresponsiveness to YY1-mediated inhibition. These data suggest that USF/c-Myc
and YY1 may play an important role in the HIV-1-replicative cycle, by modulating 
both the viral fusion/entry process and viral expression.

PMID: 10229837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Mar;260(3):743-51.

FIRE3 in the promoter of the rat fatty acid synthase (FAS) gene binds the
ubiquitous transcription factors CBF and USF but does not mediate an insulin
response in a rat hepatoma cell line.

Roder K(1), Wolf SS, Sickinger S, Schweizer M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Microbiology Department, Institute of Food Research, Norwich, UK.

Several putative insulin-responsive elements (IRE) in the fatty acid synthase
(FAS) promoter have been identified and shown to be functional in adipocytes and 
hepatocytes. Here we report on the insulin-responsiveness in the rat hepatoma
cell line H4IIE of four cis-elements in the FAS promoter: the FAS
insulin-responsive elements, FIRE2 and FIRE3; the inverted CCAAT element, ICE;
and the insulin/glucose-binding element, designated hepatic FIRE element, hFIRE, 
originally identified in rat hepatocytes. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) competition experiments together with supershifts and in vitro
transcription/translation we show that FIRE3 (-68/-58) binds not only the
upstream stimulatory factors USF-1/USF-2 but also the CCAAT-binding factor CBF,
also known as the nuclear factor Y, NF-Y. The putative IRE FIRE2, which shows
sequence similarity to FIRE3, is located between -267 and -249. Gel retardation
experiments indicate that USF-1 and USF-2 also bind to this element, which
contains an imperfect E-box motif. Using the same approach we have shown that
hFIRE binds the stimulatory proteins Sp1 and Sp3 in addition to CBF. Transient
transfection experiments using FAS promoter constructs deleted for FIRE2 and
FIRE3 demonstrate that neither of these elements mediates the insulin response of
the FAS promoter in the rat hepatoma cell line H4IIE, however, ICE at -103/-87 is
responsible for mediating the effect of the insulin antagonist cAMP. The hFIRE
element located at -57/-34, in spite of its role in the glucose/insulin response 
in primary rat hepatocytes, is apparently not involved in the insulin regulation 
of the rat FAS promoter in H4IIE cells. The fact that the topology of the
promoters of the FAS genes in rat, human, goose and chicken is conserved
regarding CBF-binding sites and USF-binding sites implies an important role for
these ubiquitously expressed transcription factors in the regulation of the FAS
promoter.

PMID: 10103003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1508-17.

Cell-type-dependent activity of the ubiquitous transcription factor USF in
cellular proliferation and transcriptional activation.

Qyang Y(1), Luo X, Lu T, Ismail PM, Krylov D, Vinson C, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

USF1 and USF2 are basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors implicated in the 
control of cellular proliferation. In HeLa cells, the USF proteins are
transcriptionally active and their overexpression causes marked growth
inhibition. In contrast, USF overexpression had essentially no effect on the
proliferation of the Saos-2 osteosarcoma cell line. USF1 and USF2 also lacked
transcriptional activity in Saos-2 cells when assayed by transient cotransfection
with USF-dependent reporter genes. Yet, there was no difference in the
expression, subcellular localization, or DNA-binding activity of the USF proteins
in HeLa and Saos-2 cells. Furthermore, Gal4-USF1 and Gal4-USF2 fusion proteins
activated transcription similarly in both cell lines. Mutational analysis and
domain swapping experiments revealed that the small, highly conserved
USF-specific region (USR) was responsible for the inactivity of USF in Saos-2
cells. In HeLa, the USR serves a dual function. It acts as an autonomous
transcriptional activation domain at promoters containing an initiator element
and also induces a conformational change that is required for USF activity at
promoters lacking an initiator. Taken together, these results suggest a model in 
which the transcriptional activity of the USF proteins, and consequently their
antiproliferative activity, is tightly controlled by interaction with a
specialized coactivator that recognizes the conserved USR domain and, in contrast
to USF, is not ubiquitous. The activity of USF is therefore context dependent,
and evidence for USF DNA-binding activity in particular cells is insufficient to 
indicate USF function in transcriptional activation and growth control.

PMCID: PMC116079
PMID: 9891084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2009-13.

Essential role in vivo of upstream stimulatory factors for a normal dietary
response of the fatty acid synthase gene in the liver.

Casado M(1), Vallet VS, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, U.129 INSERM Unité de Recherches en 
Physiologie et Pathologie Génétiques et Moléculaires, 75014 Paris, France.

In the liver, transcription of several genes encoding lipogenic and glycolytic
enzymes, in particular the gene for fatty acid synthase (FAS), is known to be
stimulated by dietary carbohydrates. The molecular dissection of the FAS promoter
pointed out the critical role of an E box motif, located at position -65 with
respect to the start site of transcription, in mediating the glucose- and
insulin-dependent regulation of the gene. Upstream stimulatory factors (USF1 and 
USF2) and sterol response element binding protein 1 (SREBP1) were shown to be
able to interact in vitro with this E box. However, to date, the relative
contributions of USFs and SREBP1 ex vivo remain controversial. To gain insight
into the specific roles of these factors in vivo, we have analyzed the glucose
responsiveness of hepatic FAS gene expression in USF1 and USF2 knock-out mice. In
both types of mouse lines, defective in either USF1 or USF2, induction of the FAS
gene by refeeding a carbohydrate-rich diet was severely delayed, whereas
expression of SREBP1 was almost normal and insulin response unchanged. Therefore,
USF transactivators, and especially USF1/USF2 heterodimers, seem to be essential 
to sustain the dietary induction of the FAS gene in the liver.

PMID: 9890958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Gene Expr. 1998;7(3):163-70.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 activates the mammalian F1F0 ATP synthase
alpha-subunit gene through an initiator element.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

The F1F0 ATP synthase is the central enzyme complex of the mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation system synthesizing ATP from ADP and Pi. Our laboratory
has been studying the transcriptional regulation of the nuclear gene that encodes
the alpha-subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ATP synthase complex (ATPA). We 
have previously identified an initiator element in the core promoter that plays
an important role in expression of this gene. In this article, we demonstrate
that ectopic expression of the transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor 
2 (USF2), transactivates the ATPA gene through this initiator element.
Importantly, cotransfection of a dominant-negative USF2 mutant significantly
reduces both the basal activity and the level of activation of the ATPA initiator
by coexpressed USF2 demonstrating the role of endogenous USF2 proteins in this
activation. We also identify several nucleotides in the ATPA initiator element
that are important for both basal activity and USF2-dependent transactivation. We
have also previously determined that the binding of the multifunctional
regulatory protein, YY1, to this initiator element can positively regulate the
ATPA gene. Here, we show that expression of YY1 together with USF2 results in a
decreased level of activation of the ATPA initiator relative to expression of
USF2 alone, suggesting competition between these two regulatory proteins.

PMID: 9840809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):28170-7.

A 69-base pair fragment derived from human transcobalamin II promoter is
sufficient for high bidirectional activity in the absence of a TATA box and an
initiator element in transfected cells. Role of an E box in transcriptional
activity.

Li N(1), Seetharam B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Medical
College of Wisconsin and Veterans Medical Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226,
USA.

A 69-base pair (bp) (-581/-513) fragment derived from human transcobalamin II
distal promoter constructed upstream of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene demonstrated high bidirectional promoter activity in transfected
epithelial Caco-2 cells. DNase I footprinting, gel mobility shift, supershift,
and mutagenesis studies with the 69-bp fragment demonstrated that a GC box
(-568/-559) and an E box (-523/-528), which interacted with Sp1/Sp3 and USF1/USF2
(where USF is upstream stimulatory factor), respectively, were required for the
full transcriptional activity of this fragment. Whereas mutations in the GC box
reduced the promoter activity by 50%, mutations in the E box alone or in both the
E box and GC box resulted in 90% loss of transcriptional activity. The essential 
role of the E box in the bidirectional promoter activity was further demonstrated
by transient transfection in Caco-2, K-562, and HeLa cells using a 29-bp
(-541/-513) fragment that contained only the E box. Based on these results we
suggest that 1) the E box is essential for both the GC box-dependent and
-independent promoter activity of the 69-bp fragment, 2) cooperative interactions
between Sp1/Sp3 and USFs are required for the full activation of the 69-bp
promoter activity, and 3) the single E box is able to mediate bidirectional
transcription in transfected cells in the absence of an obvious TATA box or a
known initiator element.

PMID: 9774437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Oct;12(10):1499-512.

Multiple promoter elements contribute to activity of the follicle-stimulating
hormone receptor (FSHR) gene in testicular Sertoli cells.

Heckert LL(1), Daggett MA, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, The University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160, USA. lheckert@kumc.edu

The FSH receptor (FSHR) is expressed only in granulosa cells of the ovary and
Sertoli cells of the testis. This highly specific pattern of gene expression
asserts that transcriptional events unique to these two cell types are
responsible for activation of the FSHR gene. We have characterized the promoter
elements required for activity of the rat FSHR gene in a Sertoli cell line MSC-1,
primary cultures of rat Sertoli cells, and two non-Sertoli cell lines. Transient 
transfection analysis of deletion and block replacement mutants identified
several elements, both 5' and 3' to the transcriptional start sites, that are
essential for full promoter activity in Sertoli cells. These studies confirmed
the use of an important E box element (CACGTG), which had the single greatest
impact on promoter function. Bases within the core CACGTG of the E box, as well
as flanking sequences, were shown to be essential for its function.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified both upstream stimulatory factor
1 (USF1) and USF2 as primary components of the complexes binding the E box.
Sequence requirements for USF binding in vitro modestly diverged from the
sequence requirements for in vivo function of the element. Comparison of the E
box binding proteins in different cell types revealed that similar proteins bind 
the E box in Sertoli and non-Sertoli cell lines. Extracts from primary cultures
of rat and mouse Sertoli cells have a second E box-binding complex that
cross-reacts with USF antibodies that is not present in the cell lines.

PMCID: PMC1496885
PMID: 9773974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Physiol. 1998 Oct;275(4 Pt 1):G778-88.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the murine polymeric IgA receptor
gene.

Martín MG(1), Wang J, Li TW, Lam JT, Gutierrez EM, Solorzano-Vargas RS, Tsai AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics,
University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90095-1752, 
USA.

The regulatory elements that control basal and activated transcriptional
expression of the polymeric IgA receptor gene (pIgR) have not been defined. In
this study, we performed functional analysis of the murine pIgR 5'-upstream
region. Transient transfection studies identified the gene's minimal promoter to 
reside within 110 nucleotides upstream from the start of transcription.
Substitution mutations of this region identified both a putative activator (-78
to -70) and a repressor (-66 to -52) element. DNase I footprint analysis
confirmed an area of protection that spans from nucleotides -85 to -62. Mobility 
shift assays of the putative region confirmed binding of upstream stimulatory
factor 1 (USF1) to an E box element at positions -75 and -70, representing the
putative enhancer. Overexpression studies using various forms of USF suggest that
both USF1 and USF2 enhance activity of the pIgR minimal promoter. We report the
identification and characterization of the murine pIgR minimal promoter, as well 
as the critical role of USF in enhancing its basal level of transcription in
Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 9756509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Immunol. 1998 Sep 15;161(6):2881-7.

Nuclear translocation of upstream stimulating factor 2 (USF2) in activated mast
cells: a possible role in their survival.

Frenkel S(1), Kay G, Nechushtan H, Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Multiple transcription factors are activated in the cytoplasm and translocated to
the nucleus where they exert positive or negative control over cellular genes.
Such subcellular traffic of transcription factors usually requires the presence
of a positively charged nuclear localization sequence (NLS). Upstream stimulating
factor 2 (USF2) is one of the few transcription factors that contain two
potential domains for nuclear localization. In addition to the conventional basic
NLS, USF2 contains a highly conserved USF-specific region that is involved in its
nuclear translocation. In the present work, the induction of translocation of
USF2 into the mast cell nucleus was observed and found to be dependent on
activation of the cells either by IL-3 or IgE-Ag. It was also observed that the
prevention of the translocation of USF2 to the nucleus, using a peptide derived
from the specific USF-NLS region, significantly inhibited their IL-3-mediated
survival. Thus, our findings show a direct connection between mast cell surface
receptor-mediated USF2 nuclear translocation and cell viability.

PMID: 9743349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20175-9.

Differential roles of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 in the transcriptional
response of liver genes to glucose.

Vallet VS(1), Casado M, Henrion AA, Bucchini D, Raymondjean M, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques,
75014 Paris, France.

USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitous transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix 
leucine zipper family. They form homo- and heterodimers and recognize a CACGTG
motif termed E box. In the liver, USF binding activity is mainly accounted for by
the USF1/USF2 heterodimer, which binds in vitro the glucose/carbohydrate response
elements (GlRE/ChoRE) of glucose-responsive genes. To assign a physiological role
of USFs in vivo, we have undertaken the disruption of USF1 and USF2 genes in
mice. We present here the generation of USF1-deficient mice. In the liver of
these mice, we demonstrate that USF2 remaining dimers can compensate for glucose 
responsiveness, even though the level of total USF binding activity is reduced by
half as compared with wild type mice. The residual USF1 binding activity was
similarly reduced in the previously reported USF2 -/- mice in which an impaired
glucose responsiveness was observed (Vallet, V. S., Henrion, A. A., Bucchini, D.,
Casado, M. , Raymondjean, M., Kahn, A., and Vaulont, S. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.
272, 21944-21949). Taken together, these results clearly suggest differential
transactivating efficiencies of USF1 and USF2 in promoting the glucose response. 
Furthermore, they support the view that USF2 is the functional transactivator of 
the glucose-responsive complex.

PMID: 9685363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Eur J Biochem. 1998 May 1;253(3):778-86.

Transcriptional regulation of the non-specific cross-reacting antigen gene, a
member of the carcinoembryonic antigen gene family up-regulated in colorectal
carcinomas.

Koops MD(1), Thompson J, Zimmermann W, Stanners CP.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Human non-specific cross-reacting antigen (NCA), a close relative of the tumor
marker human carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), is also an in vitro homotypic
intercellular adhesion molecule capable of inhibiting differentiation when
expressed ectopically by myoblasts. Moreover, NCA appears to be overexpressed at 
the transcriptional level to a greater extent and more frequently in colorectal
carcinomas than CEA. This study examines the transcriptional control mechanisms
responsible for orchestrating NCA expression. The region within 284 bp upstream
of the translational start site of the NCA gene was found to be capable of
directing high levels of expression in functional promoter assays. Footprinting
experiments identified three cis-acting elements and mobility-shift assays
revealed that the first of these elements is bound by the upstream stimulating
factors USF1 and USF2 while the other two are bound by the stimulatory proteins
Sp1 and Sp3. No cis-acting elements corresponding to CEA footprint FP4 or the
silencer CEA FP5 were detected in the NCA promoter, which may contribute to the
differential expression of NCA versus CEA in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9654079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genomics. 1998 Apr 15;49(2):218-29.

Rearrangement of the human CDC5L gene by a t(6;19)(p21;q13.1) in a patient with
multicystic renal dysplasia.

Groenen PM(1), Vanderlinden G, Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Genetic studies have implicated the short arm of chromosome 6 in congenital
hydronephrosis. In previous studies, we described a fetus carrying a
t(6;19)(p21;q13.1) as the sole cytogenetic anomaly and suffering from bilateral
multicystic renal dysplasia caused by a bilateral complete pelviureteric junction
obstruction, resulting in a massive hydronephrosis. Characterization of the
chromosome 19 breakpoint region revealed that the transcription factor-encoding
USF2 gene is affected. In this report, we show that the CDC5L gene on chromosome 
6p is rearranged in the cells of the fetus. CDC5L encodes a protein that is
related to the product of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe Cdc5 gene, which exerts
its effects at the G2/M transition during cell cycle progression. We have
established the genomic organization of the CDC5L gene and found that it consists
of at least 16 exons spanning approximately 50 kb of chromosome segment 6p21.
Northern blot analysis indicated that the gene is ubiquitously expressed as a
single mRNA of about 3.4 kb in both fetal and adult tissues. The translation
product of the CDC5L gene has an electrophoretic mobility of about 100 kDa and is
predicted to be a nuclear protein, since it contains a Myb-related DNA binding
domain and potential nuclear localization signals in its aminoterminal region.
Immunocytochemical analysis confirmed the nuclear localization of the CDC5L
protein. CDC5L was also predicted to contain a hydrophilic, proline-rich region
in its central part, which might function as a transcriptional activating domain.
The chromosome 6 breakpoint was found in the intron between exons 9 and 10,
indicating that, as a direct result of the 6;19 translocation, the Myb-related
DNA binding domains and the nuclear localization signals are separated from the
putative transactivating domain. Northern blot and RT-PCR experiments revealed
that the other CDC5L allele is unaffected, and in Western blot experiments,
expression of the 100-kDa protein was detected in fibroblasts of the fetus.
Expression of a truncated or hybrid CDC5L transcript resulting from the CDC5L
rearrangement could not be demonstrated.

PMID: 9598309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9168-78.

Transcriptional regulation of the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain-A gene.
Identification of three clustered cis-elements in intron-1 which modulate
transcription in a cell type- and differentiation state-dependent manner.

Beohar N(1), Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In an attempt to identify cis-acting elements for transcriptional regulation of
the human nonmuscle myosin II heavy chain (MHC)-A gene, the region extending 20
kilobases (kb) upstream and 40 kb downstream from the transcription start sites, 
which includes the entire 37-kb intron 1, was examined. Using transient
transfection analysis of luciferase reporter constructs, a 100-base pair (bp)
region (N2d) in intron 1, located 23 kb downstream from the transcriptional start
sites, has been found to activate transcription in a cell type- and
differentiation state-dependent manner. Maximum activity (approximately 20-fold) 
is seen in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and intermediate activity (7-fold) in
proliferating and undifferentiated C2C12 myoblasts. In contrast, this region is
almost inactive in terminally differentiated C2C12 myotubes, in which endogenous 
nonmuscle MHC-A expression is down-regulated. Gel mobility shift assays and
methylation interference analyses were performed using NIH 3T3 nuclear extracts
to determine the protein-binding elements for transcription factors. Three
binding elements have been identified within the N2d region. Antibody-supershift 
experiments, as well as competition experiments using consensus binding sequences
for specific transcription factors, revealed that the most 5'-element, C
(GGGAGGGGCC) is recognized specifically and exclusively by Sp1 and Sp3
transcriptional factors. Element C is immediately followed by a novel element, A 
(GTGACCC). A third element, F (GTGTCAGGTG), which contains an E-box, is located
50 bp 3' to element A. Element F can be recognized partially by upstream
stimulatory factors, USF1 and/or USF2. Transfection studies with luciferase
reporter constructs which include mutations in all three elements in various
combinations demonstrate that the A and C binding factors cooperatively activate 
transcriptional activity in NIH 3T3 cells. The F binding factor shows an additive
effect on transcription.

PMID: 9535907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3758-63.

Overlapping roles and asymmetrical cross-regulation of the USF proteins in mice.

Sirito M(1), Lin Q, Deng JM, Behringer RR, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

USF1 and USF2 are ubiquitously expressed transcription factors implicated as
antagonists of the c-Myc protooncoprotein in the control of cellular
proliferation. To determine the biological role of the USF proteins, mutant mice 
were generated by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. USF1-null
mice were viable and fertile, with only slight behavioral abnormalities. However,
these mice contained elevated levels of USF2, which may compensate for the
absence of USF1. In contrast, USF2-null mice contained reduced levels of USF1 and
displayed an obvious growth defect: they were 20-40% smaller at birth than their 
wild-type or heterozygous littermates and maintained a smaller size with
proportionate features throughout postnatal development. Some of the
USF-deficient mice, especially among the females, were prone to spontaneous
epileptic seizures, suggesting that USF is important in normal brain function.
Among the double mutants, an embryonic lethal phenotype was observed for mice
that were homozygous for the Usf2 mutation and either heterozygous or homozygous 
for the Usf1 mutation, demonstrating that the USF proteins are essential in
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC19910
PMID: 9520440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Feb 16;1390(2):225-36.

The potent lipid mitogen sphingosylphosphocholine activates the DNA binding
activity of upstream stimulating factor (USF), a basic helix-loop-helix-zipper
protein.

Berger A(1), Cultaro CM, Segal S, Spiegel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

We previously demonstrated that the sphingolipid, sphingosylphosphocholine (SPC) 
increased DNA binding activity of AP-1 proteins accompanying cellular
proliferation. Herein, the effects of SPC on DNA binding activity and
transcription of the basic, helix-loop-helix, leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) proteins 
Myc, Max, and USF were investigated because they regulate genes involved in
mitogenesis. E-box (CACGTG) DNA binding proteins were detected by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays in nuclear extracts from Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts. The slowest
migrating complex (complex I) increased within 1-3 min after treatment with SPC, 
remained elevated for 10 min, and increased again after 12 h. Complexes I and II 
contained USF-1 and USF-2 proteins, and complex I migrated similarly to
recombinant USF-1 protein/DNA complex. Treatment of nuclear extracts with
alkaline phosphatase decreased these complexes suggesting USF might be a
phosphoprotein, post-translationally modified by SPC. max and usf-1 mRNA levels
were unaffected by SPC treatment. In contrast, c-myc mRNA was rapidly elevated,
reached maximum levels at 0.5-1 h, and showed an additional increase after 12 h, 
just preceding S phase. Thus, certain bHLH-ZIP transcription factors may be
involved in cell growth regulation by SPC.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9507145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncogene. 1998 Feb 12;16(6):763-9.

Growth-dependent and PKC-mediated translational regulation of the upstream
stimulating factor-2 (USF2) mRNA in hematopoietic cells.

Zhang ZC(1), Nechushtan H, Jacob-Hirsch J, Avni D, Meyuhas O, Razin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Upstream stimulating factor (USF2) is a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
transcription factor, which is found in most tissues. A critical role for USF2 in
cellular proliferation has been proposed based on its importance in the
regulation of various cyclins and P53 and its capability to antagonize c-myc. In 
this paper we report that IL-3, which is a major growth factor for mast cells,
induces USF2 protein synthesis in murine mast cells (MC-9). Surprisingly, it does
not significantly affect the level of USF2 mRNA in these cells at any of the time
points tested. Using polysomal fractionation and RNA analysis we then
demonstrated that this translational regulation is mostly the result of increased
USF2 translational efficiency. Moreover, protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors
prevented both the induction of USF2 protein synthesis and the increase in USF2
translational efficiency in IL-3-activated mast cells. Two other hematopoietic
cell lines were used to determine whether the translational regulation of USF2 is
of a more general nature: mouse lymphosarcoma cells whose proliferation is
inhibited by dexamethasone; and mouse erythroleukemia cells that differentiate
upon exposure to hexamethylen bisacetamide. In both cell types, USF2 translation 
was repressed in the non-dividing cells. This strongly implies that USF2 is
translationally repressed in quiescent hematopoietic cells. Considering the
proposed role of USF in proliferation it seems that translational regulation of
USF2 might have an important role in cellular growth.

PMID: 9488040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 17;272(42):26367-74.

Upstream stimulatory factor binding to the E-box at -65 is required for insulin
regulation of the fatty acid synthase promoter.

Wang D(1), Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-3104, USA.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) plays a central role in de novo lipogenesis in mammals.
We have shown that FAS transcription rate is induced dramatically when fasted
animals are refed with a high carbohydrate diet or when streptozotocin-diabetic
mice are given insulin. We also reported that FAS gene transcription was
up-regulated by insulin through the proximal promoter region from -71 to -50 and 
that upstream stimulatory factors (USFs), including USF1 and USF2, interact with 
this region in vitro. In the present study, by using site-directed mutagenesis of
the -71/-50 region and correlating functional assays of the mutated promoter with
USF binding activities, we demonstrate that the -65/-60 E-box motif
(5'-CATGTG-3') is functionally required for insulin regulation and that USFs are 
in vivo components of the insulin response complex. Mutation of the -65/-60 E-box
sequence abolished insulin response in both transiently and stably transfected
3T3-L1 adipocytes in the -2. 1 kb promoter context, which contains all the
necessary regulatory elements of the promoter based on our previous transgenic
mice studies, and in the minimal -67 promoter context. Gel mobility shift assays 
demonstrated that USFs can no longer bind to the -71/-50 promoter region when the
E-box is mutated. Cotransfection of USF1 and USF2 expression vectors with the FAS
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs increased insulin-stimulated FAS promoter
activity. Moreover, cotransfection of dominant negative USF1 and USF2 mutants
lacking the DNA binding domain inhibited the insulin stimulation of the FAS
promoter activity. On the other hand, site-directed mutagenesis of the -65/-60
E-box surrounding sequences within the overlapped tandem copies of sterol
regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) binding sites prevented SREBP from
binding to -71/-50 promoter region in vitro but had no effect on insulin
regulation of the FAS promoter in vivo. When rat liver nuclear extracts were used
in gel mobility shift assays, only USF-containing protein-DNA complexes that can 
be supershifted by specific USF antibodies were observed. These results
demonstrate that upstream stimulatory factor binding to the E-box at -65 is
required for insulin regulation of the fatty acid synthase promoter.

PMID: 9334210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):21944-9.

Glucose-dependent liver gene expression in upstream stimulatory factor 2 -/-
mice.

Vallet VS(1), Henrion AA, Bucchini D, Casado M, Raymondjean M, Kahn A, Vaulont S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Université René Descartes, 24 rue du
Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2 belong to the Myc family of
transcription factors characterized by a basic/helix loop helix/leucine zipper
domain responsible for dimerization and DNA binding. These ubiquitous factors
form homo- and heterodimers and recognize in vitro a CACGTG core sequence termed 
E box. Through binding to E boxes of target genes, USF factors have been
demonstrated to activate gene transcription and to enhance expression of some
genes in response to various stimuli. In particular, in the liver USF1 and USF2
have been shown to bind in vitro glucose/carbohydrate response elements of
glycolytic and lipogenic genes and have been proposed, from ex vivo experiments, 
to be involved in their transcriptional activation by glucose. However, the
direct involvement of these factors in gene expression and nutrient gene
regulation in vivo has not yet been demonstrated. Therefore, to gain insight into
the specific role of USF1 and USF2 in vivo, and in particular to determine
whether the USF products are required for the response of genes to glucose, we
have created, by homologous recombination, USF2 -/- mice. In this paper, we
provide the first evidence that USF2 proteins are required in vivo for a normal
transcriptional response of L-type pyruvate kinase and Spot 14 genes to glucose
in the liver.

PMID: 9268329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20636-40.

Upstream stimulatory factor-2 (USF2) activity is required for glucose stimulation
of L-pyruvate kinase promoter activity in single living islet beta-cells.

Kennedy HJ(1), Viollet B, Rafiq I, Kahn A, Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University Walk,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, United Kingdom.

Elevated glucose concentrations stimulate L-pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene
transcription in liver and islet beta-cells. A glucose response element termed
the L4 box (two noncanonical E-boxes located -165 and -154 base pairs upstream of
the transcriptional start point) has previously been defined within the proximal 
promoter region of the gene. However, the identity of the transacting factor(s)
which binds to this site remains unclear. We have used photon counting digital
imaging of firefly luciferase activity to monitor promoter activity continuously 
in single living islet beta and derived INS-1 cells, and to analyze the molecular
basis of the regulation by glucose. L-PK promoter activity, normalized to
cytomegalovirus promoter activity using the distinct Renilla reniformis
luciferase, was >/=6-fold higher in cells cultured at 16 mM glucose or above
compared with cells cultured at 3 mM glucose. Microinjection of antibodies
against the ubiquitous transcription factor USF2 inhibited L-PK promoter activity
in beta- and INS-1 cells incubated at 30 mM glucose by 71-87%. Anti-USF2
antibodies had a much smaller effect on promoter activity in INS-1 cells cultured
at 3 mM glucose, and on the activity of a modified promoter construct lacking an 
L4 box. These data support the view that glucose enhances L-PK gene transcription
in beta-cells by modifying the transactivational capacity of USF2 bound to the
upstream L4 box.

PMID: 9252379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10538-42.

Regulation of the nuclear gene that encodes the alpha-subunit of the
mitochondrial F0F1-ATP synthase complex. Activation by upstream stimulatory
factor 2.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

We have previously identified several positive cis-acting regulatory regions in
the promoters of the bovine and human nuclear-encoded mitochondrial F0F1-ATP
synthase alpha-subunit genes (ATPA). One of these cis-acting regions contains the
sequence 5'-CACGTG-3' (an E-box), to which a number of transcription factors
containing a basic helix-loop-helix motif can bind. This E-box element is
required for maximum activity of the ATPA promoter in HeLa cells. The present
study identifies the human transcription factor, upstream stimulatory factor 2
(USF2), as a nuclear factor that binds to the ATPA E-box and demonstrates that
USF2 plays a critical role in the activation of the ATPA gene in vivo. Evidence
includes the following. Antiserum directed against USF2 recognized factors
present in HeLa nuclear extracts that interact with the ATPA promoter in mobility
shift assays. Wild-type USF2 proteins synthesized from expression vectors
trans-activated the ATPA promoter through the E-box, whereas truncated USF2
proteins devoid of the amino-terminal activation domains did not. Importantly,
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of USF2 lacking the basic DNA binding
domain but able to dimerize with endogenous USF proteins significantly reduced
the level of activation of the ATPA promoter caused by ectopically coexpressed
USF2, demonstrating the importance of endogenous USF2 in activation of the ATPA
gene.

PMID: 9099698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Genes Funct. 1997 Apr;1(2):87-97.

An auxiliary peptide required for the function of two activation domains in
upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2) transcription factor.

Gourdon L(1), Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Viollet B, Martinez A, Kahn A, Raymondjean 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches en Physiologie et Pathologie Génétiques et Moléculaires,
Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, Université René Descartes,
Paris, France.

Ubiquitous upstream stimulatory factors (USF1, USF2a and USF2b) are members of
the basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper family of transcription factors that
have been shown to be involved in the transcriptional response of the L-type
pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene to glucose. To understand the mechanisms of action of
the USF2 isoforms, we initiated a series of co-transfection assays with deletion 
mutants and Ga14-USF2 fusions. The transactivating efficiency of the different
native and mutant factors was determined at similar DNA binding activity. We
found that: (i) exons 3- and 5-encoded regions are activation domains, (ii) a
modulator domain encoded by exon 4 could be necessary to their additive action,
(iii) a hexapeptide encoded by the first 5' codons of exon 6 is indispensable for
transmitting activation due to both exon 3- and exon 5-encoded domains to the
transcriptional machinery. Therefore, USF2 presents a modular structure and
mediates transcriptional activation thanks to two non-autonomous activation
domains dependent on an auxiliary peptide for expressing their activating
potential.

PMID: 9680311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Feb 13;231(2):333-9.

USF2/FIP associates with the b-Zip transcription factor, c-Maf, via its bHLH
domain and inhibits c-Maf DNA binding activity.

Kurschner C(1), Morgan JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1997 Apr 7;233(1):293.

In screening for proteins that interact with the basic zipper (bZip)
transcription factor, c-Maf, we isolated USF2/FIP. USF2 is a member of the
bHLH-Zip protein family, possessing a basic (b) DNA binding region, a
helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif, and a leucine zipper (Zip) structure. Mutants of
USF2 that lacked a Zip formed heterodimers with c-Maf, but did not homodimerize. 
Deletion of the USF2 basic region or mutation of its helices abrogated its
binding to c-Maf, but had no effect on homodimerization. A functional c-Maf bZip 
motif was necessary for both homodimerization and heterodimerization with USF2.
These data suggest a tetrameric configuration for Maf-USF2 complexes. In the
presence of USF2, the DNA binding activity of c-Maf was markedly reduced.
Therefore, USF2 and c-Maf may interact to regulate gene expression.

PMID: 9070273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 6;14(5):589-94.

The dual role of helix-loop--helix-zipper protein USF in ribosomal RNA gene
transcription in vivo.

Ghosh AK(1), Datta PK, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, The Chicago Medical School, 
North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the core promoter of rat ribosomal RNA gene 
(rDNA) contains an E-box-like sequence to which the core promoter binding factor 
CPBF binds and that the 44 kDa subunit of this protein is immunologically related
to USF1, the helix--loop--helix-zipper DNA binding protein. Further, we showed
that RNA polymerase I (pol I) transcription in vitro is competed by
oligonucleotides containing USF-binding site, which suggested a key role for USF 
in rDNA transcription. To prove the potential role of USF in pol I transcription 
in vivo, USF1 and USF2 homodimers and USF1/USF2 heterodimer were overexpressed in
CHO cells by transfection of the respective cDNAs. Co-transfection of a plasmid
containing rDNA followed by primer extension analysis showed that overexpression 
of USF1 and USF2 as homodimers resulted in inhibition of rDNA transcription by as
much as 85-90% whereas overexpression of USF1/USF2 in the heterodimeric form
activated transcription approximately 3.5-fold. Transfection of mutant USF2 cDNA 
that is devoid of the basic DNA-binding domain produced only minimal inhibition
of rDNA transcription. These data show that USF can modulate transcription of
rRNA gene in vivo by functioning as a repressor (homodimer) or activator
(heterodimer) of pol I transcription in vivo and suggest that inhibition of rDNA 
transcription may be responsible for the antiproliferative action of USF
homodimers.

PMID: 9053857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochimie. 1997 Feb-Mar;79(2-3):113-8.

Transcriptional regulation by glucose in the liver.

Kahn A(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICGM, INSERM U129, CHU Cochin-Port-Royal, Paris, France.

Numerous hepatic and adipocytic genes are transcriptionally controlled by glucose
and insulin. It is the case, for example, of the pyruvate kinase L (L-PK) gene in
the liver and of the spot 14 gene in adipocytes, coding for proteic factors of
glycolysis and lipogenesis, respectively. At the hepatic level, the role of
insulin is mainly to stimulate the synthesis of glucokinase, needed for
phosphorylation of glucose to glucose 6-phosphate. An efficient regulation of the
L-PK gene by glucose also needs the synthesis of the glucose transporter (Glut2):
in its absence, transcription of the gene is independent of the presence of
glucose in the medium. The role of Glut2 can be to enhance the depletion of
gluconeogenic cells into glucose-6-phosphate (G6-P) when cultivated without
glucose. G6-P seems to act by one of its metabolites in the pentose phosphate
pathway, probably a pentose phosphate, maybe xylulose 5-phosphate. The active
metabolites of this pathway could control the activity of protein kinase and
protein phosphatase cascades, leading to a modification of the phosphorylation
state of the glucose response complex. This complex is assembled by so-called
glucose/carbohydrate response elements (GIRE, ChoRE) that are composed of E boxes
of the CACGTG type, more or less modified, forming a palindrome whose both parts 
are separated by five bases. These sequences are able to bind USF1 and USF2
proteins, which seem to be necessary to the glucose response. However, the
binding of USF proteins to the GIRE of the L-PK gene, appreciated by in vivo
footprints, is not modulated by nutritional conditions. Therefore, these USF
proteins could interact with different partners which are targets of regulating
cues: transcription factors bound in the immediate vicinity of the glucose
response complex, notably the HNF4 factor, and, maybe, other proteins interacting
with the USF factors assembled to the GIRE. The actually ongoing experiments try 
to appreciate the nature and the role of these partners, and to evaluate the
metabolic response of mice whose USF genes were disabled by homologous
recombination.

PMID: 9209706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 17;272(3):1753-60.

Binding of upstream stimulatory factor to an E-box in the 3'-flanking region
stimulates alpha1(I) collagen gene transcription.

Rippe RA(1), Umezawa A, Kimball JP, Breindl M, Brenner DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-7038, USA.

Since several lines of evidence implicate the 3'-flanking region in regulating
alpha1(I) collagen gene transcription, we analyzed 12. 4-kilobase pairs of
3'-flanking sequence of the murine alpha1(I) collagen gene for transcriptional
elements. A region of the 3'-flanking region stimulated expression of the
heterologous beta-globin gene promoter in an enhancer trap plasmid and of the
alpha1(I) collagen gene promoter in a collagen-luciferase reporter gene construct
when located 3' to the luciferase reporter gene. DNase I footprinting analysis
demonstrated the presence of three regions where DNA binding proteins
specifically interact within this 3'-stimulatory region. Inspection of the DNA
sequence revealed a consensus E-box, a binding site for basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, in one of the protein binding sites. Mobility shift assays demonstrated
that upstream stimulatory factors (USF) USF-1 and USF-2 bind to this E-box.
Mutating the E-box in the context of the 3'-flanking region confirmed that it
contributes to the enhancement of transcriptional activity of the alpha1(I)
collagen gene promoter. Mutations in all three protein binding sites abolished
transcriptional activation by the 3'-flanking region, suggesting a complex
interaction among the trans-acting factors in enhancing transcriptional activity.
Thus, a region of the 3'-flanking region of the alpha1(I) collagen gene
stimulates transcription of the alpha1(I) collagen gene promoter, and USF-1 and
USF-2 contribute to this transcriptional stimulation.

PMID: 8999857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32375-80.

Transcription of the transforming growth factor-beta2 gene is dependent on an
E-box located between an essential cAMP response element/activating transcription
factor motif and the TATA box of the gene.

Scholtz B(1), Kingsley-Kallesen M, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA. arizzino@unmc.edu

Transforming growth factor-beta2 (TGF-beta2) is an important regulator of cell
proliferation and differentiation; however, its transcriptional regulation is not
well understood. Here we report characterization of an essential E-box motif,
positioned at -50/-45 between a previously described functional cAMP response
element/activating transcription factor site and the TATA box of the human
TGF-beta2 promoter. By site-directed mutagenesis, we demonstrate that this E-box 
motif is necessary for the promoter activity, not only in differentiated cells
derived from embryonal carcinoma cells, but also in choriocarcinoma cells and in 
MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells. We also demonstrate that the transcription factors 
USF1 and USF2 bind to this E-box motif in vitro when nuclear extracts from each
of these cell lines are examined by gel retardation assays. Moreover, using a
dominant-negative USF2 protein, we show that USF proteins are critical for
TGF-beta2 promoter activity in vivo. The importance of the E-box motif described 
in this study is supported by the presence of an E-box motif in the same position
in the chicken TGF-beta2 gene promoter.

PMID: 8943301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Genomics. 1996 Dec 1;38(2):141-8.

Structure, sequence, and chromosome 19 localization of human USF2 and its
rearrangement in a patient with multicystic renal dysplasia.

Groenen PM(1), Garcia E, Debeer P, Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Center for Human Genetics, University of
Leuven, Belgium.

The precise etiology of hydronephrosis caused by pelvi-ureteric junction
obstruction is not yet known but there is convincing evidence for a genetic
cause, with linkage analysis predicting a hereditary hydronephrosis locus on
chromosome 6p. In previous studies, a patient was described with a de novo
autosomal t(6;19)(p21;q13.1) translocation and suffering from bilateral
multicystic renal dysplasia (MRD) caused by a bilateral complete pelvi-ureteric
junction obstruction. In an effort to elucidate a possible correlation between
this translocation and hereditary hydronephrosis, we have carried out an
extensive molecular characterization of a chromosome 19 cosmid clone previously
identified as spanning the translocation in this unique index case. DNA
sequencing across a 9.2-kb BamHI fragment that straddles the translocation
indicates the presence of DNA sequences with a high degree of similarity to the
USF2 gene that encodes the transcription factor USF2 (upstream stimulator factor 
2). The genomic structure of USF2 consists of 10 exons distributed over a DNA
region of about 11 kb. The putative promoter region is GC-rich and lacks TATA and
CCAAT boxes, suggesting that expression of the USF2 gene may be controlled by a
typical housekeeping gene promoter. The chromosome 19 breakpoint in the MRD
patient appeared to have occurred in intron 7 of the USF2 gene. Northern blot
analysis of a variety of human tissues revealed that the USF2 gene is
ubiquitously expressed. Furthermore, Northern blot and 3'-RACE analysis of mRNA
isolated from lung fibroblasts of the MRD patient failed to detect a fusion
transcript involving USF2 sequences, suggesting gene disruption rather than the
generation of a fusion gene as a possible underlying mechanism.

PMID: 8954795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Genomics. 1996 Nov 1;37(3):337-44.

Complete sequencing of the murine USF gene and comparison of its genomic
organization to that of mFIP/USF2.

Aperlo C(1), Boulukos KE, Sage J, Cuzin F, Pognonec P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 273, Laboratoire de Biochimie, Université de Nice, France.

USF is a transcription factor able to stimulate promoter activity upon binding to
an upstream sequence identical to that recognized by the protooncogene Myc.
However, despite extensive biochemical characterization, nothing is known
concerning its physiological function. A USF-related protein able to interact
with Fos and known as FIP/USF2 has been reported. Its genomic structure in mouse 
has been recently characterized. We present here the cloning and characterization
of the murine USF gene. It consists of 10 exons, the first of which is noncoding,
and the gene spans 8 kb of DNA. We show that the murine USF protein is almost
identical to its human counterpart, but that an intron not conserved between
human and murine USF genes curiously has been conserved between human USF and
murine FIP/USF2. Otherwise, the splicing pattern of murine USF and FIP/USF2 is
exactly conserved. We also demonstrate that the murine USF promoter is located
more than 2.5 kb upstream of the first coding ATG, in a region displaying
divergent promoter activity. Finally, we show that an Mx1-related sequence is
present less than 3 kb downstream of the murine USF gene, in a tail-to-tail
position. Taken together, these data indicate that the murine USF gene is very
similar to the murine FIP/USF2 gene and is potentially bracketed by two other
transcription units on the other DNA strand.

PMID: 8938446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mamm Genome. 1996 Nov;7(11):803-9.

Mouse USF1 gene cloning: comparative organization within the c-myc gene family.

Henrion AA(1), Vaulont S, Raymondjean M, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Nationale de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 129,
Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

Upstream stimulatory factors (USF/MLTF) belong to the c-myc family of
transcription factors. Through binding to target DNA as dimers, the ubiquitous
USF proteins regulate a variety of genes. USF proteins are encoded by two genes, 
USF1 and USF2. Protein sequences of USF1 and 2 are highly homologous across
species, suggesting functional conservation. To determine whether the genomic
organization was conserved between USF1 and USF2, we isolated the murine USF1
gene and characterized its genomic structure. Both genes are similarly organized 
in 10 exons spanning over 10 kbp. By the 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends and 
S1 nuclease mapping methods, exon 1 was defined and the transcription initiation 
sites were mapped. The sequence of 8 kb of the gene, including 1.75 kb of
5'-flanking DNA, was determined. The promoter region is GC rich and lacks a
typical TATA or CCAAT element. Strikingly, a comparison of the murine and human
untranslated sequences reveals regions that exhibit greater than 73% sequence
identity. A genomic alignment of the dimerization and DNA binding domains is
presented for five genes of the c-myc family, suggesting a hypothetical common
ancestor gene.

PMID: 8875887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Oct 1;241(1):249-53.

The basic region/helix-loop-helix/leucine repeat transcription factor USF
interferes with Ras transformation.

Aperlo C(1), Boulukos KE, Pognonec P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie, INSERM U273, Université de Nice, France.

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a transcription factor of the basic
region/helix-loop-helix/leucine repeat family. It shares the same DNA-binding
sequence as the myc oncogene. Based on the three-dimensional structures, its
DNA-binding domain is structurally related to that of Max, the partner of Myc. In
addition, USF can form heterodimers with a related factor, Fos-interacting
protein/upstream stimulatory factor 2 (FIP/USF2), which has been shown to
directly interact with Fos. In view of the provocative relationship of USF with
other factors involved in cell proliferation, we investigated whether USF could
also play a role in cellular growth control. In this study, we report that USF is
not an oncogene, but interferes with Ras-driven transformation. This inhibitory
effect is independent of USF transactivating domains, but requires its
DNA-binding activity. However, the minimal USF DNA-binding domain does not
display this inhibitory effect, and even slightly enhances Ras transformation. On
the basis of these data, we propose that USF may play an important role in the
control of cell growth and proliferation, through both binding to promoter
sequences and specific protein/protein interactions.

PMID: 8898913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Reprod Dev. 1996 Sep;45(1):1-9.

Two distinct forms of USF in the Lytechinus sea urchin embryo do not play a role 
in LpS1 gene inactivation upon disruption of the extracellular matrix.

George JM(1), Seid CA, Lee H, Tomlinson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Houston, Texas 77204-5513, USA.

Recent studies in our laboratory indicated that the upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) in the sea urchin embryo of Lytechinus acts as a transcriptional repressor 
for the aboral ectoderm-specific expression of the LpS1 genes. Disruption of the 
extracellular matrix (ECM) arrests development prior to gastrulation and
inactivates the LpS1 genes. We wanted to determine whether the inactivation of
the LpS1 genes by ECM disruption may be due to an increase in USF expression. In 
the course of the investigation, a second L, variegatus USF cDNA clone (LvUSF2)
was isolated and sequenced. The deduced amino acid sequence of LvUSF2 is nearly
identical to LvUSF1 except at the amino end, where they are sharply divergent.
Like LvUSF1, LvUSF2 has a USF-specific, a basic/hefixloop-helix, and a leucine
zipper domain. Genomic DNA blots indicated that the two cDNA clones are derived
from one gene, which suggested that the Lytechinus USF1 and USF2 mRNAs, of
approximately 6.0 and 4.0 kb, respectively, are the result of differential RNA
splicing. ECM disruption in Lytechinus embryos caused a relative drop in USF RNA 
accumulation levels to approximately 60% of control embryos, while LpS1 RNA
accumulation levels dropped to less than 5%. USF protein levels and DNA binding
activities in ECM-disrupted embryos also dropped to approximately 60% to that of 
control embryos. A mutation at the USF binding site in an LpS1
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) fusion DNA construct did not
cause a relative increase in CAT activity in ECM disrupted embryos. These results
suggest that the induced drop in LpS1 gene expression by ECM disruption is not
due to an increase in the repressive activity of USF.

PMID: 8873063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1367-75.

Functional domains of the transcription factor USF2: atypical nuclear
localization signals and context-dependent transcriptional activation domains.

Luo X(1), Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

USF is a family of basic helix-loop transcriptional factors that recognizes
DNA-binding sites similar to those of the Myc oncoproteins. Here, various
functional domains in the mouse USF2 protein were identified and characterized.
Indirect immunofluorescence studies with transiently transfected cells revealed
that both the basic region and the highly conserved USF-specific region (USR) are
involved in the nuclear localization of USF2. Cotransfection assays with deletion
mutants containing the DNA-binding domain of either USF2 or GAL4 identified two
distinct transcriptional activation domains in USF2, the USR and the exon
5-encoded region. Activity of the exon 5 activation domain was detectable in both
assay systems. Within USF2, however, its potency varied with the conformation
induced by the surrounding regions, especially that encoded by alternatively
spliced exon 4. In contrast, the USR activated transcription only in its natural 
context upstream of the USF2 basic region and only with reporter constructs
containing the adenovirus major late minimal promoter but not the E1b minimal
promoter. However, insertion of an initiator element downstream of the TATA box
rescued the activity of the USR on the E1b-driven reporters. The USR therefore
represents a new type of activation domain whose function depends very strongly
on the core promoter context.

PMCID: PMC231121
PMID: 8657110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Feb 6;93(3):1308-13.

Antiproliferative properties of the USF family of helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors.

Luo X(1), Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

USF is a family of transcription factors characterized by a highly conserved
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-zip) DNA-binding domain. Two
different USF genes, termed USF1 and USF2, are ubiquitously expressed in both
humans and mice. The USF1 and USF2 proteins contain highly divergent
transcriptional activation domains but share extensive homologies in the bHLH-zip
region and recognize the same CACGTG DNA motifs. Although the DNA-binding and
transcriptional activities of these proteins have been characterized, the
biological function of USF is not well understood. Here, focus- and
colony-formation assays were used to investigate the potential involvement of USF
in the regulation of cellular transformation and proliferation. Both USF1 and
USF2 inhibited the transformation of rat embryo fibroblasts mediated by Ras and
c-Myc, a bHLH-zip transcription factor that also binds CACGTG motifs. DNA binding
was required but not fully sufficient for inhibition of Myc-dependent
transformation by USF, since deletion mutants containing only the DNA-binding
domains of USF1 or USF2 produced partial inhibition. While the effect of USF1 was
selective for Myc-dependent transformation, wild-type USF2 exerted in addition a 
strong inhibition of E1A-mediated transformation and a strong suppression of HeLa
cell colony formation. These results suggest that members of the USF family may
serve as negative regulators of cellular proliferation in two ways, one by
antagonizing the transforming function of Myc, the other through a more general
growth-inhibitory effect.

PMCID: PMC40076
PMID: 8577760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1514-9.

Aggregation of the Fc epsilon RI in mast cells induces the synthesis of
Fos-interacting protein and increases its DNA binding-activity: the dependence on
protein kinase C-beta.

Lewin I(1), Jacob-Hirsch J, Zang ZC, Kupershtein V, Szallasi Z, Rivera J, Razin
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem, Israel.

The ability of c-Fos to dimerize with various proteins creates transcription
complexes which can exert their regulatory function on a variety of genes. One of
the transcription factors that binds to c-Fos is the newly discovered
Fos-interacting protein (FIP). In this report we present evidence for the
regulation of the synthesis of FIP by a physiological stimulus. We found that the
aggregation of the mast cell high affinity receptor for IgE (Fc epsilon RI)
induced the synthesis of FIP and increased its DNA binding activity. Moreover,
down-regulation of the isoenzyme protein kinase C-beta (PKC-beta) by a specific
antisense phosphorothioate oligonucleotide resulted in profound inhibition of
FIP-Fos DNA binding activity. Thus, aggregation of the Fc epsilon RI on mast
cells elicits a PKC-beta dependent signaling pathway which regulates FIP-Fos DNA 
binding activity.

PMID: 8576146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 19;271(3):1405-15.

Immunochemical characterization and transacting properties of upstream
stimulatory factor isoforms.

Viollet B(1), Lefrançois-Martinez AM, Henrion A, Kahn A, Raymondjean M, Martinez 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, U129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The ubiquitous upstream stimulatory factor (USF) transcription factors encoded by
two distinct genes (USF1 and USF2) exist under the form of various dimers able to
bind E-boxes. We report the molecular cloning and functional characterization of 
USF2 isoforms, corresponding to a 44-kDa subunit, USF2a, and a new 38-kDa
subunit, USF2b, generated by differential splicing. Using specific anti-USF
antibodies, we define the different binding complexes in various nuclear
extracts. In vivo, the USF1/USF2a heterodimer represents over 66% of the USF
binding activity whereas the USF1 and USF2a homodimers represent less than 10%,
which strongly suggests an in vivo preferential association in heterodimers. In
particular, an USF1/USF2b heterodimer accounted for almost 15% of the USF species
in some cells. The preferential heterodimerization of USF subunits was reproduced
ex vivo, while the in vitro association of cotranslated subunits, or recombinant 
USF proteins, appeared to be random. In transiently transfected HeLa or hepatoma 
cells, USF2a and USF1 homodimers transactivated a minimal promoter with similar
efficiency, whereas USF2b, which lacks an internal 67-amino acid domain, was a
poor transactivator. Additionally, USF2b was an efficient as USF1 and USF2a
homodimers in transactivating the liver-specific pyruvate kinase gene promoter.

PMID: 8576131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 1;270(48):28716-22.

Upstream stimulatory factors bind to insulin response sequence of the fatty acid 
synthase promoter. USF1 is regulated.

Wang D(1), Sul HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
94720-3104, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7873.

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) plays a central role in de novo lipogenesis in mammals.
The concentration or activity of FAS in liver and adipose tissue changes
dramatically when animals are subjected to nutritional and hormonal
manipulations. We previously reported that due to changes in transcription, FAS
synthesis declines and increases in an insulin-dependent manner during fasting
and refeeding, respectively, and that insulin administration of
streptozotocin-diabetic mice stimulates FAS transcription. We previously mapped
the FAS insulin response sequence (IRS) to the proximal promoter region from
position -71 to position -50, which contains an E-box DNA binding motif. Here,
using competition gel shift assays and specific upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
antibodies, we identified USF1 and USF2 as major components of complexes that
bind to the FAS IRS. UV-cross-linking experiments further supported that USFs
bind the FAS IRS. We also found that the amount of the 43-kDa USF1 was
dramatically increased in liver of refed rats. In contrast, the amount of USF2
remained the same in liver of fasted or refed rats. Moreover, a 17-kDa protein in
both fasted and refed rat liver was recognized by anti-USF1 antibodies, and this 
17-kDa USF1-related protein was expressed in a manner opposite to that of the
43-kDa USF1, i.e. high in liver of fasted rats and decreased in liver of refed
rats. These data suggest that the regulation of USF expression may play an
important role in the regulation of FAS transcription.

PMID: 7499393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Genomics. 1995 Jul 20;28(2):179-83.

Murine chromosomal location of five bHLH-Zip transcription factor genes.

Steingrímsson E(1), Sawadogo M, Gilbert DJ, Zervos AS, Brent R, Blanar MA, Fisher
DE, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

The genes for the bHLH-Zip transcription factors Tfap4, Mxi1, Tcfeb, Usf1, and
Usf2 have been mapped in mouse by interspecific backcross analysis. Mxi1, Usf1,
and Usf2 have been mapped previously by in situ hybridization, but their
positions on the meiotic linkage map had not been determined. The other two genes
have not previously been mapped in mouse. These transcription factors belong to a
growing family of transcriptional regulators, some of which are known to form a
complex network of interacting proteins that control cell proliferation and
apoptosis. As expected, based on mapping studies of other bHLH-Zip genes, these
loci were well distributed among mouse chromosomes. In addition, some of the
probes used in this study detected multiple, independently segregating loci,
suggesting the possible existence of additional family members or
species-specific pseudogenes.

PMID: 8530024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genomics. 1995 Jan 1;25(1):36-43.

Structure, sequence, and chromosomal location of the gene for USF2 transcription 
factors in mouse.

Henrion AA(1), Martinez A, Mattei MG, Kahn A, Raymondjean M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Unité 129 INSERM, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The ubiquitously expressed upstream stimulatory factor (USF) involved in the
transcription of a wide variety of cellular genes is defined as dimers of
c-myc-related proteins, composed of a basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper
region. The USF family consists of different members that split into two groups: 
MLTF or USF1 and USF2 or FIP. We present here evidence that USF1 and USF2 are
distinct closely related genes in human, rat, and mouse. Based on the recent
cloning of rat and human new cDNAs, we have isolated genomic clones encompassing 
the murine USF2 gene, which consists of at least 10 exons spanning a minimum of
10 kb of genomic DNA. Unexpectedly, the organization of USF2 appears very split
up by introns (0.08 to over 6 kb in size), compared to the myc gene structure.
The entire gene (but the larger intron) and 1.6 kb of the 5' flanking region were
sequenced. This 5' flanking region is GC-rich, contains several putative
transcription binding sites, and has no apparent TATA box. Gene mapping of murine
USF2 and USF1 has been determined by in situ hybridization, indicating the
localization of USF2 on chromosome 7 and of USF1 on chromosomes 1 and 11.

PMID: 7774954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):23894-903.

Archaic structure of the gene encoding transcription factor USF.

Lin Q(1), Luo X, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

The upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor 
that interacts with specific sites on the DNA that are also recognized by the MYC
oncoproteins. We isolated genomic clones to the murine 44-kDa form of USF (USF2
gene). This unique gene spans 13 kilobases of DNA and is composed of 10 exons.
The gene seems to have maintained its archaic structure, since many of the exons 
encode discrete functional domains of the transcription factor originally
identified by protein sequence comparisons. A particularly striking HpaII tiny
fragment island, extending over nearly 2,000 base pairs, surrounds the USF2
translation initiation site. This region, which includes the USF2 promoter and
the first four exons, is characterized by an overall GC content greater than 74%.
Analysis by S1 mapping and transient transfection assays revealed that the USF2
transcripts originate from an initiator element located within a highly GC-rich
region that is surrounded by two long polyadenylate stretches and functions as a 
bidirectional promoter. Different forms of USF2 messages result from the presence
or absence of the fourth exon in the processed USF2 mRNA. Alternative splicing
correlates with the lack of a consensus lariat branch point in the third intron. 
Transient cotransfection assays revealed that the presence or absence of the
amino acid sequences encoded by exon 4 affects considerably the transcription
activation properties of the USF2 protein.

PMID: 7523363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Feb 11;22(3):427-33.

Ubiquitous expression of the 43- and 44-kDa forms of transcription factor USF in 
mammalian cells.

Sirito M(1), Lin Q, Maity T, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

USF is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor that, like Myc, recognizes the DNA
binding motif CACGTG. Two different forms of USF, characterized by apparent
molecular weights of 43,000 and 44,000, were originally identified in HeLa cells 
by biochemical analysis. Clones for the 43-kDa USF were first characterized, but 
only partial clones for the human 44-kDa USF (USF2, or FIP) have been reported.
Here we describe a complete cDNA for the 44-kDa USF from murine cells. Analysis
of this clone has revealed that the various USF family members are quite
divergent in their N-terminal amino acid sequences, while a high degree of
conservation characterizes their dimerization and DNA-binding domains.
Interestingly, the 3' noncoding region of the 44-kDa USF cDNAs displayed an
unusual degree of conservation between human and mouse. In vitro
transcription/translation experiments indicated a possible role for this region
in translation regulation. Alternative splicing forms of the 44-kDa USF messages 
exist in both mouse and human. Examination of the tissue and cell-type
distribution of USF by Northern blot and gel retardation assays revealed that
while expression of both the 43- and 44-kDa USF species is ubiquitous, different 
ratios of USF homo- and heterodimers are found in different cells.

PMCID: PMC523599
PMID: 8127680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Gene Expr. 1992;2(3):231-40.

Members of the USF family of helix-loop-helix proteins bind DNA as homo- as well 
as heterodimers.

Sirito M(1), Walker S, Lin Q, Kozlowski MT, Klein WH, Sawadogo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

We have isolated human cDNA clones for USF2, a new member of the upstream
stimulatory factor (USF) family of transcription factors. Analysis of these
clones revealed the existence of highly conserved elements in the C terminal
region of all USF proteins. These include the basic region, helix-loop-helix
(HLH) motif, and, in the case of the human proteins, the C-terminal leucine
repeat (LR). In addition, a highly conserved USF-specific domain is located
immediately upstream of the basic region. Using in vitro translated proteins, we 
found that all members of the USF family bound DNA as dimers. The N-terminal
portion of USF, including the USF-specific domain, was entirely dispensable for
dimer formation and DNA-binding. However, deletion mutants of USF2 lacking the LR
were deficient in DNA-binding activity. Interestingly, each of the USF proteins
could form functional heterodimers with the other family members, including the
sea urchin USF, which does not have a LR motif. This indicates that the conserved
LR in human USF is not required for dimer formation, and influences only
indirectly DNA-binding.

PMID: 1450663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


