
1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2016 Apr;22(4):229-39. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaw006. Epub 2016 Jan 
20.

Isolation and gene expression analysis of single potential human spermatogonial
stem cells.

von Kopylow K(1), Schulze W(2), Salzbrunn A(3), Spiess AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Andrology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg,
Germany k.kopylow@uke.uni-hamburg.de. (2)Department of Andrology, University
Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany MVZ Fertility Center Hamburg
GmbH, amedes-group, 20095 Hamburg, Germany. (3)Department of Andrology,
University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: It is possible to isolate pure populations of single potential 
human spermatogonial stem cells without somatic contamination for down-stream
applications, for example cell culture and gene expression analysis.
STUDY FINDING: We isolated pure populations of single potential human
spermatogonial stem cells (hSSC) without contaminating somatic cells and analyzed
gene expression of these cells via single-cell real-time RT-PCR.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The isolation of a pure hSSC fraction could enable
clinical applications such as fertility preservation for prepubertal boys and in 
vitro-spermatogenesis. By utilizing largely nonspecific markers for the isolation
of spermatogonia (SPG) and hSSC, previously published cell selection methods are 
not able to deliver pure target cell populations without contamination by
testicular somatic cells. However, uniform cell populations free of somatic cells
are necessary to guarantee defined growth conditions in cell culture experiments 
and to prevent unintended stem cell differentiation. Fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3 (FGFR3) is a cell surface protein of human undifferentiated A-type SPG
and a promising candidate marker for hSSC. It is exclusively expressed in small, 
non-proliferating subgroups of this spermatogonial cell type together with the
pluripotency-associated protein and spermatogonial nuclear marker
undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1).
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: We specifically selected the
FGFR3-positive spermatogonial subpopulation from two 30 mg biopsies per patient
from a total of 37 patients with full spermatogenesis and three patients with
meiotic arrest. We then employed cell selection with magnetic beads in
combination with a fluorescence-activated cell sorter antibody directed against
human FGFR3 to tag and visually identify human FGFR3-positive spermatogonia.
Positively selected and bead-labeled cells were subsequently picked with a
micromanipulator. Analysis of the isolated cells was carried out by single-cell
real-time RT-PCR, real-time RT-PCR, immunocytochemistry and live/dead staining.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Single-cell real-time RT-PCR and real-time
RT-PCR of pooled cells indicate that bead-labeled single cells express FGFR3 with
high heterogeneity at the mRNA level, while bead-unlabeled cells lack FGFR3 mRNA.
Furthermore, isolated cells exhibit strong immunocytochemical staining for the
stem cell factor UTF1 and are viable.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The cell population isolated in this study has 
to be tested for their potential stem cell characteristics via
xenotransplantation. Due to the small amount of the isolated cells, propagation
by cell culture will be essential. Other potential hSSC without FGFR3 surface
expression will not be captured with the provided experimental design.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The technical approach as developed in this
work could encourage the scientific community to test other established or novel 
hSSC markers on single SPG that present with potential stem cell-like features.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: The project was funded by the DFG Research
Unit FOR1041 Germ cell potential (SCH 587/3-2) and DFG grants to K.v.K. (KO
4769/2-1) and A.-N.S. (SP 721/4-1). The authors declare no competing interests.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26792870  [PubMed - in process]


2. Cell Regen (Lond). 2015 Nov 11;4:10. doi: 10.1186/s13619-015-0024-9. eCollection 
2015.

Reprogramming barriers and enhancers: strategies to enhance the efficiency and
kinetics of induced pluripotency.

Ebrahimi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yazd Cardiovascular Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.

Induced pluripotent stem cells are powerful tools for disease modeling, drug
screening, and cell transplantation therapies. These cells can be generated
directly from somatic cells by ectopic expression of defined factors through a
reprogramming process. However, pluripotent reprogramming is an inefficient
process because of various defined and unidentified barriers. Recent studies
dissecting the molecular mechanisms of reprogramming have methodically improved
the quality, ease, and efficiency of reprogramming. Different strategies have
been applied for enhancing reprogramming efficiency, including
depletion/inhibition of barriers (p53, p21, p57, p16(Ink4a)/p19(Arf), Mbd3,
etc.), overexpression of enhancing genes (e.g., FOXH1, C/EBP alpha, UTF1, and
GLIS1), and administration of certain cytokines and small molecules. The current 
review provides an in-depth overview of the cutting-edge findings regarding
distinct barriers of reprogramming to pluripotency and strategies to enhance
reprogramming efficiency. By incorporating the mechanistic insights from these
recent findings, a combined method of inhibition of roadblocks and application of
enhancing factors may yield the most reliable and effective approach in
pluripotent reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4642739
PMID: 26566431  [PubMed]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 12;5:15041. doi: 10.1038/srep15041.

DDX3Y gene rescue of a Y chromosome AZFa deletion restores germ cell formation
and transcriptional programs.

Ramathal C(1), Angulo B(1,)(2), Sukhwani M(3), Cui J(1,)(2), Durruthy-Durruthy
J(1), Fang F(1,)(2), Schanes P(1), Turek PJ(3), Orwig KE(4), Reijo Pera R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine &Department of
Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. (2)Departments of Cell Biology 
&Neuroscience and Chemistry and Biochemistry, Montana State University, Bozeman, 
MT, USA. (3)The Turek Clinic, San Francisco, CA 94133, USA. (4)Magee Women's
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA.

Deletions of the AZFa region (AZoospermia Factor-a) region of the human Y
chromosome cause irreversible spermatogenic failure that presents clinically in
men as Sertoli-cell only (SCO) pathology of the testis. Deletions of the AZFa
region typically encompass two genes: DDX3Y and USP9Y. However, human genetic
evidence indicates that SCO is most tightly linked to deletion of DDX3Y and that 
deletions/mutations of USP9Y can be transmitted from one generation to the next. 
Here, we generated stable iPSC lines with AZFa deletions, tested complementation 
via introduction of DDX3Y, and assessed ability to form germ cells in vivo in a
xenotransplantation model. We observed a quantifiable improvement in formation of
germ cell like cells (GCLCs) from complemented donor iPSCs. Moreover, expression 
of UTF1, a prospermatogonial protein, was restored in cells complemented by
introduction of DDX3Y on the AZFa background. Whole-genome RNA sequencing of
purified GCLCs revealed an enrichment of genes involved in translational
suppression and transcriptional control in DDX3Y-rescued GCLCs over mutant GCLCs,
which maintained a molecular phenotype more similar to undifferentiated iPSCs.
This study demonstrates the ability to probe fundamental genetics of human germ
cell formation by complementation and indicates that DDX3Y functions in the
earliest stages of human germ cell development.

PMCID: PMC4601010
PMID: 26456624  [PubMed - in process]


4. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Aug 18;6:144. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0137-7.

Mesenchymal stem cells derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells retain
adequate osteogenicity and chondrogenicity but less adipogenicity.

Kang R(1,)(2), Zhou Y(3), Tan S(4,)(5), Zhou G(6), Aagaard L(7), Xie L(8), Bünger
C(9), Bolund L(10), Luo Y(11).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Research Lab, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
KANG.RAN@CLIN.AU.DK. (2)Jiangsu Province Hospital on Integration of Chinese and
Western Medicine, Nanjing, 210028, China. KANG.RAN@CLIN.AU.DK. (3)Department of
Biomedicine, the Health Faculty, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
YAZH@BIOMED.AU.DK. (4)Department of Biomedicine, the Health Faculty, Aarhus
University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. SHUANG.TAN@HUM-GEN.AU.DK. (5)Shenzhen Key
Laboratory for Anti-aging and Regenerative Medicine, Health Science Center,
Shenzhen University, 518060, Shenzhen, China. SHUANG.TAN@HUM-GEN.AU.DK.
(6)Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Anti-aging and Regenerative Medicine, Health
Science Center, Shenzhen University, 518060, Shenzhen, China. GQZHOU@SZU.EDU.CN. 
(7)Department of Biomedicine, the Health Faculty, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus
C, Denmark. AAGAARD@BIOMED.AU.DK. (8)Jiangsu Province Hospital on Integration of 
Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing, 210028, China. XIELIN117@126.COM.
(9)Orthopedic Research Lab, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
CODYBUNG@RM.DK. (10)Department of Biomedicine, the Health Faculty, Aarhus
University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. BOLUND@BIOMED.AU.DK. (11)Department of
Biomedicine, the Health Faculty, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark.
ALUN@BIOMED.AU.DK.

INTRODUCTION: Previously, we established a simple method for deriving mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC-MSCs). These
iPSC-MSCs were capable of forming osteogenic structures in scaffolds and
nanofibers. The objective of this study is to systematically characterize the
mesenchymal characteristics of the iPSC-MSCs by comparing them to bone
marrow-derived MSCs (BM-MSCs).
METHODS: Two iPSC-MSC lines (named as mRNA-iPSC-MSC-YL001 and
lenti-iPSC-MSC-A001) and one BM-MSC line were used for the study. Cell
proliferation, presence of mesenchymal surface markers, tri-lineage
differentiation capability (osteogenesis, chondrogenesis, adipogenesis), and
expression of "stemness" genes were analyzed in these MSC lines.
RESULTS: The iPSC-MSCs were similar to BM-MSCs in terms of cell morphology
(fibroblast-like) and surface antigen profile: CD29+, CD44+, CD73+, CD90+,
CD105+, CD11b-, CD14-, CD31-, CD34-, CD45- and HLA-DR-. A faster proliferative
capability was seen in both iPSC-MSCs lines compared to the BM-MSCs. The
iPSC-MSCs showed adequate capacity of osteogenesis and chondrogenesis compared to
the BM-MSCs, while less adipogenic potential was found in the iPSC-MSCs. The
iPSC-MSCs and the tri-lineage differentiated cells (osteoblasts, chondrocytes,
adipocytes) all lack expression of "stemness" genes: OCT4, SOX2, GDF3, CRIPTO,
UTF1, DPPA4, DNMT3B, LIN28a, and SAL4.
CONCLUSIONS: The MSCs derived from human iPSCs with our method have advanced
proliferation capability and adequate osteogenic and chondrogenic properties
compared to BM-MSCs. However, the iPSC-MSCs were less efficient in their
adipogenicity, suggesting that further modifications should be applied to our
method to derive iPSC-MSCs more closely resembling the naïve BM-MSCs if
necessary.

PMCID: PMC4539932
PMID: 26282538  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cell Biosci. 2015 Jul 28;5:42. doi: 10.1186/s13578-015-0034-x. eCollection 2015.

PTEN signaling is required for the maintenance of spermatogonial stem cells in
mouse, by regulating the expressions of PLZF and UTF1.

Zhou W(1), Shao H(2), Zhang D(3), Dong J(4), Cheng W(5), Wang L(4), Teng Y(2), Yu
Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hongqiao International Institute of Medicine, Shanghai Tongren Hospital /
Faculty of Basic Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200025 China ; Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of 
Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, 200025 China. (2)Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Affiliated Sixth People Hospital, Shanghai, 200233 China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025
China ; Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100101 China. (4)Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025 China. (5)College of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025 China.

BACKGROUND: Pten plays a crucial role in the stem cell maintenance in a few
organs. Pten defect also causes the premature oocytes and ovary aging. We and
other groups have found that the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)-Akt
signaling regulates the proliferation and differentiation of spermatogonial stem 
cells (SSCs). PTEN functions as a negative regulator of the PI3K pathway. Thus,
we thought that the fate of SSCs might be controlled by Pten.
RESULTS: We report that promyelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF) and
undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1), both of which are 
germ cell-specific transcriptional factors, are regulated by Pten. Conditional
deletion of Pten leads to reduction in PLZF expression but induction of UTF1,
which is associated with SSCs depletion and infertility in males with age.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that Pten is required for the long-term
maintenance of SSCs and precise regulation of spermatogenesis in mouse. The
finding of a Pten-regulated GFRa1(+)/PLZF(-)/UTF1(+) progenitor population
provides a new insight into the precise mechanisms controlling SSC fate.

PMCID: PMC4517568
PMID: 26221533  [PubMed]


6. Fertil Steril. 2015 Aug;104(2):302-11.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.05.001. 
Epub 2015 Jun 13.

Comparison of enzymatic digestion and mechanical dissociation of human testicular
tissues.

Schneider F(1), Redmann K(2), Wistuba J(2), Schlatt S(2), Kliesch S(3), Neuhaus
N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproductive
Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus,
Münster, Germany; Department of Clinical Andrology, Centre of Reproductive
Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus,
Münster, Germany. (2)Institute for Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre 
of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital Münster,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus, Münster, Germany. (3)Department of Clinical Andrology, 
Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital Münster,
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus, Münster, Germany. (4)Institute for Reproductive and
Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, University
Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus, Münster, Germany. Electronic address:
Nina.Neuhaus@ukmuenster.de.

OBJECTIVE: To compare mechanical dissociation, employing the Medimachine system, 
and enzymatic digestion of human testicular tissues with respect to the
proportion of spermatogonia and somatic cells, with the long-term objective of
establishing human spermatogonial cultures.
DESIGN: Experimental basic science study.
SETTING: Reproductive biology laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Testicular tissues were obtained from patients with gender dysphoria 
on the day of sex reassignment surgery. On the basis of the histological
evaluation, tissue samples with complete spermatogenesis (fresh, n = 6;
cryopreserved, n = 7) and with meiotic arrest (cryopreserved, n = 4) were
selected.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The composition of testicular cell suspensions was
assessed performing quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
analyses for germ cell-specific (FGFR3, SALL4, UTF1, MAGE-A4) and somatic marker 
genes (ACTA2 and VIM). Additionally, flow-cytometric analyses were used to
evaluate the percentage of SALL4-and vimentin-positive cells.
RESULT(S): While Medimachine dissociation yielded higher cell numbers in all
patient groups, viability of cells was highly variable and correlated with the
histological status of the tissue. Interestingly, qPCR analysis revealed a
significantly decreased expression of the somatic marker genes ACTA2 and VIM and 
an increased expression of the spermatogonial marker genes FGFR3 and SALL4 after 
Medimachine dissociation. These findings were corroborated by flow-cytometric
analyses that demonstrated that the proportion of SALL4-positive cells was up to 
4 times higher after mechanical dissociation.
CONCLUSION(S): Medimachine dissociation of human testicular tissues is comparably
fast and leads to an enrichment of SALL4-positive spermatogonia. The use of this 
method may therefore constitute an advantage for the establishment of human
spermatogonial cell cultures.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26056924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10924-39.

Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis of embryonic stem cell differentiation
toward blood.

Piazzi M(1), Williamson A(2), Lee CF(2), Pearson S(3), Lacaud G(4), Kouskoff
V(3), McCubrey JA(5), Cocco L(1), Whetton AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Science (DIBINEM),
University of Bologna, Italy. (2)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. (3)Stem Cell Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (4)Stem Cell Biology Group
Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Greenville,
NC, USA.

Murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro into three germ
layers (endodermic, mesodermic, ectodermic). Studies on the differentiation of
these cells to specific early differentiation stages has been aided by an ES cell
line carrying the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) targeted to the Brachyury (Bry)
locus which marks mesoderm commitment. Furthermore, expression of the Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor receptor 2 (Flk1) along with Bry defines hemangioblast 
commitment. Isobaric-tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ(TM)) and
phosphopeptide enrichment coupled to liquid chromatography separation and mass
spectrometry allow the study of phosphorylation changes occurring at different
stages of ES cell development using Bry and Flk1 expression respectively. We
identified and relatively quantified 37 phosphoentities which are modulated
during mesoderm-induced ES cells differentiation, comparing epiblast-like, early 
mesoderm and hemangioblast-enriched cells. Among the proteins differentially
phosphorylated toward mesoderm differentiation were: the epigenetic regulator
Dnmt3b, the protein kinase GSK3b, the chromatin remodeling factor Smarcc1, the
transcription factor Utf1; as well as protein specifically related to stem cell
differentiation, as Eomes, Hmga2, Ints1 and Rif1. As most key factors regulating 
early hematopoietic development have also been implicated in various types of
leukemia, understanding the post-translational modifications driving their
regulation during normal development could result in a better comprehension of
their roles during abnormal hematopoiesis in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4484429
PMID: 25890499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Nov 12;14(1):116. doi: 10.1186/s12935-014-0116-6.
eCollection 2014.

Expression of undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor-1 (UTF1) in
breast cancers and their matched normal tissues.

Xu C(1), Zhou Y(2), Chen W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing
Hospital of Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, Zhejiang 312000 China ; Department of 
Medical Research Center, Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of
Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, Zhejiang China. (2)Department of Breast and
Thyroid Surgery, Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of Zhejiang
University, Shaoxing, Zhejiang 312000 China.

OBJECTIVES: Undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor-1 (UTF1) plays a
critical role in the developmental timing during embryonic development. However, 
there is little paper dealing with UTF1 expressed in adult tissues. In the
present study, we evaluate the expression of UTF1 in breast cancer and its
correlation with clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: Real-time polymerase chain reaction (real-time PCR) was applied to
detect the expression of UTF1 mRNA in the 55 pairs of samples of breast cancer
tissues and match normal tissues. <U+25B3><U+25B3>CT method was used to evaluate the relative
quantity of target mRNA expression.
RESULTS: Among the 55 pairs of samples of breast cancer tissues and match normal 
tissues adjacent to the tumor, the UTF1 mRNA levels in normal tissues were
significantly higher than those observed in breast cancer tissues (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
UTF1 mRNA levels expression correlated with lymph node metastasis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and
tumor size (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of UTF1 in breast cancer tissues were confirmed in this
study. Decreased expression of UTF1 mRNA in breast cancer tissues was maybe one
of the factors impact on tumorigenes in breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4247222
PMID: 25435811  [PubMed]


9. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Apr 15;24(8):962-72. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0388. Epub 2015
Jan 8.

Induced overexpression of Oct4A in human dental pulp cells enhances pluripotency 
and multilineage differentiation capability.

Liu L(1), Wu L, Wei X, Ling J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics, Guanghua School of
Stomatology, Affiliated Stomatological Hospital, Guangdong Province Key
Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University , Guangzhou, China .

Octamer-binding transcription factor 4A (Oct4A), one of the three spliced
variants of the class V of POU transcription factor family, is mainly expressed
in the nucleus of undifferentiated cells and serves as the key regulator for the 
maintenance of pluripotency and self-renewal. However, its specific role in
regulating pluripotency and multilineage differentiation potential of dental pulp
cells (DPCs) remains unknown. To explore the effect of Oct4A on pluripotency and 
multilineage differentiation capability of DPCs, expression of Oct4A in human
dental pulp tissue and pluripotent markers Oct4A, Sox2, c-Myc, Nanog, and Klf4 in
DPCs with prolonged in vitro culture were examined by immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescent staining. Oct4A transfection rate in DPCs with lentivirus was
evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and western blot. Cell
proliferation, multilineage differentiation, and the expression of Oct4B1, Sox2, 
Nanog, Klf4, c-Myc, and Utf1 in DPCs after Oct4A transfection were detected by
cell counting kit-8, Alizarin red/Oil red O staining, immunofluorescent staining,
alkaline phosphatase analysis, and real-time PCR. We demonstrated that Oct4A was 
mainly expressed in the nucleus of odontoblasts in dental pulp tissue. Oct4A,
Sox2, c-Myc, Nanog, and Klf4 were primarily located in the nucleus of DPCs at
early passage (passage 1) and translocated to cytoplasm at late passage (passage 
7). In DPCs with Oct4A overexpression, Oct4A, Oct4B1, Sox2, Nanog, Klf4, c-Myc,
and Utf1 were significantly upregulated (p<0.05) and the cell proliferation
(p<0.05), odontogenic and adipogenic differentiation were significantly enhanced.
Taken together, Oct4A plays a critical role in regulation of cell proliferation, 
pluripotency, and multilineage differentiation potential of DPCs.

PMID: 25422984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anim Reprod Sci. 2014 Nov 30;150(3-4):115-24. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2014.09.010. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Transcriptional coactivator undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 
1 expressed in spermatogonial stem cells: a putative marker of boar
spermatogonia.

Lee WY(1), Lee KH(1), Heo YT(2), Kim NH(2), Kim JH(3), Kim JH(4), Moon SH(5),
Chung HJ(6), Yoon MJ(7), Song H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Bioscience, RIBH, College of Biomedical & Health Science,
Konkuk University, Chung-ju 380-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Animal
Science, College of Agriculture, Chungbuk National University, Choung-ju 361-763,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 1
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University, Seongnam 463-836,
Republic of Korea. (5)School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 1 Hwayang-dong,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (6)Animal Biotechnology Division, 
National Institute of Animal Science, RDA, Suwon 441-706, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Horse, Companion, and Wild Animal Science, College of Animal
Science, Kyungpook National University, Sangju 742-711, Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Food Bioscience, RIBH, College of Biomedical & Health Science,
Konkuk University, Chung-ju 380-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
lovelyhusband@kku.ac.kr.

Spermatogenesis is initiated from spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs), which are
derived from gonocytes. Although some rodent SSC markers have been investigated, 
other species- and developmental stage-specific markers of spermatogonia have not
been identified. The objective of this study was to characterize the expression
of undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) gene as a
potential marker for spermatogonia and SSCs in the boar testis. In boar testis
tissue at pre-pubertal stages (tissues collected at 5, 30, and 60 days of age),
UTF1 gene expression was detected in almost all spermatogonia cells that
expressed a protein gene product 9.5 (PGP9.5), and immunocytochemical analysis of
isolated total testicular cells showed that 91.14% of cells staining for PGP9.5
also stained for UTF1. However, in boar testis tissue at pubertal and
post-pubertal stages (tissues collected at 90, 120, 150, and 180 days of age),
UTF1 was not detected in all PGP9.5-positive cells in the basement membrane.
While some PGP9.5-positive cells stained for UTF1, other cells stained only for
PGP9.5 or UTF1. PGP9.5, UTF1, and NANOG was assessed in in vitro cultures of pig 
SSCs (pSSCs) from testes collected at 5 days of age. The relative amounts of
PGP9.5, NANOG, and UTF1 mRNA were greater in pSSC colonies than in testis and
muscle tissue. Thus, the UTF1 gene is expressed in PGP9.5-positive spermatogonia 
cells of pigs at 5 days of age, and its expression is maintained in cultured pSSC
colonies, suggesting that UTF1 is a putative marker for early-stage spermatogonia
in the pre-pubertal pig testis. These findings will facilitate the study of
spermatogenesis and applications in germ cell research.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25287725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(4):1199-215. doi: 10.1159/000366332. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

Functional expression and regulation of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated channels (HCN) in mouse iPS cell-derived cardiomyocytes after
UTF1 -neo selection.

Semmler J(1), Lehmann M, Pfannkuche K, Reppel M, Hescheler J, Nguemo F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In vitro reprogramming of somatic cells holds great potential to
serve as an autologous source of cells for tissue repair. However, major
difficulties in achieving this potential include obtaining homogeneous and stable
cells for transplantation. High electrical activity of cells such as
cardiomyocytes (CMs) is crucial for both, safety and efficiency of cell
replacement therapy. Moreover, the function of the cardiac pacemaker is
controlled by the activities of hyperpolarization-activated cyclic
nucleotide-gated (HCN) channels. Here we have examined changes in HCN gene
expression and function during cardiomyogenesis.
METHODS: We differentiated murine iPS cells selected by an undifferentiated
transcription factor 1 (UTF1) -promoter-driven G418 resistance to CMs in vitro
and characterized them by RT-PCR, immunocytochemistry, and electrophysiology.
RESULTS: As key cardiac markers alpha-actinin and cardiac troponin T could be
identified in derived CMs. Immunocytochemical staining of CMs showed the presence
of all HCN subunits (HCN1-4). Electrophysiology experiments revealed
developmental changes of action potentials and If currents as well as functional 
hormonal regulation and sensitivity to If channel blockers.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that iPS cells derived from UTF-selection give rise to
functional CMs in vitro, with established hormonal regulation pathways and
functionally expressed If current in a development-dependent manner; and have all
phenotypes with the pacemaker as predominant subtype. This might be of great
importance for transplantation purposes.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25277677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e108825. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108825.
eCollection 2014.

UTF1, a putative marker for spermatogonial stem cells in stallions.

Jung H(1), Roser JF(2), Yoon M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Biotechnology Science, Kyungpook National University,
Sangju, Korea. (2)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis,
Davis, California, United States of America. (3)Department of Animal and
Biotechnology Science, Kyungpook National University, Sangju, Korea; Department
of Horse, Companion and Wild Animal Science, Kyungpook National University,
Sangju, Korea.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) continuously undergo self-renewal and
differentiation to sustain spermatogenesis throughout adulthood in males. In
stallions, SSCs may be used for the production of progeny from geldings after
cryopreservation and therapy for infertile and subfertile stallions.
Undifferentiated cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) is a putative marker for
undifferentiated spermatogonia in humans and rats. The main purposes of this
study are to determine the following: 1) changes in the expression pattern of
UTF1 at various reproductive stages of stallions, 2) subpopulations of
spermatogonia that express UTF1. Testicular samples were collected and
categorized based on the age of the horses as follows: pre-pubertal (<1 yr),
pubertal (1-1.5 yr), post-pubertal (2-3 yr), and adult (4-8 yr). Western blot
analysis was utilized to determine the cross-activity of the UTF1 antibody to
horse testes tissues. Immunohistochemistry was conducted to investigate the UTF1 
expression pattern in germ cells at different reproductive stages. Whole mount
staining was applied to determine the subpopulation of UTF1-positive
spermatogonia. Immunohistological analysis showed that most germ cells in the
pre-pubertal and pubertal stages were immunolabeled with UTF1, whereas only a few
germ cells in the basal compartment of the seminiferous tubule cross-sections of 
post-pubertal and adult tissues were UTF1-positive. No staining was observed in
the Sertoli or Leydig cells at any reproductive stages. Whole mount staining
showed that A(s), A(pr), and chains of 4, 8, 16 A(al) spermatogonia were
immunolabeled with UTF1 in the post-pubertal stallion tubule. Isolated single
germ cells were also immunolabeled with UTF1. In conclusion, UTF1 is expressed in
undifferentiated spermatogonia, and its antibody can be used as a putative marker
for SSCs in stallions.

PMCID: PMC4182753
PMID: 25272017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Reprod. 2014 Nov;29(11):2497-511. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu232. Epub 2014 Sep
29.

Quantitative detection of human spermatogonia for optimization of spermatogonial 
stem cell culture.

Zheng Y(1), Thomas A(1), Schmidt CM(1), Dann CT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University, 800 E. Kirkwood Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405-7102, USA.
(2)Indiana University, 800 E. Kirkwood Ave, Bloomington, IN 47405-7102, USA
ctdann@indiana.edu.

STUDY QUESTION: Can human spermatogonia be detected in long-term primary
testicular cell cultures using validated, germ cell-specific markers of
spermatogonia?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Germ cell-specific markers of spermatogonia/spermatogonial stem
cells (SSCs) are detected in early (1-2 weeks) but not late (> 6 weeks) primary
testicular cell cultures; somatic cell markers are detected in late primary
testicular cell cultures.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The development of conditions for human SSC culture is
critically dependent on the ability to define cell types unequivocally and to
quantify spermatogonia/SSCs. Growth by somatic cells presents a major challenge
in the establishment of SSC cultures and therefore markers that define
spermatogonia/SSCs, but are not also expressed by testicular somatic cells, are
essential for accurate characterization of SSC cultures.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Testicular tissue from eight organ donors with
normal spermatogenesis was used for assay validation and establishing primary
testicular cell cultures.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immunofluorescence analysis of normal
human testicular tissue was used to validate antibodies (UTF1, SALL4, DAZL and
VIM) and then the antibodies were used to demonstrate that primary testicular
cells cultured in vitro for 1-2 weeks were composed of somatic cells and rare
germ cells. Primary testicular cell cultures were further characterized by
comparing to testicular somatic cell cultures using quantitative reverse
transcriptase PCR (UTF1, FGFR3, ZBTB16, GPR125, DAZL, GATA4 and VIM) and flow
cytometry (CD9 and SSEA4).
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: UTF1, FGFR3, DAZL and ZBTB16 qRT-PCR and
SSEA4 flow cytometry were validated for the sensitive, quantitative and specific 
detection of germ cells. In contrast, GPR125 mRNA and CD9 were found to be not
specific to germ cells because they were also expressed in testicular somatic
cell cultures. While the germ cell-specific markers were detected in early
primary testicular cell cultures (1-2 weeks), their expression steadily declined 
over time in vitro. After 6 weeks in culture only somatic cells were detected.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Different groups attempting SSC culture have
utilized different sources of human testes and minor differences in the
preparation and maintenance of the testicular cell cultures. Differences in
outcome may be explained by genetic background of the source tissue or technical 
differences.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The ability to propagate human SSCs in vitro 
is a prerequisite for proposed autologous transplantation therapy aimed at
restoring fertility to men who have been treated for childhood cancer. By
applying the assays validated here it will be possible to quantitatively compare 
human SSC culture conditions. The eventual development of conditions for
long-term propagation of human SSCs in vitro will greatly facilitate learning
about the basic biology of these cells and in turn the ability to use human SSCs 
in therapy.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: The experiments presented in this manuscript
were funded by a Project Development Team within the ICTSI NIH/NCRR Grant Number 
TR000006. The authors declare no competing interests.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4191455
PMID: 25267789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 24;8(2):327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.002. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

Genome-wide functional analysis reveals factors needed at the transition steps of
induced reprogramming.

Yang CS(1), Chang KY(2), Rana TM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA
01605, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail
Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Program for RNA Biology, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, Mail
Code 0762, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address: trana@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Aug 7;15(2):116-8.

Although transcriptome analysis can uncover the molecular changes that occur
during induced reprogramming, the functional requirements for a given factor
during stepwise cell-fate transitions are left unclear. Here, we used a
genome-wide RNAi screen and performed integrated transcriptome analysis to
identify key genes and cellular events required at the transition steps in
reprogramming. Genes associated with cell signaling pathways (e.g., Itpr1, Itpr2,
and Pdia3) constitute the major regulatory networks before cells acquire
pluripotency. Activation of a specific gene set (e.g., Utf1 or Tdgf1) is
important for mature induced pluripotent stem cell formation. Strikingly, a major
proportion of RNAi targets (~ 53% to 70%) includes genes whose expression levels 
are unchanged during reprogramming. Among these non-differentially expressed
genes, Dmbx1, Hnf4g, Nobox, and Asb4 are important, whereas Nfe2, Cdkn2aip, Msx3,
Dbx1, Lzts1, Gtf2i, and Ankrd22 are roadblocks to reprogramming. Together, our
results provide a wealth of information about gene functions required at
transition steps during reprogramming.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4152236
PMID: 25043178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Aug;16(4):235-40. doi: 10.1089/cell.2014.0010. Epub 2014 Jun
24.

The small molecule inhibitors PD0325091 and CHIR99021 reduce expression of
pluripotency-related genes in putative porcine induced pluripotent stem cells.

Petkov S(1), Hyttel P, Niemann H.

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute for Farm Animal Genetics (FLI) , Mariensee, Neustadt, Germany ,
31535.

Small molecule inhibitors of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)
and glycogen synthesis kinase 3 (Gsk3) have been essential in the establishment
and maintenance of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) from rats and from nonpermissive
mouse strains. However, conflicting results have been reported regarding their
efficacy in the establishment and maintenance of pluripotent stem cells from
other species. Here, we investigated the effects of PD0325091 (PD; a MEK
inhibitor) and CHIR99021 (CH; a Gsk3ß inhibitor) on the reprogramming of porcine 
fetal fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (piPSCs). Primary cultures
treated with the two inhibitors (2i) showed a reduced number of alkaline
phosphatase-positive colonies and a lower percentage of OCT4-expressing cells
compared with the cultures grown with basic medium, which was supplemented with
murine leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Moreover, the piPS-like cell lines
established under 2i conditions expressed significantly lower levels of
pluripotency markers, including OCT4, SOX2, REX1, UTF1, STELLA, TDH, and CHD1,
compared with the controls. To test the short-term effects of the small molecule 
inhibitors, piPS-like cells that had been established in basic culture medium
were cultured for five passages in medium supplemented with 2i or PD or CH
individually. In accordance with the first experiment, expression levels of most 
pluripotency genes declined in cultures treated with inhibitors, although the
response to each inhibitory molecule varied for the different genes. Results of
this study concur with previous reports and cast doubts on the effectiveness of
CH and PD in the reprogramming of porcine somatic cells to pluripotency.

PMID: 24960205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Fertil Steril. 2014 Aug;102(2):566-580.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.04.036.
Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Fluorescence- and magnetic-activated cell sorting strategies to isolate and
enrich human spermatogonial stem cells.

Valli H(1), Sukhwani M(2), Dovey SL(3), Peters KA(2), Donohue J(2), Castro CA(3),
Chu T(3), Marshall GR(4), Orwig KE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Developmental Biology Graduate Program,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
Magee-Womens Research Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (2)Magee-Womens
Research Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (3)Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Magee-Womens Research Institute, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. (4)Department of Natural Sciences, Chatham University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Department
of Molecular Genetics and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Magee-Womens Research
Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: orwigke@upmc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the molecular characteristics of human spermatogonia and 
optimize methods to enrich spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs).
DESIGN: Laboratory study using human tissues.
SETTING: Research institute.
PATIENT(S): Healthy adult human testicular tissue.
INTERVENTION(S): Human testicular tissue was fixed or digested with enzymes to
produce a cell suspension. Human testis cells were fractionated by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and magnetic-activated cell sorting
(MACS).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Immunostaining for selected markers, human-to-nude mouse
xenotransplantation assay.
RESULT(S): Immunohistochemistry costaining revealed the relative expression
patterns of SALL4, UTF1, ZBTB16, UCHL1, and ENO2 in human undifferentiated
spermatogonia as well as the extent of overlap with the differentiation marker
KIT. Whole mount analyses revealed that human undifferentiated spermatogonia
(UCHL1+) were typically arranged in clones of one to four cells whereas
differentiated spermatogonia (KIT+) were typically arranged in clones of eight or
more cells. The ratio of undifferentiated-to-differentiated spermatogonia is
greater in humans than in rodents. The SSC colonizing activity was enriched in
the THY1dim and ITGA6+ fractions of human testes sorted by FACS. ITGA6 was
effective for sorting human SSCs by MACS; THY1 and EPCAM were not.
CONCLUSION(S): Human spermatogonial differentiation correlates with increased
clone size and onset of KIT expression, similar to rodents. The
undifferentiated-to-differentiated developmental dynamics in human spermatogonia 
is different than rodents. THY1, ITGA6, and EPCAM can be used to enrich human SSC
colonizing activity by FACS, but only ITGA6 is amenable to high throughput
sorting by MACS.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4128386
PMID: 24890267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097820. eCollection
2014.

The epigenetic bivalency of core pancreatic ß-cell transcription factor genes
within mouse pluripotent embryonic stem cells is not affected by knockdown of the
polycomb repressive complex 2, SUZ12.

Wong JC(1), Jack MM(2), Li Y(1), O'Neill C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Kolling Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Royal North Shore Hospital,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

This study assesses changes in activator and repressor modifications to histones 
associated with the core transcription factor genes most highly upregulated or
downregulated in pancreatic ß-cells relative to expression in an embryonic stem
cell line. Epigenetic analysis of the Oct4, Utf1, Nanog and Sox2 (pluripotency)
and Pdx1, Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and MafA (pancreatic ß-cells) transcription factor genes
in embryonic stem cells and a ß-cell line (MIN6) showed the pluripotency genes
were enriched for active (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4 and histone 3
acetylated at lysine 9) and depleted of repressor modifications (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 9) around the
transcription start site in mouse embryonic stem cells (D3), and this was
reversed in MIN6 cells. The ß-cell transcription factors were bivalently enriched
for activating (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4) and repressor (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27) modifications in embryonic stem cells but were
monovalent for the activator modification (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4)
in the ß-cells. The polycomb repressor complex 2 acts as a histone 3 lysine 27
methylase and an essential component of this complex, SUZ12, was enriched at the 
ß-cell transcription factors in embryonic stem cells and was reduced MIN6.
Knock-down of SUZ12 in embryonic stem cells, however, did not reduce the level of
histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27 at ß-cell transcription factor loci or break
the transcriptional repression of these genes in embryonic stem cells. This study
shows the reduction in the total SUZ12 level was not a sufficient cause of the
resolution of the epigenetic bivalency of ß-cell transcription factors in
embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4028244
PMID: 24845830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug;95(4):251-9. doi: 10.1111/iep.12077. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

Expression profile of undifferentiated cell transcription factor 1 in normal and 
cancerous human epithelia.

Mouallif M(1), Albert A, Zeddou M, Ennaji MM, Delvenne P, Guenin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium; Laboratory of Virology and Hygiene & Microbiology, University Hassan
II-Mohammedia, Mohammedia, Morocco.

Undifferentiated cell Transcription Factor 1 (UTF1) is a chromatin-bound protein 
involved in stem cell differentiation. It was initially reported to be restricted
to stem cells or germinal tissues. However, recent work suggests that UTF1 is
also expressed in somatic cells and that its expression may increase during
carcinogenesis. To further clarify the expression profile of UTF1, we evaluated
UTF1 expression levels immunohistochemically in eight normal human epithelia
(from breast, prostate, endometrium, bladder, colon, oesophagus, lung and kidney)
and their corresponding tumours as well as in several epithelial cell lines. We
showed UTF1 staining in normal and tumour epithelial tissues, but with varying
intensities according to the tissue location. In vitro analyses also revealed
that UTF1 is expressed in somatic epithelial cell lines even in the absence of
Oct4A and Sox2, its two main known regulators. The comparison of UTF1 levels in
normal and tumoral tissues revealed significant overexpression in endometrial and
prostatic adenocarcinomas, whereas lower intensity of the staining was observed
in renal and colic tumours, suggesting a potential tissue-specific function of
UTF1. Altogether, these results highlight a potential dual role for UTF1, acting 
either as an oncogene or as a tumour suppressor depending on the tissue. These
findings also question its role as a specific marker for stem cells.

© 2014 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2014
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC4170967
PMID: 24738751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Feb 20;2(3):245-52. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.01.007.
eCollection 2014.

In Vivo and in vitro dynamics of undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription
factor 1.

Galonska C(1), Smith ZD(1), Meissner A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA ; Harvard Stem
Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA ; Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Pluripotent stem cells retain the ability to differentiate into the three germ
layers and germline. As a result, there is a major interest in characterizing
regulators that establish and maintain pluripotency. The network of transcription
factors continues to expand in complexity, and one factor, undifferentiated
embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1), has recently moved more into the
limelight. To facilitate the study of UTF1, we report the generation and
characterization of two reporter lines that enable efficient tracking, mapping,
and purification of endogenous UTF1. In particular, we include a built-in
biotinylation system in our targeted locus that allows efficient and reliable
pulldown. We also use this reporter to show the dynamic regulation of Utf1 in
distinct stem cell conditions and demonstrate its utility for reprogramming
studies. The multipurpose design of the reporter lines enables many directions of
future study and should lead to a better understanding of UTF1's diverse roles.

PMCID: PMC3964277
PMID: 24672748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Pathology. 2014 Apr;46(3):225-9. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000071.

The embryonic stem cell factor UTF1 serves as a reliable diagnostic marker for
germinomas.

Pantazis G(1), Harter PN, Capper D, Kohlhof P, Mittelbronn M, Schittenhelm J.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Neuropathology, University of Marburg 2Department of
Neuropathology, Edinger Institute (Institute of Neurology), Goethe University,
Frankfurt/Main 3Department of Neuropathology, Ruprecht-Karls-University of
Heidelberg 4Department of Pathology, Klinikum Stuttgart 5Department of
Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology and Neuropathology,
Eberhard-Karls-University of Tuebingen, Germany.

The transcription factor OCT4 is an established diagnostic marker for central
nervous system (CNS) germinoma. However, no data are available to date concerning
the expression of its downstream target undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (UTF1) in CNS germ cell tumours. We examined 21 CNS
germinomas and two mixed CNS germ cell tumours for UTF1 and the
post-transcriptional regulator LIN28 immunohistochemical expression. We compared 
the profile to established diagnostic germinoma markers and to the expression in 
six testicular and four metastatic germ cell tumours as well as 150 CNS tumours
of various backgrounds. We found UTF1 expression in 23 of 23 and LIN28 in 20 of
23 CNS germ cell tumours. The established germinoma markers cKIT (23/23), OCT4
(21/23) and placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) (19/21) were also frequently
expressed in our cohort. In terms of signal intensity and frequency, UTF1 showed 
similar results as cKIT but staining was superior to OCT4, PLAP and LIN28. OCT4
was absent in all CNS metastases and haemangioblastomas, while UTF1 was weakly
observed in two metastases.With a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 97% in
the detection of CNS germinomas, UTF1 serves as a new reliable alternative in the
diagnostic setting of CNS germ cell tumours.

PMID: 24614704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e85089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085089. eCollection
2014.

Efficient reprogramming of naïve-like induced pluripotent stem cells from porcine
adipose-derived stem cells with a feeder-independent and serum-free system.

Zhang Y(1), Wei C(1), Zhang P(1), Li X(1), Liu T(1), Pu Y(1), Li Y(1), Cao Z(1), 
Cao H(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anhui Provincial Laboratory for Local Livestock and Poultry Genetic Resource
Conservation and Bio-breeding, Department of Animal Science, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, Anhui, People's
Republic of China.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are somatic cells reprogrammed by ectopic 
expression of transcription factors or small molecule treatment, which resemble
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). They hold great promise for improving the generation
of genetically modified large animals. However, few porcine iPSCs (piPSCs) lines 
obtained currently can support development of cloned embryos. Here, we generated 
iPSCs from porcine adipose-derived stem cells (pADSCs), using drug-inducible
expression of defined human factors (Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc and Klf4). Reprogramming
of iPSCs from pADSCs was more efficient than from fibroblasts, regardless of
using feeder-independent or feeder-dependent manners. By addition of Lif-2i
medium containing mouse Lif, CHIR99021 and PD0325901 (Lif-2i), naïve-like piPSCs 
were obtained under feeder-independent and serum-free conditions. These
successfully reprogrammed piPSCs were characterized by short cell cycle
intervals, alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining, expression of Oct4, Sox2, Nanog,
SSEA3 and SSEA4, and normal karyotypes. The resemblance of piPSCs to naïve ESCs
was confirmed by their packed dome morphology, growth after single-cell
dissociation, Lif-dependency, up-regulation of Stella and Eras, low expression
levels of TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81 and MHC I and activation of both X chromosomes. Full
reprogramming of naïve-like piPSCs was evaluated by the significant up-regulation
of Lin28, Esrrb, Utf1 and Dppa5, differentiating into cell types of all three
germ layers in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, nuclear transfer embryos from
naïve-like piPSCs could develop to blastocysts with improved quality. Thus, we
provided an efficient protocol for generating naïve-like piPSCs from pADSCs in a 
feeder-independent and serum-free system with controlled regulation of exogenous 
genes, which may facilitate optimization of culture media and the production of
transgenic pigs.

PMCID: PMC3896366
PMID: 24465482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Reproduction. 2014 Jan 25;147(3):253-64. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0608. Print 2014
Mar.

Germ cell loss is associated with fading Lin28a expression in a mouse model for
Klinefelter's syndrome.

Werler S(1), Demond H, Damm OS, Ehmcke J, Middendorff R, Gromoll J, Wistuba J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproductive
Medicine and Andrology, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1 (D11),
48149 Muenster, Germany.

Klinefelter's syndrome is a male sex-chromosomal disorder (47,XXY), causing
hypogonadism, cognitive and metabolic deficits. The majority of patients are
infertile due to complete germ cell loss after puberty. As the depletion occurs
during development, the possibilities to study the underlying causes in humans
are limited. In this study, we used the 41,XX(Y*) mouse model to characterise the
germ line postnatally. We examined marker expression of testicular cells focusing
on the spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) and found that the number of germ cells
was approximately reduced fivefold at day 1pp in the 41,XX(Y*) mice, indicating
the loss to start prenatally. Concurrently, immunohistochemical SSC markers
LIN28A and PGP9.5 also showed decreased expression on day 1pp in the 41,XX(Y*)
mice (48.5 and 38.9% of all germ cells were positive), which dropped to 7.8 and
7.3% on 3dpp, and were no longer detectable on days 5 and 10pp respectively. The 
differences in PCNA-positive proliferating cells in XY* and XX(Y*) mice
dramatically increased towards day 10pp. The mRNA expression of the germ cell
markers Lin28a (Lin28), Pou5f1 (Oct4), Utf1, Ddx4 (Vasa), Dazl, and Fapb1 (Sycp3)
was reduced and the Lin28a regulating miRNAs were deregulated in the 41,XX(Y*)
mice. We suggest a model for the course of germ cell loss starting during the
intrauterine period. Neonatally, SSC marker expression by the already lowered
number of spermatogonia is reduced and continues fading during the first
postnatal week, indicating the surviving cells of the SSC population to be
disturbed in their stem cell characteristics. Subsequently, the entire germ line 
is then generally lost when entering meiosis.

PMID: 24298047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hum Reprod. 2013 Nov;28(11):3012-25. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det336. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

A combined approach facilitates the reliable detection of human spermatogonia in 
vitro.

Kossack N(1), Terwort N, Wistuba J, Ehmcke J, Schlatt S, Schöler H, Kliesch S,
Gromoll J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, Centre of Reproductive
Medicine and Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1
(D11), Münster 48149, Germany.

STUDY QUESTION: Does a combined approach allow for the unequivocal detection of
human germ cells and particularly of spermatogonia in vitro?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Based on our findings, we conclude that an approach comprising:
(i) the detailed characterization of patients and tissue samples prior to the
selection of biopsies, (ii) the use of unambiguous markers for the
characterization of cultures and (iii) the use of biopsies lacking the germ cell 
population as a negative control is the prerequisite for the establishment of
human germ cell cultures.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The use of non-specific marker genes and the failure to
assess the presence of testicular somatic cell types in germ cell cultures may
have led to a misinterpretation of results and the erroneous description of germ 
cells in previous studies.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Testicular biopsies were selected from a pool of
264 consecutively obtained biopsies. Based on the histological diagnosis,
biopsies with distinct histological phenotypes were selected (n = 35) to analyze 
the expression of germ cell and somatic cell markers. For germ cell culture
experiments, gonadotrophin levels and clinical data were used as selection
criteria resulting in the following two groups: (i) biopsies with qualitatively
intact spermatogenesis (n = 4) and (ii) biopsies from Klinefelter syndrome
Klinefelter patients lacking the germ cell population (n = 3).
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR analyses
were performed to evaluate the specificity of 18 selected germ cell and 3 somatic
marker genes. Cell specificity of individual markers was subsequently validated
using immunohistochemistry. Finally, testicular cell cultures were established
and were analyzed after 10 days for the expression of germ cell- (UTF1, FGFR3,
MAGE A4, DDX4) and somatic cell-specific markers (SMA, VIM, LHCGR) at the RNA and
the protein levels.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Interestingly, only 9 out of 18 marker genes
reflected the presence of germ cells and cell specificity could be validated
using immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, VIM, SMA and LHCGR were found to reflect
the presence of testicular somatic cells at the RNA and the protein levels. Using
this validated marker panel and biopsies lacking the germ cell population (n = 3)
as a negative control, we demonstrated that germ cell cultures containing
spermatogonia can be established from biopsies with normal spermatogenesis (n =
4) and that these cultures can be maintained for the period of 10 days. However, 
marker profiling has to be performed at regular time points as the composition of
testicular cell types may continuously change under longer term culture
conditions.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: There are significant differences regarding the
spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) system and spermatogenesis between rodents and
primates. It is therefore possible that marker genes that do not reflect the
presence of spermatogonia in the human are specific for spermatogonia in other
animal models.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: While some studies have reported that human
SSCs can be maintained in vitro and show characteristics of pluripotency, the
germ cell origin and the differentiation potential of these cells were
subsequently called into question. This study provides critical insights into
possible sources for the misinterpretation of results regarding the presence of
germ cells in human testicular cell cultures and our findings can therefore help 
to avoid conflicting reports in the future.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This project was supported by the Stem Cell 
Network North Rhine-Westphalia and the Innovative Medical Research of the
University of Münster Medical School (Grant KO111014). In addition, it was funded
by the DFG-Research Unit FOR 1041 Germ Cell Potential (GR 1547/11-1 and SCHL
394/11-2), the BMBF (01GN0809/10) and the IZKF (CRA 03/09). The authors declare
that there is no conflict of interest.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

PMID: 24001715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e68119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068119. Print 2013.

In vivo function and evolution of the eutherian-specific pluripotency marker
UTF1.

Nishimoto M(1), Katano M, Yamagishi T, Hishida T, Kamon M, Suzuki A, Hirasaki M, 
Nabeshima Y, Nabeshima Y, Katsura Y, Satta Y, Deakin JE, Graves JA, Kuroki Y, Ono
R, Ishino F, Ema M, Takahashi S, Kato H, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Radioisotope Experimental Laboratory, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, Yamane Hidaka, Saitama, Japan.
masamasa@saitama-med.ac.jp

Embryogenesis in placental mammals is sustained by exquisite interplay between
the embryo proper and placenta. UTF1 is a developmentally regulated gene
expressed in both cell lineages. Here, we analyzed the consequence of loss of the
UTF1 gene during mouse development. We found that homozygous UTF1 mutant newborn 
mice were significantly smaller than wild-type or heterozygous mutant mice,
suggesting that placental insufficiency caused by the loss of UTF1 expression in 
extra-embryonic ectodermal cells at least in part contributed to this phenotype. 
We also found that the effects of loss of UTF1 expression in embryonic stem cells
on their pluripotency were very subtle. Genome structure and sequence comparisons
revealed that the UTF1 gene exists only in placental mammals. Our analyses of a
family of genes with homology to UTF1 revealed a possible mechanism by which
placental mammals have evolved the UTF1 genes.

PMCID: PMC3706607
PMID: 23874519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jun 14;435(4):551-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.100. Epub 2013 May 9.

Myc binds the pluripotency factor Utf1 through the basic-helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper domain.

Laskowski AI(1), Knoepfler PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis
School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

In order to elucidate the function of Myc in the maintenance of pluripotency and 
self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), we screened for novel
ESC-specific interactors of Myc by mass spectrometry. Undifferentiated embryonic 
cell transcription factor 1 (Utf1) was identified in the screen as a putative Myc
binding protein in mESCs. We found that Myc and Utf1 directly interact. Utf1 is a
chromatin-associated factor required for maintaining pluripotency and
self-renewal in mESCs. It can also replace c-myc during induced pluripotent stem 
cell (iPSC) generation with relatively high efficiency, and shares target genes
with Myc in mESCs highlighting a potentially redundant functional role between
Myc and Utf1. A large region of Utf1 was found to be necessary for direct
interaction with N-Myc, while the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper domain of
N-Myc is necessary for direct interaction with Utf1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3694802
PMID: 23665319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jul;34(7):1660-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt102. Epub 2013 Mar 
27.

Undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor-1 (UTF1) inhibits the growth
of cervical cancer cells by transactivating p27Kip1.

Wu XL(1), Zheng PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University of Medical College, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.

Undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor-1 (UTF1) is an important
transcription factor during development, which plays critical roles in cell fate 
determination. However, its expression and function in somatic tissues remain
unclear. Here, we investigated the expression pattern of the UTF1 in the human
normal and cancerous lesions of cervix and found that UTF1 was downregulated in
cervical carcinogenesis, which was related to the hypermethylation of UTF1
promoter. Exogenous expression of UTF1 resulted in the significant inhibition of 
cell proliferation in vitro and tumorigenesis in vivo through attenuating cell
cycle arrest via increasing the level of p27 (Kip1) . Luciferase reporter assay
indicated that the region containing an intact activating transcription factor
site between nucleotides -517 and -388 of the p27 (Kip1) promoter was
indispensable for its activation by UTF1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis 
confirmed the physical interaction between UTF1 and the p27 (Kip1) promoter.
Taken together, our findings reveal that UTF1 attenuates cell proliferation and
is inactivated in cervical carcinogenesis through epigenetic modification, which 
strongly supports that UTF1 is a potential tumor suppressor.

PMID: 23536577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biomaterials. 2013 May;34(14):3571-80. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.01.073.
Epub 2013 Feb 17.

A feeder-free, defined three-dimensional polyethylene glycol-based extracellular 
matrix niche for culture of human embryonic stem cells.

Jang M(1), Lee ST, Kim JW, Yang JH, Yoon JK, Park JC, Ryoo HM, van der Vlies AJ, 
Ahn JY, Hubbell JA, Song YS, Lee G, Lim JM.

Author information: 
(1)WCU Biomodulation Program, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

We report optimization of a serum- and feeder-free, three-dimensional (3D) niche 
created with a synthetic polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based extracellular matrix for
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Three hESC lines (H9, H1 and 
Novo) were cultured in hydrogels of different mechanical properties, and cellular
morphology and activity were compared to culture in feeder-free or
feeder-containing two-dimensional (2D) niches. Significant effects of PEG
concentration (5, 7.5, 10, 12.5 or 15%) and vinyl sulfone-functionalized PEG
multiarm number (3, 4 or 8) on hESC morphology were detected in the H9 line. Cell
growth was maximal with an 8 multiarm architecture of any PEG concentration,
which yielded the highest expression of stemness-related genes. Alkaline
phosphatase activity in cultured H9 cells was similar between the optimized
feeder-free 3D and the feeder-containing 2D systems. However, increased
expression of the KLF4, CDH1, TERT, SOX2, and UTF1 genes and expression of
pluripotency-specific SSEA-4, Oct3/4, Nanog, Tra-1-60 and Tra-1-81 were detected 
in the 3D-cultured hESC clumps. H1 and Novo cell lines also expanded in the
optimized 3D system, which maintain stemness properties. Although different
proliferation activities were detected among three lines, the difference was
decreased after the 3D culture. These results demonstrate that chemically
defined, acellular niches created using PEG-based hydrogels have the potential to
support hESC self-renewal. Modulation of 3D properties can create various models 
for cell transformation and differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23422594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055226. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Feeder-free generation and long-term culture of human induced pluripotent stem
cells using pericellular matrix of decidua derived mesenchymal cells.

Fukusumi H(1), Shofuda T, Kanematsu D, Yamamoto A, Suemizu H, Nakamura M,
Yamasaki M, Ohgushi M, Sasai Y, Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka
National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.

Human ES cells (hESCs) and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are
usually generated and maintained on living feeder cells like mouse embryonic
fibroblasts or on a cell-free substrate like Matrigel. For clinical applications,
a quality-controlled, xenobiotic-free culture system is required to minimize
risks from contaminating animal-derived pathogens and immunogens. We previously
reported that the pericellular matrix of decidua-derived mesenchymal cells
(PCM-DM) is an ideal human-derived substrate on which to maintain hiPSCs/hESCs.
In this study, we examined whether PCM-DM could be used for the generation and
long-term stable maintenance of hiPSCs. Decidua-derived mesenchymal cells (DMCs) 
were reprogrammed by the retroviral transduction of four factors (OCT4, SOX2,
KLF4, c-MYC) and cultured on PCM-DM. The established hiPSC clones expressed
alkaline phosphatase, hESC-specific genes and cell-surface markers, and
differentiated into three germ layers in vitro and in vivo. At over 20 passages, 
the hiPSCs cultured on PCM-DM held the same cellular properties with genome
integrity as those at early passages. Global gene expression analysis showed that
the GDF3, FGF4, UTF1, and XIST expression levels varied during culture, and GATA6
was highly expressed under our culture conditions; however, these gene
expressions did not affect the cells' pluripotency. PCM-DM can be conveniently
prepared from DMCs, which have a high proliferative potential. Our findings
indicate that PCM-DM is a versatile and practical human-derived substrate that
can be used for the feeder-cell-free generation and long-term stable maintenance 
of hiPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3561375
PMID: 23383118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 1;22(9):1455-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0637. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Reviewing and updating the major molecular markers for stem cells.

Calloni R(1), Cordero EA, Henriques JA, Bonatto D.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Molecular e Biotecnologia, Centro de Biotecnologia da
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Stem cells (SC) are able to self-renew and to differentiate into many types of
committed cells, making SCs interesting for cellular therapy. However, the pool
of SCs in vivo and in vitro consists of a mix of cells at several stages of
differentiation, making it difficult to obtain a homogeneous population of SCs
for research. Therefore, it is important to isolate and characterize unambiguous 
molecular markers that can be applied to SCs. Here, we review classical and new
candidate molecular markers that have been established to show a molecular
profile for human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs),
and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The commonly cited markers for embryonic
ESCs are Nanog, Oct-4, Sox-2, Rex-1, Dnmt3b, Lin-28, Tdgf1, FoxD3, Tert, Utf-1,
Gal, Cx43, Gdf3, Gtcm1, Terf1, Terf2, Lefty A, and Lefty B. MSCs are primarily
identified by the expression of CD13, CD29, CD44, CD49e, CD54, CD71, CD73, CD90, 
CD105, CD106, CD166, and HLA-ABC and lack CD14, CD31, CD34, CD45, CD62E, CD62L,
CD62P, and HLA-DR expression. HSCs are mainly isolated based on the expression of
CD34, but the combination of this marker with CD133 and CD90, together with a
lack of CD38 and other lineage markers, provides the most homogeneous pool of
SCs. Here, we present new and alternative markers for SCs, along with microRNA
profiles, for these cells.

PMCID: PMC3629778
PMID: 23336433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Dec 7;11(6):732-4. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.11.012.

Utf1: Goldilocks for ESC bivalency.

Laskowski AI(1), Knoepfler PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis
School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2012 Oct 26;151(3):576-89.

Recently in Cell, Jia et al. (2012) reported novel Utf1-controlled mechanisms of 
maintaining pluripotency and self-renewal in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Utf1
buffers bivalent gene expression by competitive binding with polycomb repressive 
complex 2 and initiation of mRNA degradation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684620
PMID: 23217417  [PubMed]


31. Cell. 2012 Oct 26;151(3):576-89. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.023.

Regulation of pluripotency and self- renewal of ESCs through epigenetic-threshold
modulation and mRNA pruning.

Jia J(1), Zheng X, Hu G, Cui K, Zhang J, Zhang A, Jiang H, Lu B, Yates J 3rd, Liu
C, Zhao K, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution for Science, 3520 San Martin
Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Dec 7;11(6):732-4.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Dec;13(12):826-7.

Embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency requires bivalent epigenetic modifications
of key developmental genes regulated by various transcription factors and
chromatin-modifying enzymes. How these factors coordinate with one another to
maintain the bivalent chromatin state so that ESCs can undergo rapid self-renewal
while retaining pluripotency is poorly understood. We report that Utf1, a target 
of Oct4 and Sox2, is a bivalent chromatin component that buffers poised states of
bivalent genes. By limiting PRC2 loading and histone 3 lysine-27 trimethylation, 
Utf1 sets proper activation thresholds for bivalent genes. It also promotes
nuclear tagging of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) transcribed from insufficiently
silenced bivalent genes for cytoplasmic degradation through mRNA decapping. These
opposing functions of Utf1 promote coordinated differentiation. The mRNA
degradation function also ensures rapid cell proliferation by blocking the
Myc-Arf feedback control. Thus, Utf1 couples the core pluripotency factors with
Myc and PRC2 networks to promote the pluripotency and proliferation of ESCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3575637
PMID: 23101626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 1;22(1):124-35. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0382. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Derivation and characterization of sleeping beauty transposon-mediated porcine
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Kues WA(1), Herrmann D, Barg-Kues B, Haridoss S, Nowak-Imialek M, Buchholz T,
Streeck M, Grebe A, Grabundzija I, Merkert S, Martin U, Hall VJ, Rasmussen MA,
Ivics Z, Hyttel P, Niemann H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Farm Animal Genetics, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Mariensee,
Germany. wilfried.kues@fli.bund.de

The domestic pig is an important large animal model for preclinical testing of
novel cell therapies. Recently, we produced pluripotency reporter pigs in which
the Oct4 promoter drives expression of the enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP). Here, we reprogrammed Oct4-EGFP fibroblasts employing the nonviral
Sleeping Beauty transposon system to deliver the reprogramming factors Oct4,
Sox2, Klf4, and cMyc. Successful reprogramming to a pluripotent state was
indicated by changes in cell morphology and reactivation of the Oct4-EGFP
reporter. The transposon-reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells showed
long-term proliferation in vitro over >40 passages, expressed transcription
factors typical of embryonic stem cells, including OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, REX1,
ESRRB, DPPA5, and UTF1 and surface markers of pluripotency, including SSEA-1 and 
TRA-1-60. In vitro differentiation resulted in derivatives of the 3 germ layers. 
Upon injection of putative iPS cells under the skin of immunodeficient mice, we
observed teratomas in 3 of 6 cases. These results form the basis for in-depth
studies toward the derivation of porcine iPS cells, which hold great promise for 
preclinical testing of novel cell therapies in the pig model.

PMID: 22989381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell. 2012 Sep 14;150(6):1209-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.08.023.

Single-cell expression analyses during cellular reprogramming reveal an early
stochastic and a late hierarchic phase.

Buganim Y(1), Faddah DA, Cheng AW, Itskovich E, Markoulaki S, Ganz K, Klemm SL,
van Oudenaarden A, Jaenisch R.

Author information: 
(1)The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Oct 5;11(4):445-7.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 Nov;13(11):755.

During cellular reprogramming, only a small fraction of cells become induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Previous analyses of gene expression during
reprogramming were based on populations of cells, impeding single-cell level
identification of reprogramming events. We utilized two gene expression
technologies to profile 48 genes in single cells at various stages during the
reprogramming process. Analysis of early stages revealed considerable variation
in gene expression between cells in contrast to late stages. Expression of Esrrb,
Utf1, Lin28, and Dppa2 is a better predictor for cells to progress into iPSCs
than expression of the previously suggested reprogramming markers Fbxo15, Fgf4,
and Oct4. Stochastic gene expression early in reprogramming is followed by a late
hierarchical phase with Sox2 being the upstream factor in a gene expression
hierarchy. Finally, downstream factors derived from the late phase, which do not 
include Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc, and Nanog, can activate the pluripotency
circuitry.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3457656
PMID: 22980981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Rep. 2012 Sep 27;2(3):440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.07.015. Epub 2012
Aug 23.

Direct differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into haploid spermatogenic
cells.

Easley CA 4th(1), Phillips BT, McGuire MM, Barringer JM, Valli H, Hermann BP,
Simerly CR, Rajkovic A, Miki T, Orwig KE, Schatten GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15108, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
have been shown to differentiate into primordial germ cells (PGCs) but not into
spermatogonia, haploid spermatocytes, or spermatids. Here, we show that hESCs and
hiPSCs differentiate directly into advanced male germ cell lineages, including
postmeiotic, spermatid-like cells, in vitro without genetic manipulation.
Furthermore, our procedure mirrors spermatogenesis in vivo by differentiating
PSCs into UTF1-, PLZF-, and CDH1-positive spermatogonia-like cells; HIWI- and
HILI-positive spermatocyte-like cells; and haploid cells expressing acrosin,
transition protein 1, and protamine 1 (proteins that are uniquely found in
spermatids and/or sperm). These spermatids show uniparental genomic imprints
similar to those of human sperm on two loci: H19 and IGF2. These results
demonstrate that male PSCs have the ability to differentiate directly into
advanced germ cell lineages and may represent a novel strategy for studying
spermatogenesis in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3698576
PMID: 22921399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42704. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042704. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

Aberrant promoter methylation and expression of UTF1 during cervical
carcinogenesis.

Guenin S(1), Mouallif M, Deplus R, Lampe X, Krusy N, Calonne E, Delbecque K,
Kridelka F, Fuks F, Ennaji MM, Delvenne P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de
Génoprotéomique Appliquée-Cancer, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
samuel.guenin@gmail.com

Promoter methylation profiles are proposed as potential prognosis and/or
diagnosis biomarkers in cervical cancer. Up to now, little is known about the
promoter methylation profile and expression pattern of stem cell (SC) markers
during tumor development. In this study, we were interested to identify SC genes 
methylation profiles during cervical carcinogenesis. A genome-wide promoter
methylation screening revealed a strong hypermethylation of Undifferentiated cell
Transcription Factor 1 (UTF1) promoter in cervical cancer in comparison with
normal ectocervix. By direct bisulfite pyrosequencing of DNA isolated from
liquid-based cytological samples, we showed that UTF1 promoter methylation
increases with lesion severity, the highest level of methylation being found in
carcinoma. This hypermethylation was associated with increased UTF1 mRNA and
protein expression. By using quantitative RT-PCR and Western Blot, we showed that
both UTF1 mRNA and protein are present in epithelial cancer cell lines, even in
the absence of its two main described regulators Oct4A and Sox2. Moreover, by
immunofluorescence, we confirmed the nuclear localisation of UTF1 in cell lines. 
Surprisingly, direct bisulfite pyrosequencing revealed that the inhibition of DNA
methyltransferase by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine was associated with decreased UTF1
gene methylation and expression in two cervical cancer cell lines of the four
tested. These findings strongly suggest that UTF1 promoter methylation profile
might be a useful biomarker for cervical cancer diagnosis and raise the questions
of its role during epithelial carcinogenesis and of the mechanisms regulating its
expression.

PMCID: PMC3411846
PMID: 22880087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nature. 2012 Aug 16;488(7411):409-13. doi: 10.1038/nature11272.

The H3K27 demethylase Utx regulates somatic and germ cell epigenetic
reprogramming.

Mansour AA(1), Gafni O, Weinberger L, Zviran A, Ayyash M, Rais Y, Krupalnik V,
Zerbib M, Amann-Zalcenstein D, Maza I, Geula S, Viukov S, Holtzman L, Pribluda A,
Canaani E, Horn-Saban S, Amit I, Novershtern N, Hanna JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be derived from somatic cells by
ectopic expression of different transcription factors, classically Oct4 (also
known as Pou5f1), Sox2, Klf4 and Myc (abbreviated as OSKM). This process is
accompanied by genome-wide epigenetic changes, but how these chromatin
modifications are biochemically determined requires further investigation. Here
we show in mice and humans that the histone H3 methylated Lys<U+2009>27 (H3K27)
demethylase Utx (also known as Kdm6a) regulates the efficient induction, rather
than maintenance, of pluripotency. Murine embryonic stem cells lacking Utx can
execute lineage commitment and contribute to adult chimaeric animals; however,
somatic cells lacking Utx fail to robustly reprogram back to the ground state of 
pluripotency. Utx directly partners with OSK reprogramming factors and uses its
histone demethylase catalytic activity to facilitate iPSC formation. Genomic
analysis indicates that Utx depletion results in aberrant dynamics of H3K27me3
repressive chromatin demethylation in somatic cells undergoing reprogramming. The
latter directly hampers the derepression of potent pluripotency promoting gene
modules (including Sall1, Sall4 and Utf1), which can cooperatively substitute for
exogenous OSK supplementation in iPSC formation. Remarkably, Utx safeguards the
timely execution of H3K27me3 demethylation observed in embryonic day 10.5-11
primordial germ cells (PGCs), and Utx-deficient PGCs show cell-autonomous
aberrant epigenetic reprogramming dynamics during their embryonic maturation in
vivo. Subsequently, this disrupts PGC development by embryonic day 12.5, and
leads to diminished germline transmission in mouse chimaeras generated from
Utx-knockout pluripotent cells. Thus, we identify Utx as a novel mediator with
distinct functions during the re-establishment of pluripotency and germ cell
development. Furthermore, our findings highlight the principle that molecular
regulators mediating loss of repressive chromatin during in vivo germ cell
reprogramming can be co-opted during in vitro reprogramming towards ground state 
pluripotency.

PMID: 22801502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Histochem Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;138(5):759-72. doi: 10.1007/s00418-012-0991-7. Epub
2012 Jul 10.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 is highly expressed in rarely dividing human 
type A spermatogonia.

von Kopylow K(1), Staege H, Schulze W, Will H, Kirchhoff C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Andrology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistr.
52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

Human spermatogonia (Spg) and their fetal precursors express fibroblast growth
factor receptor 3 (FGFR3). To further elucidate the role of FGFR3 in the control 
of Spg self-renewal, proliferation, and/or differentiation, and to narrow down
the FGFR3-positive cell type(s) in the normal adult human testis, tissue sections
and whole mount preparations of seminiferous tubules were analyzed combining
immunofluorescence and confocal fluorescence microscopy. FGFR3 protein was
chiefly observed in cellular membranes and cytoplasmic vesicles of a
subpopulation of type A Spg, which comprised the chromatin rarefaction
zone-containing type A(dark). Cytoplasmic expression of FGFR3 and nuclear
expression of proliferation-associated antigen KI-67 were mutually exclusive.
Similarly, FGFR3-positive Spg were negative for Doublesex and Mab-3 related
transcription factor 1 (DMRT1). By contrast, undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (UTF1) and survival time-associated PHD finger in ovarian 
cancer 1 protein (SPOC1) were co-expressed in the nuclei of FGFR3-positive Spg.
Whole mounted seminiferous tubules illustrated the clonogenic arrangement of the 
FGFR3/UTF1 double-positive Spg, which mainly occurred as pairs or quadruplets
and, different from the KIT-positive Spg, showed no overlap with KI-67 labeled
clusters. Taken together, in the adult human testis, FGFR3 expression is a
feature of small clones of rarely dividing type A Spg which resemble
"undifferentiated" Spg, including the spermatogonial stem cells.

PMID: 22777346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Aug;9(4):523-30. doi: 10.1007/s12015-011-9342-7.

Use of UTF1 genetic control elements as iPSC reporter.

Morshedi A(1), Soroush Noghabi M, Dröge P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, Singapore, Singapore 637551.

The reprogramming of adult somatic cells into an embryonic stem cell (ESC) state 
by various means has opened a new chapter in basic and applied life science.
While this technology will create great opportunities for regenerative medicine, 
the more immediate impact is likely to be found in human disease modeling and
drug testing/development. An important aspect in the latter contexts is the
ability to reliably monitor the pluripotent stem cell state, in particular with
respect to human cell reprogramming using patient-specific somatic cells and
high-throughput screens. Undifferentiated transcription factor 1 (UTF1) belongs
to the core transcriptional network characterizing pluripotency. UTF1 is involved
in ESC-specific chromatin organization, and its expression pattern during cell
reprogramming and subsequent differentiation appears to be tightly connected with
the pluripotent stem cell state. Here, we capitalized on these features and
generated a reliable reporter system that was used to monitor induced pluripotent
stem cell (iPSC) formation and subsequent differentiation. Our reporter cassette 
comprises less than 2.3 kb and remains functional during many cell passages after
genomic integration. The fact that the human UTF1 genetic control elements work
in a mouse background and the demonstrated functionality of the reporter in an
epigenetic state further qualifies this system as a versatile new tool for iPSC
research.

PMID: 22205530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;44(2):350-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.11.008.
Epub 2011 Nov 17.

UTF1 deficiency promotes retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation in P19
embryonal carcinoma cells.

Lin CH(1), Yang CH, Chen YR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, 101, Section
2, Kuang-Fu Road, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan.

UTF1 (undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1) is a marker for the
pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. We found that UTF1-deficient clones, which 
were isolated from P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, showed higher
neuron-differentiating potentials than the parental cell line. Consistent with
this result, suppression of UTF1 expression in P19 cells by RNA interference
enhanced retinoic acid (RA)-induced neuronal differentiation. Moreover,
reconstitution of UTF1 expression in UTF1-deficient clones decreased their
ability to undergo neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, the growth rates of
UTF1-deficient P19 cells did not differ from that of parental cells in adherent
cultures, but were increased in embryoid bodies during RA-induced
differentiation. Furthermore, different from the parental cells, UTF1-deficient
P19 clones could proceed to neuronal differentiation without forming embryoid
bodies. Based on these results we proposed that endogenous UTF1 prevented P19 EC 
cells from neuronal differentiation, and that the loss of UTF1 directed EC cells 
toward the neuronal fate.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22107969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Reproduction. 2012 Jan 1;143(1):45-57. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0290. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Differential marker protein expression specifies rarefaction zone-containing
human Adark spermatogonia.

von Kopylow K(1), Staege H, Spiess AN, Schulze W, Will H, Primig M, Kirchhoff C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Andrology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse
52, Hamburg, Germany.

It is unclear whether the distinct nuclear morphologies of human A(dark) (Ad) and
A(pale) (Ap) spermatogonia are manifestations of different stages of germ cell
development or phases of the mitotic cycle, or whether they may reflect still
unknown molecular differences. According to the classical description by
Clermont, human dark type A spermatogonium (Ad) may contain one, sometimes two or
three nuclear 'vacuolar spaces' representing chromatin rarefaction zones. These
structures were readily discerned in paraffin sections of human testis tissue
during immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence analyses and thus represented
robust morphological markers for our study. While a majority of the marker
proteins tested did not discriminate between spermatogonia with and without
chromatin rarefaction zones, doublesex- and mab-3-related transcription factor
(DMRT1), tyrosine kinase receptor c-Kit/CD117 (KIT) and proliferation-associated 
antigen Ki-67 (KI-67) appeared to be restricted to subtypes which lacked the
rarefaction zones. Conversely, exosome component 10 (EXOSC10) was found to
accumulate within the rarefaction zones, which points to a possible role of this 
nuclear domain in RNA processing.

PMID: 22046055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Stem Cells. 2011 Aug;29(8):1176-85. doi: 10.1002/stem.666.

Activin/Nodal signaling controls divergent transcriptional networks in human
embryonic stem cells and in endoderm progenitors.

Brown S(1), Teo A, Pauklin S, Hannan N, Cho CH, Lim B, Vardy L, Dunn NR, Trotter 
M, Pedersen R, Vallier L.

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Activin/Nodal signaling is necessary to maintain pluripotency of human embryonic 
stem cells (hESCs) and to induce their differentiation toward endoderm. However, 
the mechanisms by which Activin/Nodal signaling achieves these opposite functions
remain unclear. To unravel these mechanisms, we examined the transcriptional
network controlled in hESCs by Smad2 and Smad3, which represent the direct
effectors of Activin/Nodal signaling. These analyses reveal that Smad2/3
participate in the control of the core transcriptional network characterizing
pluripotency, which includes Oct-4, Nanog, FoxD3, Dppa4, Tert, Myc, and UTF1. In 
addition, similar experiments performed on endoderm cells confirm that a broad
part of the transcriptional network directing differentiation is downstream of
Smad2/3. Therefore, Activin/Nodal signaling appears to control divergent
transcriptional networks in hESCs and in endoderm. Importantly, we observed an
overlap between the transcriptional network downstream of Nanog and Smad2/3 in
hESCs; whereas, functional studies showed that both factors cooperate to control 
the expression of pluripotency genes. Therefore, the effect of Activin/Nodal
signaling on pluripotency and differentiation could be dictated by tissue
specific Smad2/3 partners such as Nanog, explaining the mechanisms by which
signaling pathways can orchestrate divergent cell fate decisions.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21630377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Exp Pathol. 2011 Oct;92(5):326-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2011.00769.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Embryonic stem cell factors undifferentiated transcription factor-1 (UFT-1) and
reduced expression protein-1 (REX-1) are widely expressed in human skin and may
be involved in cutaneous differentiation but not in stem cell fate determination.

Reinisch CM(1), Mildner M, Petzelbauer P, Pammer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Undifferentiated transcription factor-1 (UTF-1) and reduced expression protein-1 
(REX-1) are used as markers for the undifferentiated state of pluripotent stem
cells. Because no highly specific cytochemical marker for epidermal stem cells
has yet been identified, we investigated the expression pattern of these markers 
in human epidermis and skin tumours by immunohistochemistry and in keratinocyte
cell cultures. Both presumed stem cell markers were widely expressed in the
epidermis and skin appendages. Distinct expression was found in the matrix cells 
of the hair shaft. Differentiation of human primary keratinocytes (KC) in vitro
strongly downregulated UTF-1 and REX-1 expression. In addition, REX-1 was
upregulated in squamous cell carcinomas, indicating a possible role of this
transcription factor in malignant tumour formation. Our data point to a role for 
these proteins not only in maintaining KC stem cell populations, but also in
proliferation and differentiation of matrix cells of the shaft and also
suprabasal KC.

© 2011 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2011
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC3193146
PMID: 21446939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 May;20(5):851-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0291. Epub 2010 Dec 
6.

Comparative analysis of the retinal potential of embryonic stem cells and
amniotic fluid-derived stem cells.

Decembrini S(1), Cananzi M, Gualdoni S, Battersby A, Allen N, Pearson RA, Ali RR,
De Coppi P, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.

Photoreceptors have recently been generated from mouse and human embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), although ethics concerns impede their utilization for cell
replacement therapy for retinal disease. Extra-embryonic tissues have received
attention as alternative therapeutic sources of stem cells. Human and mouse
amniotic fluid-derived stem cells (AFCs) have been reported to be multipotent and
express embryonic and adult stem cell markers. Here, in vitro conditions that
generate retinal cells from ESCs were used to analyze and compare the retinal
potential of murine AFCs and ESCs. We show that AFCs express pluripotency markers
(Nanog, Sox2, and Oct3/4) as well as retinal transcription factor genes (Et,
Lhx2, Tll1, Six6, Otx2, Pax6, and Fgf15). AFCs from amniotic fluid of Fgf15.gfp, 
Nrl.gfp, and Crx.gfp embryos cultured in retinal proliferation and
differentiation conditions failed to switch on these retinal transgenes. AFCs
cultured in retinal-promoting conditions, effective on ESCs, showed reduced
expression of retinal markers. Retinal co-cultures activated retinal genes in
ESCs but not in AFCs, and migration assays in retinal explants showed limited
migration of AFCs compared with ESCs. Unlike ESCs, AFCs do not express the early 
embryonic ectodermal gene Utf1 and Western analysis of AFCs identified only the B
isoform of Oct3/4, rather than the isoform A present in ESCs. We conclude that
AFCs have restricted potential and differ considerably from ESCs and retinal
progenitor cells. Reprogramming to induce pluripotency or new differentiation
protocols will be required to confer retinal potential to AFCs as expression of a
subset of pluripotency and retinal markers is not sufficient.

PMID: 20939691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Oct;134(4):604-12. doi: 10.1309/AJCPB44HBKINJNYU.

Expression of UTF1 in primary and metastatic testicular germ cell tumors.

Wang P(1), Li J, Allan RW, Guo CC, Peng Y, Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Beijing, China.

We immunohistochemically evaluated UTF1 in 104 primary and 68 metastatic
testicular germ cell tumors and 339 non-germ cell tumors. The percentage of tumor
cells stained was semiquantitatively scored (0, no tumor cell staining; 1+, =30% 
of cells; 2+, 31%-60% of cells; 3+, 61%-90% of cells; 4+, >90% of cells).
Staining intensity (nuclear) was scored as weak, moderate, or strong. UTF1
staining was seen in all 56 intratubular germ cell neoplasias, unclassified type 
(2+, 1; 3+, 2; 4+, 53; weak, 4; moderate, 49; strong, 3), all 72 seminomas (1+,
2; 2+, 4; 3+, 8; 4+, 58; weak, 10; moderate, 33; strong, 29), and 59 embryonal
carcinomas (3+, 2; 4+, 57; moderate, 1; strong, 58). Weak UTF1 staining was seen 
in 15 of 37 yolk sac tumors (1+, 10; 2+, 2; 3+, 2; 4+, 1). All 34 teratomas, 9
choriocarcinomas, and 6 spermatocytic seminomas were negative for UTF1 staining. 
Among the 339 non-germ cell tumors, only 18 showed weak UTF1 staining (1+ to 4+).
Normal prepubertal and postpubertal spermatogonia showed weak to strong UTF1
staining. UTF1 was differentially expressed in testicular germ cell tumors.
Strong UTF1 staining can be used for diagnosing embryonal carcinoma and seminoma.
UTF1 expression in spermatogonia suggests its possible role in spermatogenesis
and renewal of spermatogonia.

PMID: 20855642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1703-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.497.

Undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 regulates ESC chromatin
organization and gene expression.

Kooistra SM(1), van den Boom V, Thummer RP, Johannes F, Wardenaar R, Tesson BM,
Veenhoff LM, Fusetti F, O'Neill LP, Turner BM, de Haan G, Eggen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and
Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

Previous reports showed that embryonic stem (ES) cells contain hyperdynamic and
globally transcribed chromatin-properties that are important for ES cell
pluripotency and differentiation. Here, we demonstrate a role for
undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) in regulating ES
cell chromatin structure. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip analysis,
we identified >1,700 UTF1 target genes that significantly overlap with previously
identified Nanog, Oct4, Klf-4, c-Myc, and Rex1 targets. Gene expression profiling
showed that UTF1 knock down results in increased expression of a large set of
genes, including a significant number of UTF1 targets. UTF1 knock down (KD) ES
cells are, irrespective of the increased expression of several self-renewal
genes, Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) dependent. However, UTF1 KD ES cells are 
perturbed in their differentiation in response to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or
after LIF withdrawal and display increased colony formation. UTF1 KD ES cells
display extensive chromatin decondensation, reflected by a dramatic increase in
nucleosome release on micrococcal nuclease (MNase) treatment and enhanced MNase
sensitivity of UTF1 target genes in UTF1 KD ES cells. Summarizing, our data show 
that UTF1 is a key chromatin component in ES cells, preventing ES cell chromatin 
decondensation, and aberrant gene expression; both essential for proper
initiation of lineage-specific differentiation of ES cells.

PMID: 20715181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 23;5(7):e11756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011756.

Innate immune suppression enables frequent transfection with RNA encoding
reprogramming proteins.

Angel M(1), Yanik MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Generating autologous pluripotent stem cells for therapeutic
applications will require the development of efficient DNA-free reprogramming
techniques. Transfecting cells with in vitro-transcribed, protein-encoding RNA is
a straightforward method of directly expressing high levels of reprogramming
proteins without genetic modification. However, long-RNA transfection triggers a 
potent innate immune response characterized by growth inhibition and the
production of inflammatory cytokines. As a result, repeated transfection with
protein-encoding RNA causes cell death.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: RNA viruses have evolved methods of disrupting
innate immune signaling by destroying or inhibiting specific proteins to enable
persistent infection. Starting from a list of known viral targets, we performed a
combinatorial screen to identify siRNA cocktails that could desensitize cells to 
exogenous RNA. We show that combined knockdown of interferon-beta (Ifnb1),
Eif2ak2, and Stat2 rescues cells from the innate immune response triggered by
frequent long-RNA transfection. Using this technique, we were able to transfect
primary human fibroblasts every 24 hours with RNA encoding the reprogramming
proteins Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and Utf1. We provide evidence that the encoded protein
is active, and we show that expression can be maintained for many days, through
multiple rounds of cell division.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results demonstrate that suppressing innate
immunity enables frequent transfection with protein-encoding RNA. This technique 
represents a versatile tool for investigating expression dynamics and protein
interactions by enabling precise control over levels and timing of protein
expression. Our finding also opens the door for the development of reprogramming 
and directed-differentiation methods based on long-RNA transfection.

PMCID: PMC2909252
PMID: 20668695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 May;34(5):697-706. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181db84aa.

Diagnostic utility of novel stem cell markers SALL4, OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, UTF1, and
TCL1 in primary mediastinal germ cell tumors.

Liu A(1), Cheng L, Du J, Peng Y, Allan RW, Wei L, Li J, Cao D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Primary mediastinal germ cell tumors (GCTs) are rare and sometimes they pose
diagnostic difficulty without immunohistochemical studies. Here, we investigated 
the diagnostic utility of 6 stem cell markers (SCMs) SALL4, OCT4, NANOG, SOX2,
UTF1, and TCL1 in 16 primary mediastinal seminomas, 3 embryonal carcinomas (ECs),
10 yolk sac tumors (YSTs), 7 teratomas (4 mature, 3 immature), and 1
choriocarcinoma. The percentage of tumor cells stained was scored as: 0 (no tumor
cell staining), 1+ (< or =30%), 2+ (31% to 60%), 3+ (61% to 90%), and 4+ (>90%). 
The staining intensity of SCMs was scored as weak, moderate, or strong. We also
compared them with currently used GCT markers placental-like alkaline phosphatase
(PLAP), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), c-KIT, CD30, and glypican-3. All 16 seminomas
showed staining for SALL4 (4+ in 15, 2+ in 1) (15 strong, 1 moderate), OCT4 (4+
in 11, 3+ in 4, 2+ in 1) (13 strong, 3 moderate), and UTF1 (4+ in 13, 3+ in 2, 2+
in 1) (7 strong, 5 moderate, 4 weak). Positive staining was shown by 9/9
seminomas tested for NANOG (4+ in 7, 2+ in 2) (8 strong, 1 weak), TCL1 (4+ strong
in all), c-KIT (4+ in all), and PLAP (4+ in 5, 3+ in 1, 2+ in 2, 1+ in 1), but
SOX2 staining was negative in all these tumors. All 3 ECs showed 4+ strong
staining for SALL4, OCT4, and UTF1 but negative for TCL1. SOX2 staining was seen 
in 3/3 ECs (4+ strong in 1, 3+ weak to moderate in 2) whereas NANOG staining was 
seen in 2/3 ECs (2+ weak, 1+ moderate). CD30 staining was seen in 3/3 ECs (1+,
2+, 4+). Strong SALL4 staining was seen in 10/10 YSTs (4+ in 9, 2+ in 1). All 10 
YSTs showed AFP (1+ in 7, 2+ in 1, 3+ in 2) and glypican-3 (1+ in 3, 2+ in 1, 3+ 
in 5, 4+ in 1) staining but only 4/10 YSTs showed PLAP staining (1+ in all 4).
The mean percentage of YST cells stained with SALL4 was 92%, whereas it was 23%
for AFP, 50% for glypican-3, and 4% for PLAP (P<0.01). Focal (1+) SALL4 (weak)
and SOX2 (weak to moderate) staining was seen in 2/7 and 4/7 teratomas,
respectively. The choriocarcinoma was negative for all 6 SCMs. Eleven thymomas
and 6 thymic carcinomas were negative for 6 SCMs. No staining of NANOG and SOX2
was seen in 20 lymphomas (5 Hodgkin, 5 large B cell, 5 lymphoblastic, 5
anaplastic large cell) (other 4 SCMs in lymphomas earlier studied). Our study
indicates that SALL4, OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, UTF1, and TLC1 are novel sensitive
diagnostic markers for primary mediastinal GCTs, with high specificity. Of these 
6 SCMs, SALL4 is the only 1 expressed in YST. These novel SCMs are more sensitive
than the currently used markers for mediastinal GCTs.

PMID: 20410807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 8;5(3):e9580. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009580.

Initial colony morphology-based selection for iPS cells derived from adult
fibroblasts is substantially improved by temporary UTF1-based selection.

Pfannkuche K(1), Fatima A, Gupta MK, Dieterich R, Hescheler J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute for Neurophysiology,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Kurt.Pfannkuche@uni-koeln.de

BACKGROUND: Somatic cells can be reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells. Recently, selection of fully reprogrammed cells was achieved based on
colony morphology reminiscent of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The maintenance of
pluripotency was analysed.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Clonal murine iPS cell line TiB7-4, which was
derived from adult fibroblasts, was analysed for maintenance of pluripotency.
Colony morphology, expression of pluripotency factors and stage specific
embryonic antigen 1 (SSEA1) were analysed by real time PCR and flow cytometry. We
found the iPS cell line TiB7-4 and its subclones to be rather diverse and
exhibiting a tendency towards spontaneous differentiation and loss of
pluripotency independent of their initial colony morphology. In contrast an
undifferentiated transcription factor 1 (UTF1) promoter-driven G418 (Neo)
resistance significantly improved the quality of these iPS cells. After selection
with UTF-Neo for two weeks iPS subclones could be stably maintained for at least 
40 passages in culture and differentiate into all three germ layers. As control, 
a construct expressing G418 resistance under the control of the ubiquitously
active SV40 early promoter formed subclones with different colony morphology.
Some of these subclones could be cultured for at least 12 passages without
loosing their pluripotency, but loss of pluripotency eventually occured in an
unpredictable manner and was independent of the subclones' initial morphology and
SSEA1 expression. A UTF-Neo-based selection of a whole population of TiB7-4
without further subcloning resulted in the generation of cultures with up to 99% 
SSEA1 positive cells under stringent selection conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that temporary selection using a genetic
UTF1-based system can generate homogenous pluripotent iPS cells that can be
maintained without permanent selection pressure.

PMCID: PMC2833193
PMID: 20221450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. DNA Cell Biol. 2010 May;29(5):241-8. doi: 10.1089/dna.2009.0981.

Functional characterization of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the human
undifferentiated embryonic-cell transcription factor 1 gene.

Thummer RP(1), Drenth-Diephuis LJ, Carney KE, Eggen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are single-nucleotide sequence variations 
between individuals. Two missense SNPs are present in the human undifferentiated 
embryonic-cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) gene and their consequences for UTF1
function are investigated in this study. Expression of the UTF1 gene is
restricted to pluripotent cells and UTF1 is a chromatin-associated protein with
core histone-like properties. UTF1 further acts as a transcriptional repressor
and is required for proper differentiation of pluripotent cells. Two missense
mutations in UTF1 are reported: rs11599284, which results in a glycine to an
arginine change at amino acid 73, and rs4480453, resulting in a leucine to
methionine change at amino acid 275. To study the effects of these two SNPs,
P19CL6 mouse embryonic carcinoma cells stably expressing eGFP-hUTF1 constructs
containing either one or both SNPs were generated. The single and double SNPs did
not alter the localization or transcriptional repressor activity of the protein. 
Further, the single SNPs did not alter the chromatin association and mobility of 
hUTF1. However, the double mutant, G73R/L275M, demonstrated a decreased chromatin
association, indicating a degree of protein malfunction.

PMID: 20218897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Reprod. 2010 May;25(5):1104-12. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq053. Epub 2010 Mar 5.

Screening for biomarkers of spermatogonia within the human testis: a whole genome
approach.

von Kopylow K(1), Kirchhoff C, Jezek D, Schulze W, Feig C, Primig M, Steinkraus
V, Spiess AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Andrology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: A key step in studying the biology of spermatogonia is to determine
their global gene expression profile. However, disassociation of these cells from
the testis may alter their profile to a considerable degree. To characterize the 
molecular phenotype of human spermatogonia, including spermatogonial stem cells
(SSCs), within their cognate microenvironment, a rare subtype of human defective 
spermatogenesis was exploited in which spermatogonia were the only germ cell
type.
METHODS: The global expression profile of these samples was assessed on the
Affymetrix microarray platform and compared with tissues showing homogeneous
Sertoli-cell-only appearance; selected genes were validated by quantitative
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry on disparate sample sets.
RESULTS: Highly significant differences in gene expression levels correlated with
the appearance of spermatogonia, including 239 best candidates of human
spermatogonially expressed genes. Specifically, fibroblast growth factor receptor
3 (FGFR3), desmoglein 2 (DSG2), E3 ubiquitin ligase c-CBL (casitas B-cell
lymphoma), cancer/testis antigen NY-ESO-1 (CTAG1A/B), undifferentiated embryonic 
cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1) and synaptosomal-associated protein, 91 kDa
homolog (SNAP91) were shown to represent specific biomarkers of human
spermatogonia.
CONCLUSIONS: These biomarkers, specifically the surface markers FGFR3 and DSG2,
may facilitate the isolation and enrichment of human stem and/or progenitor
spermatogonia and thus lay a foundation for studies of long-term maintenance of
human SSCs/progenitor cells, spermatogonial self-renewal, clonal expansion and
differentiation.

PMID: 20208059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Jul;16(7):2197-206. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0747.

Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from human adipose-derived stem
cells without c-MYC.

Aoki T(1), Ohnishi H, Oda Y, Tadokoro M, Sasao M, Kato H, Hattori K, Ohgushi H.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering Research Group, Research Institute for Cell Engineering,
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Amagasaki,
Hyogo, Japan.

Human adipose-derived stem cells (hASCs) are ubiquitous, plentiful, and
easily/safely obtainable cells derived from adipose tissue, regardless of the age
and sex of the donor. However, the hASCs have limited proliferative and
differentiation capabilities. In this study, we examined whether induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) could be generated from hASCs. We transduced hASCs
with three human transcription factors (OCT3/4, SOX2, and KLF4), and found that
they formed human embryonic stem cell (ESC)-like colonies. Importantly, we did
not transduce c-MYC, which is usually utilized to generate iPSCs but is
considered an oncogene. These colonies expressed human ESC-specific surface
antigens (stage-specific embryonic antigens SSEA-3 and SSEA-4, and tumor-related 
antigens TRA-1-60 and TRA-1-81), endogenous transcription factors (OCT3/4, NANOG,
and SOX2), and undifferentiated human ESC marker genes (REX1, UTF1, GDF3, DPPA2, 
DPPA4, and DPPA5). Further, the colonies were able to differentiate into the
three germ layers both in vitro and in vivo. These results show that human iPSCs 
can be generated by the transduction of three factors (OCT3/4, SOX2, and KLF4)
into hASCs.

PMID: 20146561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Hum Reprod. 2010 Nov;16(11):835-45. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaq008. Epub 2010 Jan
31.

OCT4 and downstream factors are expressed in human somatic urogenital epithelia
and in culture of epididymal spheres.

Kristensen DM(1), Nielsen JE, Kalisz M, Dalgaard MD, Audouze K, Larsen ME,
Jacobsen GK, Horn T, Brunak S, Skakkebaek NE, Leffers H.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Section GR5064,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. david@moebjerg.com

The transcription factor OCT4 plays a crucial role in the earliest
differentiation of the mammalian embryo and in self-renewal of embryonic stem
cells. However, it remains controversial whether this gene is also expressed in
somatic tissues. Here, we use a combination of RT-PCR on whole and microdissected
tissues, in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry and western blotting to show
that OCT4 and SOX2 together with downstream targets, UTF1 and REX1/ZFP42, are
expressed in the human male urogenital tract. We further support these results by
the analysis of DNA methylation of a region in the OCT4 promoter. In culture,
human primary epididymal cells formed spheres that continued to express the
investigated genes for at least 20 days. Transcriptomic analysis of cultured
cells showed up-regulation of CD29, CD44 and CD133 that are normally associated
with sphere-forming cancer stem cells. Furthermore, stimulation with retinoic
acid resulted in down-regulation of OCT4 expression, however, without
multilineage differentiation. Our results show that OCT4 and associated genes are
expressed in somatic epithelial cells from the urogenital tract and that these
cells can form spheres, a general marker of stem cell behaviour.

PMID: 20123703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Med. 2009 Nov-Dec;15(11-12):392-401. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2009.00068. Epub
2009 Aug 10.

Expression pattern of stemness-related genes in human endometrial and
endometriotic tissues.

Forte A(1), Schettino MT, Finicelli M, Cipollaro M, Colacurci N, Cobellis L,
Galderisi U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Second University of Naples, Italy.

Endometriosis is a chronic disease characterized by the presence of ectopic
endometrial tissue outside of the uterus with mixed traits of benign and
malignant pathology. In this study we analyzed in endometrial and endometriotic
tissues the differential expression of a panel of genes that are involved in
preservation of stemness status and consequently considered as markers of stem
cell presence. The expression profiles of a panel of 13 genes (SOX2, SOX15, ERAS,
SALL4, OCT4, NANOG, UTF1, DPPA2, BMI1, GDF3, ZFP42, KLF4, TCL1) were analyzed by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in human endometriotic (n = 12)
and endometrial samples (n = 14). The expression of SALL4 and OCT4 was further
analyzed by immunohistochemical methods. Genes UTF1, TCL1, and ZFP42 showed a
trend for higher frequency of expression in endometriosis than in endometrium (P 
< 0.05 for UTF1), whereas GDF3 showed a higher frequency of expression in
endometrial samples. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that SALL4 was
expressed in endometriotic samples but not in endometrium samples, despite the
expression of the corresponding mRNA in both the sample groups. This study
highlights a differential expression of stemness-related genes in ectopic and
eutopic endometrium and suggests a possible role of SALL4-positive cells in the
pathogenesis of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC2727462
PMID: 19690622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Transplant. 2009;18(1):39-54.

Cotransplantation of mouse embryonic stem cells and bone marrow stromal cells
following spinal cord injury suppresses tumor development.

Matsuda R(1), Yoshikawa M, Kimura H, Ouji Y, Nakase H, Nishimura F, Nonaka J,
Toriumi H, Yamada S, Nishiofuku M, Moriya K, Ishizaka S, Nakamura M, Sakaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nara Medical University, Nara 634-8521, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are a potential source for treatment of spinal cord
injury (SCI). Although one of the main problems of ES cell-based cell therapy is 
tumor formation, there is no ideal method to suppress tumor development. In this 
study, we examined whether transplantation with bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
prevented tumor formation in SCI model mice that received ES cell-derived grafts 
containing both undifferentiated ES cells and neural stem cells. Embryoid bodies 
(EBs) formed in 4-day hanging drop cultures were treated with retinoic acid (RA) 
at a low concentration of 5 x 10(-9) M for 4 days, in order to allow some of the 
ES cells to remain in an undifferentiated state. RA-treated EBs were
enzymatically digested into single cells and used as ES cell-derived graft cells.
Mice transplanted with ES cell-derived graft cells alone developed tumors at the 
grafted site and behavioral improvement ceased after day 21. In contrast, no
tumor development was observed in mice cotransplanted with BMSCs, which also
showed sustained behavioral improvement. In vitro results demonstrated the
disappearance of SSEA-1 expression in cytochemical examinations, as well as
attenuated mRNA expressions of the undifferentiated markers Oct3/4, Utf1, Nanog, 
Sox2, and ERas by RT-PCR in RA-treated EBs cocultured with BMSCs. In addition,
MAP2-immunopositive cells appeared in the EBs cocultured with BMSCs. Furthermore,
the synthesis of NGF, GDNF, and BDNF was confirmed in cultured BMSCs, while
immunohistochemical examinations demonstrated the survival of BMSCs and their
maintained ability of neurotrophic factor production at the grafted site for up
to 5 weeks after transplantation. These results suggest that BMSCs induce
undifferentiated ES cells to differentiate into a neuronal lineage by
neurotrophic factor production, resulting in suppression of tumor formation.
Cotransplantation of BMSCs with ES cell-derived graft cells may be useful for
preventing the development of ES cell-derived tumors.

PMID: 19476208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 Jul;8(13):1300-6.

Genes involved in regulation of stem cell properties: studies on their expression
in a small cohort of neuroblastoma patients.

Melone MA(1), Giuliano M, Squillaro T, Alessio N, Casale F, Mattioli E, Cipollaro
M, Giordano A, Galderisi U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics F Fede, Second University of Naples, Naples 80138,
Italy.

Cancer stem cells have been isolated from many tumors. Several evidences prove
that neuroblastoma contains its own stem cell-like cancer cells. We chose to
analyze 20 neuroblastoma tumor samples in the expression of 13 genes involved in 
the regulation of stem cell properties to evaluate if their misregulation could
have a clinical relevance. In several specimens we detected the expression of
genes belonging to the OCT3/SOX2/NANOG/KLF4 core circuitry that acts at the
highest level in regulating stem cell biology. This result is in agreement with
studies showing the existence of malignant stem cells in neuroblastoma. We also
observed differences in the expression of some stemness-related genes that may be
useful for developing new prognostic analyses. In fact, preliminary data suggests
that the presence/absence of UTF1 along with differences in BMI1 mRNA levels
could distinguish low grade neuroblastomas from IV stage tumors.

PMID: 19458492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stem Cell Res. 2009 May;2(3):211-8. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2009.02.001. Epub 2009 Feb
12.

Characterization of human UTF1, a chromatin-associated protein with repressor
activity expressed in pluripotent cells.

Kooistra SM(1), Thummer RP, Eggen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, University of Groningen, Kerklaan 30, 9751 NN Haren, The Netherlands.

In mice, during early embryonic development UTF1 (undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1) is expressed in the inner cell mass of blastocysts and in
adult animals expression is restricted to the gonads. (Embryonic) Cells
expressing UTF1 are generally considered pluripotent, meaning they can
differentiate into all cell types of the adult body. In mouse it was shown that
UTF1 is tightly associated with chromatin and that it is required for proper
differentiation of embryonic carcinoma and embryonic stem cells. In this study we
functionally characterized the human UTF1 protein. We show with localization,
subnuclear fractionation, and strip-FRAP analyses that human UTF1 is a tightly
DNA-associated protein with transcriptional repressor activity. Our data identify
human UTF1 as a pluripotency-associated chromatin component with core
histone-like characteristics.

PMID: 19393592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):475-9. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.10.002.

Two supporting factors greatly improve the efficiency of human iPSC generation.

Zhao Y, Yin X, Qin H, Zhu F, Liu H, Yang W, Zhang Q, Xiang C, Hou P, Song Z, Liu 
Y, Yong J, Zhang P, Cai J, Liu M, Li H, Li Y, Qu X, Cui K, Zhang W, Xiang T, Wu
Y, Zhao Y, Liu C, Yu C, Yuan K, Lou J, Ding M, Deng H.

PMID: 18983962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells. 2008 Nov;26(11):2800-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0389. Epub 2008
Aug 28.

Laminin-511 but not -332, -111, or -411 enables mouse embryonic stem cell
self-renewal in vitro.

Domogatskaya A(1), Rodin S, Boutaud A, Tryggvason K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Matrix Biology,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

We tested specific laminin (LN) isoforms for their ability to serve as substrata 
for maintaining mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells pluripotent in vitro in the
absence of leukemia inhibitory factor or any other differentiation inhibitors or 
feeder cells. Recombinant human LN-511 alone was sufficient to enable
self-renewal of mouse ES cells for up to 169 days (31 passages). Cells cultured
on LN-511 maintained expression of pluripotency markers, such as Oct4, Sox2,
Tert, UTF1, and Nanog, during the entire period, and cells cultured for 95 days
(17 passages) were used to generate chimeric mice. LN-332 enabled ES cells
proliferation but not pluripotency. In contrast, under the same conditions
LN-111, Matrigel, and gelatin caused rapid differentiation, whereas LN-411 and
poly-d-lysine did not support survival. ES cells formed a thin monolayer on
LN-511 that differed strikingly from typical dense cluster ES cell morphology.
However, expression of pluripotency markers was not affected by morphological
changes. The effect was achieved at low ES cell density (<200 cell/mm(2)). The
ability of LN-511 and LN-332 to support ES cell proliferation correlated with
increased cell contact area with those adhesive substrata. ES cells interacted
with LN-511 via beta1-integrins, mostly alpha6beta1 and alphaVbeta1. This is the 
first demonstration that certain extracellular matrix molecules can support ES
cell self-renewal in the absence of differentiation inhibitors and at low cell
density. The results suggest that recombinant laminin isoforms can provide a
basis for defined surface coating systems for feeder-free maintenance of
undifferentiated mammalian ES cells in vitro. Disclosure of potential conflicts
of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 18757303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 6;105(18):6656-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801802105. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

ES cell pluripotency and germ-layer formation require the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling component BAF250a.

Gao X(1), Tate P, Hu P, Tjian R, Skarnes WC, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Richard Simches Research Center, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA
02114, USA.

ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes are a notable group of epigenetic
modifiers that use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to change the structure of
chromatin, thereby altering its accessibility to nuclear factors. BAF250a
(ARID1a) is a unique and defining subunit of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex
with the potential to facilitate chromosome alterations critical during
development. Our studies show that ablation of BAF250a in early mouse embryos
results in developmental arrest (about embryonic day 6.5) and absence of the
mesodermal layer, indicating its critical role in early germ-layer formation.
Moreover, BAF250a deficiency compromises ES cell pluripotency, severely inhibits 
self-renewal, and promotes differentiation into primitive endoderm-like cells
under normal feeder-free culture conditions. Interestingly, this phenotype can be
partially rescued by the presence of embryonic fibroblast cells. DNA microarray, 
immunostaining, and RNA analyses revealed that BAF250a-mediated chromatin
remodeling contributes to the proper expression of numerous genes involved in ES 
cell self-renewal, including Sox2, Utf1, and Oct4. Furthermore, the pluripotency 
defects in BAF250a mutant ES cells appear to be cell lineage-specific. For
example, embryoid body-based analyses demonstrated that BAF250a-ablated stem
cells are defective in differentiating into fully functional mesoderm-derived
cardiomyocytes and adipocytes but are capable of differentiating into
ectoderm-derived neurons. Our results suggest that BAF250a is a key component of 
the gene regulatory machinery in ES cells controlling self-renewal,
differentiation, and cell lineage decisions.

PMCID: PMC2373334
PMID: 18448678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Reproduction. 2008 Jul;136(1):33-40. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0536. Epub 2008 Apr 4.

Expression of the pluripotency marker UTF1 is restricted to a subpopulation of
early A spermatogonia in rat testis.

van Bragt MP(1), Roepers-Gajadien HL, Korver CM, Bogerd J, Okuda A, Eggen BJ, de 
Rooij DG, van Pelt AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The population of early A spermatogonia includes stem cells that possess
spermatogonial stem cell properties. Recent reports suggest that these cells have
the ability to regain pluripotent properties. Here, we show that expression of
the pluripotency marker undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1
(UTF1) is restricted to distinct germ cells within the testis. In embryonic and
neonatal testes, all gonocytes were found to strongly express UTF1. During
further testicular development, expression of UTF1 was restricted to a subset of 
A spermatogonia and with the increase in age the number of cells expressing UTF1 
decreased even more. Ultimately, in the adult rat testis, only a small subset of 
the A spermatogonia expressed UTF1. Remarkably, even in testes of vitamin
A-deficient rats, in which the early A spermatogonia (A(s), A(pr), and A(al)) are
the only type of spermatogonia, only a subset of the spermatogonia expressed
UTF1. In the adult rat testis, expression of UTF1 is restricted to a
subpopulation of the ZBTB16 (PLZF)-positive early A spermatogonia. Furthermore,
the observed distribution pattern of UTF1-expressing cells over the different
stages of the cycle of the seminiferous epithelium suggests that the expression
of UTF1 is restricted to those A(s), A(pr), and short chains of A(al)
spermatogonia that are in the undifferentiated state and therefore maintain the
ability to differentiate into A1 spermatogonia in the next round of the
epithelial cycle or possibly even in other directions when they are taken out of 
their testicular niche.

PMID: 18390688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hum Reprod. 2008 Apr;23(4):775-82. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den010. Epub 2008 Feb 15.

Presumed pluripotency markers UTF-1 and REX-1 are expressed in human adult testes
and germ cell neoplasms.

Kristensen DM(1), Nielsen JE, Skakkebaek NE, Graem N, Jacobsen GK, Rajpert-De
Meyts E, Leffers H.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Section GR5064,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. moebjerg@imbg.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: UTF-1 and REX-1/ZFP42 are transcription factors involved in
pluripotency. Because of phenotypic similarities between pluripotent embryonic
stem cells and testicular germ cell tumours (TGCT) and the derivation of
pluripotent cells from testes, we investigated the expression of UTF-1 and REX-1 
during human gonadal development and in TGCT.
METHODS: Expression of UTF-1 and REX-1 was studied in 52 specimens from human
gonadal development and in 86 samples from TGCT.
RESULTS: UTF-1 and REX-1 were expressed throughout male gonadal development. In
the mature testis, UTF-1 was expressed in spermatogonia, whereas REX-1 was
expressed in meiotic cells and, together with OCT-3/4, in primary oocytes. Both
UTF-1 and REX-1 were expressed in testicular carcinoma in situ and in TGCT.
Contrarily to REX-1, UTF-1 was expressed in all spermatocytic seminomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike other pluripotency markers NANOG and OCT-3/4, UTF-1 and REX-1
are expressed throughout human testes development. The expression pattern
indicated that UTF-1 plays a possible role in spermatogonial self-renewal,
whereas expression of REX-1 in meiotic cells from both testes and ovary indicate 
a role in meiosis. UFT-1 and REX-1 are expressed in TGCT and the high abundance
of UTF-1 in spermatocytic seminomas is consistent with the hypothesis that this
tumour type originates from spermatogonia.

PMID: 18281244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):903-11. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0951. Epub 2008
Jan 31.

Small increases in the level of Sox2 trigger the differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Kopp JL(1), Ormsbee BD, Desler M, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that the transcription factor Sox2 is
essential during the early stages of development. Furthermore, decreasing the
expression of Sox2 severely interferes with the self-renewal and pluripotency of 
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Other studies have shown that Sox2, in conjunction
with the transcription factor Oct-3/4, stimulates its own transcription as well
as the expression of a growing list of genes (Sox2:Oct-3/4 target genes) that
require the cooperative action of Sox2 and Oct-3/4. Remarkably, recent studies
have shown that overexpression of Sox2 decreases expression of its own gene, as
well as four other Sox2:Oct-3/4 target genes (Oct-3/4, Nanog, Fgf-4, and Utf1).
This finding led to the prediction that overexpression of Sox2 in ES cells would 
trigger their differentiation. In the current study, we initially engineered
mouse ES cells for inducible overexpression of Sox2. Using this model system, we 
demonstrate that small increases (twofold or less) in Sox2 protein trigger the
differentiation of ES cells into cells that exhibit markers for a wide range of
differentiated cell types, including neuroectoderm, mesoderm, and trophectoderm
but not endoderm. We also demonstrate that elevating the levels of Sox2 quickly
downregulates several developmentally regulated genes, including Nanog, and a
newly identified Sox2:Oct-3/4 target gene, Lefty1. Together, these data argue
that the self-renewal of ES cells requires that Sox2 levels be maintained within 
narrow limits. Thus, Sox2 appears to function as a molecular rheostat that
controls the expression of a critical set of embryonic genes, as well as the
self-renewal and differentiation of ES cells.

PMID: 18238855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008 Apr;7(4):672-83. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and proteome
quantitation of mouse embryonic stem cells to a depth of 5,111 proteins.

Graumann J(1), Hubner NC, Kim JB, Ko K, Moser M, Kumar C, Cox J, Schöler H, Mann 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for
Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent cells isolated from mammalian
preimplantation embryos. They are capable of differentiating into all cell types 
and therefore hold great promise in regenerative medicine. Here we show that
murine ES cells can be fully SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in
cell culture)-labeled when grown feeder-free during the last phase of cell
culture. We fractionated the SILAC-labeled ES cell proteome by one-dimensional
gel electrophoresis and by isoelectric focusing of peptides. High resolution
analysis on a linear ion trap-orbitrap instrument (LTQ-Orbitrap) at sub-ppm mass 
accuracy resulted in confident identification and quantitation of more than 5,000
distinct proteins. This is the largest quantified proteome reported to date and
contains prominent stem cell markers such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, and UTF1 along
with the embryonic form of RAS (ERAS). We also quantified the proportion of the
ES cell proteome present in cytosolic, nucleoplasmic, and membrane/chromatin
fractions. We compared two different preparation approaches, cell fractionation
followed by one-dimensional gel separation and in-solution digestion of total
cell lysate combined with isoelectric focusing, and found comparable proteome
coverage with no apparent bias for any functional protein classes for either
approach. Bioinformatics analysis of the ES cell proteome revealed a broad
distribution of cellular functions with overrepresentation of proteins involved
in proliferation. We compared the proteome with a recently published map of
chromatin states of promoters in ES cells and found excellent correlation between
protein expression and the presence of active and repressive chromatin marks.

PMID: 18045802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008 Mar;7(3):459-72. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Quantitative proteomics analysis demonstrates post-transcriptional regulation of 
embryonic stem cell differentiation to hematopoiesis.

Williamson AJ(1), Smith DL, Blinco D, Unwin RD, Pearson S, Wilson C, Miller C,
Lancashire L, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V, Whetton AD.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Leukemia Proteomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, University of Manchester, Kinnaird House, Kinnaird Road, Manchester M20
4QL, United Kingdom.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro to produce the endothelial
and hematopoietic precursor, the hemangioblasts, which are derived from the
mesoderm germ layer. Differentiation of Bry(GFP/+) ES cell to hemangioblasts can 
be followed by the expression of the Bry(GFP/+) and Flk1 genes. Proteomic and
transcriptomic changes during this differentiation process were analyzed to
identify mechanisms for phenotypic change during early differentiation. Three
populations of differentiating Bry(GFP) ES cells were obtained by flow cytometric
sorting, GFP-Flk1- (epiblast), GFP+Flk1- (mesoderm), and GFP+Flk1+
(hemangioblast). Microarray analyses and relative quantification two-dimensional 
LCLC-MS/MS on nuclear extracts were performed. We identified and quantified 2389 
proteins, 1057 of which were associated to their microarray probe set. These
included a variety of low abundance transcription factors, e.g. UTF1, Sox2, Oct4,
and E2F4, demonstrating a high level of proteomic penetrance. When paired
comparisons of changes in the mRNA and protein expression levels were performed
low levels of correlation were found. A strong correlation between isobaric
tag-derived relative quantification and Western blot analysis was found for a
number of nuclear proteins. Pathway and ontology analysis identified proteins
known to be involved in the regulation of stem cell differentiation, and proteins
with no described function in early ES cell development were also shown to change
markedly at the proteome level only. ES cell development is regulated at the mRNA
and protein level.

PMID: 18045800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Feb 1;314(3):603-15. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Stem molecular signature of adipose-derived stromal cells.

Peroni D(1), Scambi I, Pasini A, Lisi V, Bifari F, Krampera M, Rigotti G,
Sbarbati A, Galiè M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological and Biomedical Sciences, Section of Anatomy and
Histology, University of Verona, Italy.

It has recently been shown that adipose tissue is an abundant and easily
accessible source of stromal progenitor cells (ADSCs, adipose-derived stromal
cells), resembling the mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) obtained from adult bone
marrow. However, the identification of these two lineages is still controversial 
and even the stem cell nature of ADSCs is doubted. In this study, we examined the
"stemness" transcriptional profile of ADSCs and BM-MSCs, with two aims: (1) to
compare their "stem cell molecular signature" and (2) to dissect their
constitutive expression pattern for molecules involved in tissue development,
homeostasis and repair. As well as several molecules involved in matrix
remodeling and adult tissue angiogenesis and repair, we detected the expression
of genes UTF-1, Nodal, and Snail2, which are known to be expressed by embryonic
stem cells but have been never described in other stem lineages. In addition, for
the first time we described the transcriptional profile of human BM-MSCs and
ADSCs for the CD44 splice variants, which are determinant in cell trafficking
during embryonic development, in adult tissue homeostasis and also in tumor
dissemination. Thus, our findings strongly support a close relationship between
ADSCs and BM-MSCs, suggest an unexpected similarity between MSCs and embryonic
stem cells, and possibly support the potential therapeutic application of ADSCs.

PMID: 18022619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Prolif. 2007 Oct;40(5):685-705.

Skin keratinocytes pre-treated with embryonic stem cell-conditioned medium or
BMP4 can be directed to an alternative cell lineage.

Grinnell KL(1), Bickenbach JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

OBJECTIVES: In this study, we have investigated whether secreted factors from
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could reprogramme keratinocytes and increase their
potential to be directed into alternative cell lineages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Contact and non-contact co-cultures of skin keratinocytes 
and murine ESCs were used initially to confirm any reprogramming ability of
ESC-conditioned medium (CM). Immunofluoresence was used to assess nuclear
expression of octamer-4 (Oct-4), as well as to confirm neuronal protein
expression in neuroectodermally directed keratinocytes. Transcript expression
changes were evaluated using semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction. Western blotting, accompanied by densitometry analysis, was used 
to evaluate protein expression following morphology changes.
RESULTS: We found that keratinocytes treated with ESC-CM changed their morphology
and were stimulated to express the pluripotency regulator, Oct-4, and its target 
transcripts, Sox-2, Nanog, Utf1 and Rex-1. We demonstrate that at least one of
the reprogramming factors is bone morphogenetic factor-4 (BMP4). Pre-treated
keratinocytes could be specifically directed to differentiate into cells of the
neuronal lineage. The majority of responsive keratinocytes were the epidermal
stem cell population, with a small percentage of transit-amplifying cells also
being affected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that ESC-CM contains a number of factors,
including BMP4, which are capable of reprogramming mouse skin keratinocytes to
make them more developmentally potent, as evidenced by their ability to be
re-differentiated into cells of the neuronal lineage. Our findings also imply a
continuum of differentiation within the basal keratinocyte population. An
increase in developmental potential combined with directed differentiation could 
increase the therapeutic relevancy of somatic cells.

PMID: 17877610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(18):e118. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

A UTF1-based selection system for stable homogeneously pluripotent human
embryonic stem cell cultures.

Tan SM(1), Wang ST, Hentze H, Dröge P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang
Drive, 637551 and ES Cell International Pte Ltd, 11 Biopolis Way, #05-06 Helios, 
138667 Singapore.

Undifferentiated transcription factor 1 (UTF1) was identified first in mouse
embryonic stem cells and is also expressed in human embryonic and adult stem
cells. UTF1 transcription ceases at the onset of differentiation, which clearly
distinguishes it from less sensitive pluripotency markers, such as Oct4 or Nanog.
We present here two transgenic hESC lines, named ZUN. Each line harbors one copy 
of the UTF1 promoter/enhancer driving a resistance gene and yielded highly
homogeneous cultures under selection pressure, with a larger proportion of Oct4
and Sox2 positive cells. While ZUN cultures, like parental HUES8 cultures,
retained the capacity to differentiate into tissues of all three germ layers
using a SICD mouse teratoma model, they surprisingly exhibited an increased
refractoriness to various differentiation cues in vitro. Together with its small 
size of only 2.4 kb for the entire cassette, these features render our selection 
system a powerful novel tool for many stem cell applications and human somatic
cell reprogramming strategies.

PMCID: PMC2094078
PMID: 17855398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Cell Biol. 2007 Sep 10;178(6):913-24. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

UTF1 is a chromatin-associated protein involved in ES cell differentiation.

van den Boom V(1), Kooistra SM, Boesjes M, Geverts B, Houtsmuller AB, Monzen K,
Komuro I, Essers J, Drenth-Diephuis LJ, Eggen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology
Institute, University of Groningen, 9750 AA, Haren, Netherlands.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are able to grow indefinitely (self-renewal) and have
the potential to differentiate into all adult cell types (pluripotency). The
regulatory network that controls pluripotency is well characterized, whereas the 
molecular basis for the transition from self-renewal to the differentiation of ES
cells is much less understood, although dynamic epigenetic gene silencing and
chromatin compaction are clearly implicated. In this study, we report that UTF1
(undifferentiated embryonic cell transcription factor 1) is involved in ES cell
differentiation. Knockdown of UTF1 in ES and carcinoma cells resulted in a
substantial delay or block in differentiation. Further analysis using
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching assays, subnuclear fractionations, and
reporter assays revealed that UTF1 is a stably chromatin-associated
transcriptional repressor protein with a dynamic behavior similar to core
histones. An N-terminal Myb/SANT domain and a C-terminal domain containing a
putative leucine zipper are required for these properties of UTF1. These data
demonstrate that UTF1 is a strongly chromatin-associated protein involved in the 
initiation of ES cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2064617
PMID: 17785516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Feb;127(2):372-80. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

De-differentiation of mouse interfollicular keratinocytes by the embryonic
transcription factor Oct-4.

Grinnell KL(1), Yang B, Eckert RL, Bickenbach JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Iowa Carver College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Feb;127(2):260-2.

The embryonic transcription factor Oct-4 is often referred to as the master
regulator of the undifferentiated state. Although its role in maintaining
embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency is well established, its ability to
directly reprogram committed somatic cells is not well defined. Using transient
transfection, we tested its ability to revert mouse interfollicular epidermal
basal keratinocytes to a more ES cell-like state. We found that the
Oct-4-transfected keratinocytes expressed the Oct-4 target genes, Sox-2, Nanog,
undifferentiated transcription factor 1 (Utf1), and Rex-1. We also noted an
increase in developmental potential caused by Oct-4, with the transfected cells
able to differentiate into neuronal cells when exposed to neuroectodermal
differentiation medium. Control-transfected keratinocytes were unable to respond 
to the medium, and remained as keratinocytes. These findings suggest that Oct-4
may be the master regulator of the pluripotent state and demonstrate that
differentiated somatic cells can be reverted into more developmentally potent
cells through the use of a single factor. The latter finding has great
implications for therapeutic cell-replacement applications using cells from
easily accessible adult tissues, such as the skin.

PMID: 16932739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Seikagaku. 2006 May;78(5):433-7.

[Trials for generating non-tumorigenic ES cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Okuda A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

PMID: 16780118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Jul;208(1):97-108.

Differential activity of the FGF-4 enhancer in F9 and P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells.

Boer B(1), Bernadt CT, Desler M, Wilder PJ, Kopp JL, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6805, USA.

Transcription factors Oct-3/4 and Sox2 behave as global regulators during
mammalian embryogenesis. They work together by binding co-operatively to closely 
spaced HMG and POU motifs (HMG/POU cassettes). Recently, it was suggested that a 
critical Sox2:Oct-3/4 target gene, FGF-4, is expressed at lower levels in P19
than in F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, due to lower levels of Sox2 in P19
than in F9 cells. We tested this possibility to better understand how FGF-4
expression is modulated during development. Although we found that P19 EC cells
express approximately 10-fold less FGF-4 mRNA than F9 EC cells, we determined
that Sox2 levels do not differ markedly in F9 and P19 EC cells. We also
determined that Sox2 and Oct-3/4 work together equally well in both EC cell
lines. Moreover, in contrast to an earlier prediction based on in vitro binding
studies, we demonstrate that the function of the HMG/POU cassettes of the FGF-4
and UTF1 genes does not differ significantly in these EC cell lines when tested
in the context of a natural enhancer. Importantly, we determined that the FGF-4
promoter is highly responsive to a heterologous enhancer in both EC cell lines;
whereas, the FGF-4 enhancer is 7- to 10-fold less active in P19 than in F9 EC
cells. Because F9 and P19 EC cells are likely to represent cells at different
stages of mammalian development, we suggest that this difference in FGF-4
enhancer activity may reflect a mechanism used to decrease, but not abolish,
FGF-4 expression as the early embryo develops.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16523502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(12):5084-94.

Oct-3/4 maintains the proliferative embryonic stem cell state via specific
binding to a variant octamer sequence in the regulatory region of the UTF1 locus.

Nishimoto M(1), Miyagi S, Yamagishi T, Sakaguchi T, Niwa H, Muramatsu M, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical School, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

The POU transcription factor Oct-3/4 has been shown to be critical for
maintaining embryonic stem (ES) cell character. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying its function remain elusive. We have previously shown that among the
POU transcription factor family of proteins, Oct-3/4 alone is able to bind to the
regulatory region of the UTF1 gene bearing a variant octamer sequence together
with Sox-2. Here, we demonstrate using Oct-3/4-Oct-6 chimeras that there is a
precise correlation between the ability of proteins to form a complex on the UTF1
enhancer with Sox-2 and the ability to maintain the stem cell state in ES cells. 
Different chimeric proteins show differential abilities to form a
Sox-2-containing complex on the UTF1 regulatory region, with a decrease in
efficiency of the complex formation accompanied by a decrease in the level of
UTF1 expression and the rate of cell proliferation. Overexpression of UTF1 in
these slow-growing cells was able to restore their proliferation rate to
wild-type levels. Moreover, UTF1 was also observed to have an effect on teratoma 
formation. These results suggest a molecular pathway by which Oct-3/4 induces
rapid proliferation and tumorigenic properties of ES cells through activation of 
the UTF1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1140574
PMID: 15923625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Cycle. 2004 Dec;3(12):1645-50. Epub 2004 Dec 4.

A dynamic switch in the replication timing of key regulator genes in embryonic
stem cells upon neural induction.

Perry P(1), Sauer S, Billon N, Richardson WD, Spivakov M, Warnes G, Livesey FJ,
Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG, Azuara V.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
School of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Mammalian embryonic stem (ES) cells can either self-renew or generate progenitor 
cells that have a more restricted developmental potential. This provides an
important model system to ask how pluripotency, cell commitment and
differentiation are regulated at the level of chromatin-based changes that
distinguish stem cells from their differentiated progeny. Here we show that the
differentiation of ES cells to neural progenitors results in dynamic changes in
the epigenetic status of multiple genes that encode transcription factors
critical for early embryonic development or lineage specification. In particular,
we demonstrate that DNA replication at a subset of neural-associated genes
including Pax3, Pax6, Irx3, Nkx2.9 and Mash1 is advanced upon neural induction,
consistent with increased locus accessibility. Conversely, many ES-associated
genes including Oct4, Nanog, Utf1, Foxd3, Cripto and Rex1 that replicate early in
ES cells switch their replication timing to later in S-phase in response to
differentiation. Detailed analysis of the Rex1 locus reveals that delayed
replication extends to a 2.8 Mb region surrounding the gene and is associated
with substantial reductions in the level of histone H3K9 and H4 acetylation at
the promoter. These results show that loss of pluripotency (and lineage choice)
is associated with extensive and predictable changes in the replication timing of
key regulator genes.

PMID: 15611653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5307-17. Epub 2004 Nov 22.

Oct-3/4 and Sox2 regulate Oct-3/4 gene in embryonic stem cells.

Okumura-Nakanishi S(1), Saito M, Niwa H, Ishikawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Assembly, Department of Biological
Information, Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 4259 Nagatuda, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Oct-3/4 is a key transcriptional factor whose expression level governs the fate
of primitive inner cell mass and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Previously, an
upstream 3.3-kb distal enhancer (DE) fragment was identified to be responsible
for the specific expression of mouse Oct-3/4 in the inner cell mass and ES cells.
However, little is known about the cis-elements and trans-factors required for DE
activity. In this study, we identified a novel cis-element, called Site 2B here, 
located approximately 30 bp downstream from Site 2A, which was previously
revealed in DE by an in vivo chemical modification experiment. Using the
luciferase reporter assay, we demonstrated that both Site 2A and Site 2B are
necessary and sufficient for activating DE in the contexts of both the native
Oct-3/4 promoter and the heterologous thymidine kinase minimal promoter. In an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay we showed that Site 2B specifically binds to
Oct-3/4 and Sox2 when ES-derived cell extracts were used, whereas Site 2A binds
to a factor(s) present in both ES and NIH 3T3 cells. Furthermore, we showed that 
the physiological level of Oct-3/4 in ES cells is required for Site 2B-mediated
DE activity using the inducible knock-out system of Oct-3/4 in ES cells. These
results indicate that Oct-3/4 is a member of the gene family regulated by Oct-3/4
and Sox2, as reported before for the FGF-4, UTF1, Sox2, and Fbx15 genes. Thus,
Oct-3/4 and Sox2 comprise a regulatory complex that controls the expression of
genes important for the maintenance of the primitive state, including themselves.
This autoregulatory circuit of the Sox2.Oct-3/4 complex may contribute to
maintaining robustly the precise expression level of Oct-3/4 in primitive cells.

PMID: 15557334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 15;17(16):2048-59.

Crystal structure of a POU/HMG/DNA ternary complex suggests differential assembly
of Oct4 and Sox2 on two enhancers.

Reményi A(1), Lins K, Nissen LJ, Reinbold R, Schöler HR, Wilmanns M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Program, EMBL, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
remenyi@itsa.ucsf.edu

Members of the POU and SOX transcription factor families exemplify the
partnerships established between various transcriptional regulators during early 
embryonic development. Although functional cooperativity between key regulator
proteins is pivotal for milestone decisions in mammalian development, little is
known about the underlying molecular mechanisms. In this study, we focus on two
transcription factors, Oct4 and Sox2, as their combination on DNA is considered
to direct the establishment of the first three lineages in the mammalian embryo. 
Using experimental high-resolution structure determination, followed by model
building and experimental validation, we found that Oct4 and Sox2 were able to
dimerize onto DNA in distinct conformational arrangements. We demonstrate that
the DNA enhancer region of their target genes is responsible for the correct
spatial alignment of glue-like interaction domains on their surface.
Interestingly, these surfaces frequently have redundant functions and are
instrumental in recruiting various interacting protein partners.

PMCID: PMC196258
PMID: 12923055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 14;302(3):581-6.

The embryonic Octamer factor 3/4 displays distinct DNA binding specificity from
those of other Octamer factors.

Nishimoto M(1), Miyagi S, Katayanagi T, Tomioka M, Muramatsu M, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Saitama Medical School Research Center for 
Genomic Medicine, 1397-1 Yamane Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

The Oct-3/4 is a transcriptional factor expressed rather specifically in inner
cell mass and embryonic ectoderm during early embryogenesis in mammals. During
the course of characterizing the regulatory element of embryonic transcriptional 
coactivator UTF1 which is one of the downstream genes of Oct-3/4, we have found
that Oct-3/4, but not other Octamer factors, shows unique DNA binding
specificity, being able to bind to variant Octamer sequence (5'-ACTAGCAT-3')
present in UTF1 regulatory element. Here, we have determined the DNA binding
property of Oct-3/4 in a systematic manner using all possible one point mutants
of Octamer sequence as well as completely random sequences. These analyses led to
the identification of nine distinct nucleotide sequences including the one
(5'-ACTAGCAT-3') present in UTF1 regulatory element which serves rather as
specific binding site for the Oct-3/4. Moreover, we show that, at least, one of
the newly identified sequences, 5'-ATCAGCAT-3', exhibits a transcriptional
stimulating activity equivalent to that of the variant Octamer sequence present
in the UTF1 regulatory region in embryonic stem cells in a pluripotent-state
specific manner.

PMID: 12615074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jul 15;30(14):3202-13.

Identification of Sox-2 regulatory region which is under the control of
Oct-3/4-Sox-2 complex.

Tomioka M(1), Nishimoto M, Miyagi S, Katayanagi T, Fukui N, Niwa H, Muramatsu M, 
Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Saitama Medical School Research Center for 
Genomic Medicine, 1397-1 Yamane Hidaka-City, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

Sox-2 is a transcriptional cofactor expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells as
well as in neuronal cells. It has been demonstrated that Sox-2 plays an important
role in supporting gene expression in ES cells, especially by forming a complex
with embryonic Octamer factor, Oct-3/4. Here, we have analyzed the regulatory
regions of the Sox-2 gene and identified two enhancers which stimulate
transcription in ES cells as well as in embryonal carcinoma cells. These
regulatory regions, which we termed Sox regulatory regions (SRR) 1 and 2, exert
their function specifically when cells are in an undifferentiated state.
Interestingly, like the regulatory elements of FGF-4 and UTF1 genes,
combinatorial action of Octamer and Sox-2 binding sites support the SRR2
activity. However, biochemical analyses reveal that, due to the unique sequence
and/or its organization, the SRR2 bears distinct characteristics from those of
FGF-4 and UTF1 regulatory elements. That is, unlike the FGF-4 gene enhancer, the 
SRR2 precludes the binding of the Oct-1-Sox-2 complex. The difference between the
SRR2 and UTF1 regulatory element is in the ability of SRR2 to recruit the
Oct-6-Sox-2 complex as well as the Oct-3/4-Sox-2 complex. Co-transfection
analyses confirm that both complexes are able to stimulate transcription through 
the SRR2 element.

PMCID: PMC135755
PMID: 12136102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 27;285(4):945-53.

Structural analyses of the UTF1 gene encoding a transcriptional coactivator
expressed in pluripotent embryonic stem cells.

Nishimoto M(1), Fukushima A, Miyagi S, Suzuki Y, Sugano S, Matsuda Y, Hori T,
Muramatsu M, Okuda A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine,
Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama, Iruma-gun, Saitama, 350-0495,
Japan.

The UTF1 is a transcriptional coactivator expressed mainly in pluripotent
embryonic stem cells. Here, we have isolated a genomic DNA fragment carrying the 
UTF1 gene and found that the gene contains two exons interrupted by a short
intron. The gene possesses four GC boxes, but no TATA box in the 5'-flanking
region. This is reminiscent of a housekeeping gene type promoter and the
functional relevance of these motifs is confirmed by the transient transfection
analyses. As to the gene product, our analyses have led to the identification of 
two different species. One of them corresponds to the full-length protein, while 
the other is produced by utilizing the second methionine codon for the
translation initiation. The oligo-capping analyses reveal multiple transcription 
start sites. Interestingly, some of them are localized downstream of the first
methionine codon, indicating that such transcripts produce a protein starting
from the second methionine codon. Chromosomal mapping analyses locate the gene at
7F5, the syntenic region of the human chromosome (10q26) where the human UTF1
gene is located.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11467843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Aug;19(8):5453-65.

The gene for the embryonic stem cell coactivator UTF1 carries a regulatory
element which selectively interacts with a complex composed of Oct-3/4 and Sox-2.

Nishimoto M(1), Fukushima A, Okuda A, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, Iruma-gun, Saitama
350-0495, Japan.

UTF1 is a transcriptional coactivator which has recently been isolated and found 
to be expressed mainly in pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells (A. Okuda, A.
Fukushima, M. Nishimoto, et al., EMBO J. 17:2019-2032, 1998). To gain insight
into the regulatory network of gene expression in ES cells, we have characterized
the regulatory elements governing UTF1 gene expression. The results indicate that
the UTF1 gene is one of the target genes of an embryonic octamer binding
transcription factor, Oct-3/4. UTF1 expression is, like the FGF-4 gene, regulated
by the synergistic action of Oct-3/4 and another embryonic factor, Sox-2,
implying that the requirement for Sox-2 by Oct-3/4 is not limited to the FGF-4
enhancer but is rather a general mechanism of activation for Oct-3/4. Our
biochemical analyses, however, also reveal one distinct difference between these 
two regulatory elements: unlike the FGF-4 enhancer, the UTF1 regulatory element
can, by its one-base difference from the canonical octamer-binding sequence,
selectively recruit the complex comprising Oct-3/4 and Sox-2 and preclude the
binding of the transcriptionally inactive complex containing Oct-1 or Oct-6.
Furthermore, our analyses reveal that these properties are dictated by the unique
ability of the Oct-3/4 POU-homeodomain that recognizes a variant of the Octamer
motif in the UTF1 regulatory element.

PMCID: PMC84387
PMID: 10409735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 19;258(3):519-23.

Carboxy-terminally truncated form of a coactivator UTF1 stimulates transcription 
from a variety of gene promoters through the TATA Box.

Fukushima A(1), Nishimoto M, Okuda A, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo Moroyama
Iruma-gun, Saitama, 350-0495, Japan.

We have recently isolated a novel transcriptional coactivator, UTF1, which is
expressed mainly in pluripotent embryonic stem cells (Okuda, A., Fukushima, A.,
Nishimoto, M., Orimo, A., Yamagishi, T., Nabeshima, Y., Kuro-o, M., Nabeshima,
Y., Boon, K., Keaveney, M., Stunnenberg, H. G., and Muramatsu, M. EMBO J. 17,
2019-2032, 1998). The UTF1 does not activate transcription nonspecifically, but
boosts the level of transcription strictly in a specific upstream factor, ATF-2, 
dependent manner in mammalian cells. However, when expressed in yeast cells, the 
UTF1 displays a distinct activity, being able to augment the activity of minimal 
promoter bearing only the TATA element. Thus, these results indicate that certain
domains of UTF1 render the factor inactive in terms of stimulating transcription 
through the basal transcription machinery in the absence of promoter-bound ATF-2 
in mammalian cells. Here we report that the region bearing the leucine zipper
motif is responsible for such biochemical properties of the UTF1. Indeed, UTF1
lacking functional leucine zipper is able to rather promiscuously stimulate
transcription from a number of basal gene promoters such as those of hsp70 and
E1B genes in mammalian cells. We have also shown that this activation is executed
through TATA box by the experiments using a TBP allele with an altered
TATA-binding specificity. Moreover, we have found that Dr1-mediated repression of
transcription can be overcome by expression of this mutant UTF1, indicating that 
the observed stimulation of transcription is at least in part due to its action
as an anti-repressor.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25840-9.

Characterization of functional domains of an embryonic stem cell coactivator UTF1
which are conserved and essential for potentiation of ATF-2 activity.

Fukushima A(1), Okuda A, Nishimoto M, Seki N, Hori TA, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama,
Iruma-gun Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

We have recently cloned a cDNA encoding an embryonic stem cell transcriptional
coactivator termed UTF1 from the mouse F9 teratocarcinoma cell line (Okuda, A.,
Fukushima, A., Nishimoto, M., Orimo, A., Yamagishi, T., Nabeshima, Y., Kuro-o,
M., Nabeshima, Y., Boon, K., Keaveney, M., Stunnenberg, H.G., and Muramatsu, M.
(1998) EMBO J. 17, 2019-2032). Here we have cloned a cDNA for human UTF1 and
identified two highly conserved domains termed conserved domain (CD)1 and CD2.
Human UTF1, like that of mouse, binds to ATF-2 and the mutagenesis analyses
reveal that the leucine zipper motif within the CD2 of the UTF1 and metal binding
motif of ATF-2 are involved in this interaction. The factor also binds to
TATA-binding protein containing complex. By means of immunoprecipitation
analysis, we mapped two domains which are independently able to bind to the
complex. Importantly, both domains are located within the conserved domains (one 
in CD1 and the other in CD2). Furthermore, transient transfection analyses point 
out the importance of these domains for activating ATF-2. Thus, these results
suggest that these two conserved domains identified here play important roles in 
activating specific transcription at least in part by supporting physical
interaction between the upstream factor, ATF-2, and basal transcription
machinery.

PMID: 9748258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. EMBO J. 1998 Apr 1;17(7):2019-32.

UTF1, a novel transcriptional coactivator expressed in pluripotent embryonic stem
cells and extra-embryonic cells.

Okuda A(1), Fukushima A, Nishimoto M, Orimo A, Yamagishi T, Nabeshima Y, Kuro-o
M, Nabeshima Yi, Boon K, Keaveney M, Stunnenberg HG, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama,
Iruma-gun, Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

We have obtained a novel transcriptional cofactor, termed undifferentiated
embryonic cell transcription factor 1 (UTF1), from F9 embryonic carcinoma (EC)
cells. This protein is expressed in EC and embryonic stem cells, as well as in
germ line tissues, but could not be detected in any of the other adult mouse
tissues tested. Furthermore, when EC cells are induced to differentiate, UTF1
expression is rapidly extinguished. In normal mouse embryos, UTF1 mRNA is present
in the inner cell mass, the primitive ectoderm and the extra-embryonic tissues.
During the primitive streak stage, the induction of mesodermal cells is
accompanied by the down-regulation of UTF1 in the primitive ectoderm. However,
its expression is maintained for up to 13.5 days post-coitum in the
extra-embryonic tissue. Functionally, UTF1 boosts the level of transcription of
the adenovirus E2A promoter. However, unlike the pluripotent cell-specific
E1A-like activity, which requires the E2F sites of the E2A promoter for increased
transcriptional activation, UTF1-mediated activation is dependent on the upstream
ATF site of this promoter. This result indicates that UTF1 is not a major
component of the E1A-like activity present in pluripotent embryonic cells.
Further analyses revealed that UTF1 interacts not only with the activation domain
of ATF-2, but also with the TFIID complex in vivo. Thus, UTF1 displays many of
the hallmark characteristics expected for a tissue-specific transcriptional
coactivator that works in early embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1170547
PMID: 9524124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


