
1. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2015 Mar;35(3):343-8.

[Epimedin C induced mesenchymal stem cells C3H/10T1/2 to differentiate into
endothelioid cells in vitro: an experimental study].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y, Gao JL, Chen SH, Lu GY.

OBJECTIVE: To study the endothelioid differentiation effect of Epimedin C on
murine embryonic mesenchymal stem cells (C3H/10T1/2).
METHODS: C3H/10T1/2 cells were cultivated in vitro. The cytotoxicity of Epimedin 
C at different concentrations was determined by MTT assay and crystal violet
assay. Morphological changes were observed under microscope after treated with
Epimendin C. The effect of Epimendin C on the cell cycle distribution was
determined by flow cytometry. mRNA expression levels of endothelial markers, such
as CD31, CD34, vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (Vezf1), angiopoietin 1 (Ang1),
and angiopoietin 2 (Ang2) were detected by semi-quantitative PCR. Protein
expression levels of platelet endothelial adhesive molecule 1 (CD31),
ecto-5'-nucleotidase (CD73), endothelial cell specific molecule-1 (ESM-1), and
integrin ß5 were determined by immunocytochemical (IHC) staining.
RESULTS: Epimedin C could not affect the survival rate of C3H/10T1/2 cells at
1-30 µmol/L. Its cell cycle distribution was not significantly changed after
treated by 30 µmol/L Epimedin C for 24 h. C3H/10T1/2 cells were differentiated to
vascular endothelial cells by Epimedin C treatment, with significant
morphological changes (whirlpool-like structure). PCR results indicated that mRNA
levels of classic endothelial mark- ers, namely CD34, Vezf1, Ang1, and Ang2 were 
significantly increased in C3H/10T1/2 cells after treated with Epimedin C for 5
days (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). Protein expression levels of CD31, CD73, and ESM-1
were also positively expressed after treated with Epimedin C for 5 days, showing 
statistical difference when compared with those of the control group (P < 0.01, P
< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Epimendin C could induce C3H/10T1/2 cells to differentiate into
endothelioid cells.

PMID: 25951642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Prenat Diagn. 2015 Jun;35(6):517-28. doi: 10.1002/pd.4586. Epub 2015 May 19.

Why increased nuchal translucency is associated with congenital heart disease: a 
systematic review on genetic mechanisms.

Burger NB(1), Bekker MN(2), de Groot CJ(1), Christoffels VM(3), Haak MC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

This overview provides insight into the underlying genetic mechanism of the high 
incidence of cardiac defects in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency (NT). 
Nuchal edema, the morphological equivalent of increased NT, is likely to result
from abnormal lymphatic development and is strongly related to cardiac defects.
The underlying genetic pathways are, however, unknown. This study aims to present
a systematic overview of genes involved in both cardiac and lymphatic development
in mouse embryos. A search of PubMed and the Mammalian Phenotype Browser was
performed. Fifteen candidate genes involved in both cardiac and lymphatic
development were identified: Adrenomedullin; Chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription factor 2 (COUP-TFII); Cyp51; Ephrin-B2; Forkhead box
protein C2 (Foxc2); Nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic 1 (Nfatc1); 
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (Nf1); Phosphoinositide 3-kinase encoding isoform p110a 
(Pik3ca); Podoplanin; Prospero-related homeobox 1 (Prox1); T-box 1 (Tbx1);
Tyrosine kinase with immunoglobulin-like and endothelial growth factor-like
domains 1 (Tie1); vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf)-A; Vegf receptor-3
(Vegfr-3); and Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (Vezf1). Mutations in all but
one gene (Pik3ca) resulted in both a cardiac defect and nuchal edema. Candidate
genes - mainly encoding for endothelium - are involved in both cardiac and
lymphatic development. Alterations in candidate genes are associated with the
strong relation between increased NT and cardiac defects.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25728762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Chemosphere. 2015 Feb;120:447-55. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.07.100. Epub
2014 Sep 18.

Assessment of trifloxystrobin uptake kinetics, developmental toxicity and mRNA
expression in rare minnow embryos.

Zhu B(1), Liu GL(2), Liu L(1), Ling F(1), Wang GX(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, China. (2)College of Science, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi 712100, China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
wanggaoxue@126.com.cn.

Trifloxystrobin (TFS) is the widely used strobilurin fungicide. However, little
information is so far available regarding the uptake kinetics and developmental
toxicity of TFS to fish. The present study was conducted to investigate the
uptake kinetics, potential environment risk and toxicity of TFS on Gobiocypris
rarus embryos. Results revealed that increased malformation, decreased body
length and heart rate, affected spontaneous movement and swimming speed provide a
gradual concentration-dependent manner; values of 144 h LC50 (median lethal
concentration) and EC50 (median effective concentration) were 1.11 and 0.86 µg
L(-1). Continuous exposure to TFS resulted in a steady accumulation with no
evidence of elimination. Enzyme activities were significantly changed; reactive
oxygen species and DNA damage were significantly induced after TFS treatment.
Certain genes related to cell apoptosis (p53), metabolism (cyp1a), stress
response (hsp70) and blood vessels (vezf1) development were all significantly
up-regulated. This is the first study to define uptake kinetics and to focus on
behavioral consequences, physiological changes and mRNA expression following TFS 
exposure in the early life stages of fish. Our results suggest that TFS is highly
toxic to fish embryos.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014 Dec;21(23):13625-35. doi:
10.1007/s11356-014-3317-6. Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Triazole-induced toxicity in developing rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus) embryos.

Zhu B(1), Liu L, Gong YX, Ling F, Wang GX.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A&F University, Xinong Road 22nd, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

Using rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus) at early-life stages as experimental
models, the developmental toxicity of five widely used triazole fungicides
(myclobutanil, fluconazole, flusilazole, triflumizole, and epoxiconazole) were
investigated following exposure to 1-15 mg/L for 72 h. Meanwhile, morphological
parameters (body length, body weight, and heart rate), enzyme activities
(superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione S-transferase (GST), adenosine
triphosphatase (ATPase), and acetyl cholinesterase (AChE)), and mRNA levels
(hsp70, mstn, mt, apaf1, vezf1, and cyp1a) were also recorded following exposure 
to 0.2, 1.0, and 5.0 mg/L for 72 h. Results indicated that increased malformation
and mortality, decreased body length, body weight, and heart rate provide a
concentration-dependent pattern; values of 72 h LC50 (median lethal
concentration) and EC50 (median effective concentration) ranged from 3 to 12
mg/L. Most importantly, the results of the present study suggest that even at the
lowest concentration, 0.2 mg/L, five triazole fungicides also caused notable
changes in enzyme activities and mRNA levels. Overall, the present study points
out that those five triazole fungicides are highly toxic to the early development
of G. rarus embryos. The information presented in this study will be helpful in
better understanding the toxicity induced by triazole fungicides in fish embryos.

PMID: 25028328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2014 Jun;104:269-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2014.03.018.
Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Developmental toxicity in rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus) embryos exposed to Cu, 
Zn and Cd.

Zhu B(1), Liu L(1), Li DL(1), Ling F(1), Wang GX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. (2)Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
wanggaoxue@126.com.

Using rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus) embryos as experimental model, the
developmental toxicity of Cu, Zn and Cd were investigated following exposure to
0.001-1.000mg/L for 72h, and the toxicity effects were evaluated by larval
malformation rate, heart rate, pericardial area, spontaneous movements, tail
length, enzyme activities and biomarker genes. Our results revealed that
increased malformation rate provide a gradual dose-response relationship, and the
most pronounced morphological alteration was heart and body malformations. Values
of 72h EC50 with their 95 percent confidence intervals on G. rarus embryos were
0.103 (0.072-0.149)mg/L for Cu, 0.531 (0.330-1.060)mg/L for Zn, 0.219
(0.147-0.351)mg/L for Cd. Enzyme activities can be regard as a type of low-dose
stimulation and high-dose inhibition. Stress and metabolism-related genes (hsp70,
cyp1a and mt) were significantly up-regulated, development-related genes (wnt8a, 
vezf1 and mstn) were significantly down-regulated after the treatment by Cu, Zn
and Cd. Overall, the present study points out Cu, Zn and Cd are highly toxic to
G. rarus embryos. The information presented in this study will be helpful in
fully understanding the toxicity induced by Cu, Zn and Cd in fish embryos.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090885. eCollection
2014.

Efficient and simple production of insulin-producing cells from embryonal
carcinoma stem cells using mouse neonate pancreas extract, as a natural inducer.

Ebrahimie M(1), Esmaeili F(2), Cheraghi S(3), Houshmand F(4), Shabani L(5),
Ebrahimie E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University,
Shahrekord, Iran. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, University
of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord
University, Shahrekord, Iran. (3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic
Sciences, Azad Islamic University of Shahrekord, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Department 
of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord University of Medical
Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, 
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology,
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran. (6)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz
University, Shiraz, Iran; School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

An attractive approach to replace the destroyed insulin-producing cells (IPCs) is
the generation of functional ß cells from stem cells. Embryonal carcinoma (EC)
stem cells are pluripotent cells which can differentiate into all cell types. The
present study was carried out to establish a simple nonselective inductive
culture system for generation of IPCs from P19 EC cells by 1-2 weeks old mouse
pancreas extract (MPE). Since, mouse pancreatic islets undergo further remodeling
and maturation for 2-3 weeks after birth, we hypothesized that the mouse neonatal
MPE contains essential factors to induce in vitro differentiation of pancreatic
lineages. Pluripotency of P19 cells were first confirmed by expression analysis
of stem cell markers, Oct3/4, Sox-2 and Nanog. In order to induce
differentiation, the cells were cultured in a medium supplemented by different
concentrations of MPE (50, 100, 200 and 300 µg/ml). The results showed that P19
cells could differentiate into IPCs and form dithizone-positive cell clusters.
The generated P19-derived IPCs were immunoreactive to proinsulin, insulin and
insulin receptor beta. The expression of pancreatic ß cell genes including,
PDX-1, INS1 and INS2 were also confirmed. The peak response at the 100 µg/ml MPE 
used for investigation of EP300 and CREB1 gene expression. When stimulated with
glucose, these cells synthesized and secreted insulin. Network analysis of the
key transcription factors (PDX-1, EP300, CREB1) during the generation of IPCs
resulted in introduction of novel regulatory candidates such as MIR17, and VEZF1 
transcription factors, as well as MORN1, DKFZp761P0212, and WAC proteins.
Altogether, we demonstrated the possibility of generating IPCs from
undifferentiated EC cells, with the characteristics of pancreatic ß cells. The
derivation of pancreatic cells from EC cells which are ES cell siblings would
provide a valuable experimental tool in study of pancreatic development and
function as well as rapid production of IPCs for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3948699
PMID: 24614166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2824. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3824.

RhoB controls coordination of adult angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis following 
injury by regulating VEZF1-mediated transcription.

Gerald D(1), Adini I, Shechter S, Perruzzi C, Varnau J, Hopkins B, Kazerounian S,
Kurschat P, Blachon S, Khedkar S, Bagchi M, Sherris D, Prendergast GC, Klagsbrun 
M, Stuhlmann H, Rigby AC, Nagy JA, Benjamin LE.

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Vascular Biology Research, Department of Pathology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA [2] ImClone Systems (a wholly owned subsidiary of Eli Lilly and Company), New
York, New York 10016, USA.

Mechanisms governing the distinct temporal dynamics that characterize post-natal 
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis elicited by cutaneous wounds and inflammation 
remain unclear. RhoB, a stress-induced small GTPase, modulates cellular responses
to growth factors, genotoxic stress and neoplastic transformation. Here we show, 
using RhoB null mice, that loss of RhoB decreases pathological angiogenesis in
the ischaemic retina and reduces angiogenesis in response to cutaneous wounding, 
but enhances lymphangiogenesis following both dermal wounding and inflammatory
challenge. We link these unique and opposing roles of RhoB in blood versus
lymphatic vasculatures to the RhoB-mediated differential regulation of sprouting 
and proliferation in primary human blood versus lymphatic endothelial cells. We
demonstrate that nuclear RhoB-GTP controls expression of distinct gene sets in
each endothelial lineage by regulating VEZF1-mediated transcription. Finally, we 
identify a small-molecule inhibitor of VEZF1-DNA interaction that recapitulates
RhoB loss in ischaemic retinopathy. Our findings establish the first
intra-endothelial molecular pathway governing the phased response of angiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis following injury.

PMCID: PMC3868161
PMID: 24280686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e73925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073925. eCollection 
2013.

The chicken HS4 insulator element does not protect the H19 ICR from differential 
DNA methylation in yeast artificial chromosome transgenic mouse.

Okamura E(1), Matsuzaki H, Fukamizu A, Tanimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Mono-allelic expression at the mouse IGF2/H19 locus is controlled by differential
allelic DNA methylation of the imprinting control region (ICR). Because a
randomly integrated H19 ICR fragment, when incorporated into the genome of
transgenic mice (TgM), was allele-specifically methylated in somatic, but not in 
germ cells, it was suggested that allele-discriminating epigenetic signature, set
within or somewhere outside of the Tg H19 ICR fragment in germ cells, was later
translated into a differential DNA methylation pattern. To test if the chicken
ß-globin HS4 (cHS4) chromatin insulator might interfere with methylation
imprinting establishment at the H19 ICR, we inserted the H19 ICR fragment,
flanked by a set of floxed cHS4 core sequences, into a human ß-globin locus YAC
and generated TgM (insulated ICR' TgM). As controls, the cHS4 sequences were
removed from one side (5'HS4-deleted ICR') or both sides (pseudo-WT ICR') of the 
insulated ICR' by in vivo cre-loxP recombination. The data show that while
maternally inherited transgenic H19 ICR was not methylated in insulated ICR' TgM,
it was significantly methylated upon paternal transmission, though the level was 
lower than in the pseudo-WT ICR' control. Because this reduced level of
methylation was also observed in the 5'HS4-deleted ICR' TgM, we speculate that
the phenotype is due to VEZF1-dependent demethylation activity, rather than the
insulator function, borne in cHS4. Collectively, although we cannot rule out the 
possibility that cHS4 is incapable of blocking an allele-discriminating signal
from outside of the transgene, the epigenetic signature appears to be marked
intrinsically within the H19 ICR.

PMCID: PMC3762768
PMID: 24023912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Vasc Res. 2013;50(4):265-78. doi: 10.1159/000353287. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Role of HOXA9 and VEZF1 in endothelial biology.

Bruderer M(1), Alini M, Stoddart MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Regeneration Program, AO Research Institute Davos, Davos,
Switzerland.

Proper development of the vascular system as one of the earliest and most
critical steps during vertebrate embryogenesis is ensured by the exact spatial
and temporal control of gene expression in cells forming the vessel network.
Whereas the regulation of vascular system development is well elucidated on the
level of ligand-receptor signaling, the processes on the transcriptional level
are much less understood. As the signaling mechanisms in embryogenesis and
pathological conditions are similar, the study of embryonic blood vessel
development is of great interest for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases and
cancer. This review discusses two transcription factors, HOXA9 and VEZF1, which
are relevant for endothelial biology but are excluded in the bulk of
transcription factor references discussing endothelial biology. To our knowledge,
there is no comprehensive overview of these two transcription factors available
to date. Here, we summarize the current knowledge of human HOXA9 and VEZF1
biology and function, we detail their target genes and roles in endothelial
biology and propose that HOXA9 and VEZF1 also deserve consideration as relevant
transcriptional regulators of endothelial biology. Due to their broad role in
multiple aspects of endothelial biology, they might potentially become
interesting targets for therapeutic manipulation of pathological blood vessel
growth.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23921720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Chemosphere. 2013 Jan;90(3):1132-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.09.021. Epub 
2012 Oct 6.

Developmental toxicity of 3,4-dichloroaniline on rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus) 
embryos and larvae.

Zhu B(1), Liu T, Hu X, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.

Gobiocypris rarus is a freshwater cyprinid, which possesses lots of attractive
features (short life cycle, high fecundity, and especially the transparent trait 
during early life stage) that make it a suitable model in aquatic toxicity tests.
In this study, the effects of 3,4-dichloroaniline (3,4-DCA) on the early life
stages of G. rarus were measured. As endpoints, normal developmental parameters
(survival rate, malformation rate, total body length and average heart rate) as
well as biomarker genes (stress response (hsp70), organizer function and axis
formation (wnt8a), vascular system development (vezf1), detoxification (cyp1a)
and endocrine disruption (era)) in the developing embryos and larvae were
recorded during a 72 h exposure. The results revealed that reduced survival rate,
increased malformation, changes in heart rate and total body length provide a
gradual dose-response relationship, values of 72 h LC(50) were 4.146
(3.665-4.713) mg L(-1) for embryos and 1.088 (0.832-1.432) mg L(-1) for larvae.
The developmental biochemical biomarkers are very promising tools to determine
the severity of toxicants in the growing G. rarus embryos and larvae, even at a
concentration of 1% for LC(50). Gene expressions of wnt8a and cyp1a in embryos
were highly up-regulated (more than 100-fold) after exposure to 3,4-DCA. Overall,
the present study points out that 3,4-DCA is high toxic to the early development 
of G. rarus, and offers a practicable and highly sensitive bioassay for the
general assessment of chemical toxicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23047119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Epigenomics. 2012 Feb;4(1):67-80. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.112.

Chromatin insulator elements: establishing barriers to set heterochromatin
boundaries.

Barkess G(1), West AG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary & Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.

Epigenomic profiling has revealed that substantial portions of genomes in higher 
eukaryotes are organized into extensive domains of transcriptionally repressive
chromatin. The boundaries of repressive chromatin domains can be fixed by DNA
elements known as barrier insulators, to both shield neighboring gene expression 
and to maintain the integrity of chromosomal silencing. Here, we examine the
current progress in identifying vertebrate barrier elements and their binding
factors. We overview the design of the reporter assays used to define
enhancer-blocking and barrier insulators. We look at the mechanisms vertebrate
barrier proteins, such as USF1 and VEZF1, employ to counteract Polycomb- and
heterochromatin-associated repression. We also undertake a critical analysis of
whether CTCF could also act as a barrier protein. There is good evidence that
barrier elements in vertebrates can form repressive chromatin domain boundaries. 
Future studies will determine whether barriers are frequently used to define
repressive domain boundaries in vertebrates.

PMID: 22332659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jul;1819(7):644-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.01.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Chromatin domains, insulators, and the regulation of gene expression.

Ghirlando R(1), Giles K, Gowher H, Xiao T, Xu Z, Yao H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Key Diseases, National Insitute of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892-0540, USA.

The DNA sequence elements called insulators have two basic kinds of properties.
Barrier elements block the propagation of heterochromatic structures into
adjacent euchromatin. Enhancer blocking elements interfere with interaction
between an enhancer and promoter when placed between them. We have dissected a
compound insulator element found at the 5' end of the chicken ß-globin locus,
which possesses both activities. Barrier insulation is mediated by two kinds of
DNA binding proteins: USF1/USF2, a heterodimer which recruits multiple enzyme
complexes capable of marking histone on adjacent nucleosomes with 'activating'
marks, and Vezf1, which protects against DNA methylation. We have found that the 
heterochromatic region upstream of the insulator element is maintained in its
silent state by a dicer-dependent mechanism, suggesting a mechanism for Vezf1
function in the insulator. Enhancer blocking function in the ß-globin insulator
element is conferred by a binding site for CTCF. Consistent with this property,
CTCF binding was found some years ago to be essential for imprinted expression at
the Igf2/H19 locus. Work in many laboratories has since demonstrated that CTCF
helps stabilize long-range interactions in the nucleus. We have recently shown
that in the case of the human insulin locus such an interaction, over a distance 
of ~300kb, can result in stimulation of a target gene which itself is important
for insulin secretion. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Chromatin in time and space.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3484685
PMID: 22326678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2370-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121538109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Vezf1 protein binding sites genome-wide are associated with pausing of elongating
RNA polymerase II.

Gowher H(1), Brick K, Camerini-Otero RD, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0540, USA.

The protein Vezf1 plays multiple roles important for embryonic development. In
Vezf1(-/-) mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells, our earlier data showed widespread
changes in gene-expression profiles, including decreased expression of the
full-length active isoform of Dnmt3b methyltransferase and concomitant
genome-wide reduction in DNA methylation. Here we show that in HeLaS3 cells there
is a strong genome-wide correlation between Vezf1 binding and peaks of elongating
Ser2-P RNA polymerase (Pol) ll, reflecting Vezf1-dependent slowing of elongation.
In WT mES cells, the elongating form of RNA pol II accumulates near Vezf1 binding
sites within the dnmt3b gene and at several other Vezf1 sites, and this
accumulation is significantly reduced at these sites in Vezf1(-/-) mES cells.
Depending upon genomic location, Vezf1-mediated Pol II pausing can have different
regulatory roles in transcription and splicing. We find examples of genes in
which Vezf1 binding sites are located near cassette exons, and in which loss of
Vezf1 leads to a change in the relative abundance of alternatively spliced
messages. We further show that Vezf1 interacts with Mrg15/Mrgbp, a protein that
recognizes H3K36 trimethylation, consistent with the role of histone
modifications at alternatively spliced sites.

PMCID: PMC3289347
PMID: 22308494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(5):459-68. doi: 10.1139/o11-033. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

CTCF function is modulated by neighboring DNA binding factors.

Weth O(1), Renkawitz R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, D35392 Giessen,
Germany. oliver.weth@gen.bio.uni-giessen.de

The zinc-finger protein CTCF was originally identified in the context of gene
silencing and gene repression (Baniahmad et al. 1990; Lobanenkov et al. 1990).
CTCF was later shown to be involved in several transcriptional mechanisms such as
gene activation (Vostrov et al. 2002) and enhancer blocking (Filippova et al.
2001; Hark et al. 2000; Kanduri et al. 2000; Lutz et al. 2003; Szabó et al. 2000;
Tanimoto et al. 2003; Phillips and Corces 2009; Bell et al. 1999; Zlatanova and
Caiafa 2009a, 2009b). Insulators block the action of enhancers when positioned
between enhancer and promoter. CTCF was found to be required in almost all cases 
of enhancer blocking tested in vertebrates. This CTCF-mediated enhancer blocking 
is in many instances conferred by constitutive CTCF action. For some examples
however, a modulation of the enhancer blocking activity was documented (Lutz et
al. 2003; Weth et al. 2010). One mechanism is achieved by regulation of binding
to DNA. It was shown that CTCF is not able to bind to those binding-sites
containing methylated CpG sequences. At the imprinting control region (ICR) of
the Igf2/H19 locus the binding-site for CTCF on the paternal allele is
methylated. This prevents DNA-binding of CTCF, resulting in the loss of enhancer 
blocking (Bell and Felsenfeld 2000; Chao et al. 2002; Filippova et al. 2001; Hark
et al. 2000; Kanduri et al. 2000, 2002; Szabó et al. 2000; Takai et al. 2001).
Not only can DNA methylation interfere with CTCF binding to DNA, it was also
shown in one report that RNA transcription through the CTCF binding site results 
in CTCF eviction (Lefevre et al. 2008). In contrast to these cases most of the
DNA sites are not differentially bound by CTCF. Even CTCF interaction with its
cofactor cohesin does not seem to differ in different cell types (Schmidt et al. 
2010). These results indicate that regulation of CTCF activity might be achieved 
by neighboring factors bound to DNA. In fact, whole genome analyses of CTCF
binding sites identified several classes of neighboring sequences (Dickson et al.
2010; Boyle et al. 2010; Essien et al. 2009). Therefore, in this review we will
summarize those results for which a combined action of CTCF with factors bound
adjacently was found. These neighboring factors include the RNA polymerases I, II
and III, another zinc finger factor VEZF1 and the factors YY1, SMAD, TR and Oct4.
Each of these seems to influence, modulate or determine the function of CTCF.
Thereby, at least some of the pleiotropic effects of CTCF can be explained.

PMID: 21895576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Aug;122(2):466-75. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr136. Epub 2011 May
24.

Genetic architecture of susceptibility to PCB126-induced developmental
cardiotoxicity in zebrafish.

Waits ER(1), Nebert DW.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Research and Development, National Exposure Research Laboratory,
Ecological Exposure Research Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45268, USA. waits.eric@epa.gov

Variability in risk of developmental defects caused by dioxin-like compounds
(DLCs) has been demonstrated within and among several vertebrate species. Beyond 
our knowledge of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and its role in mediating
toxicity for this class of compounds, little else is known concerning precise
downstream targets influencing this vulnerability. In the present study,
zebrafish with divergent genetic backgrounds were screened for susceptibility to 
developmental cardiotoxicity caused by the prototypical DLC,
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126); a range up to ~40-fold differences was 
observed. Differentially sensitive zebrafish were chosen for a genetic cross, and
the recombinant generation was used for genome-wide quantitative trait loci (QTL)
mapping. Multiple QTLs were identified--several acting alone, one additively, and
two others via epistatic interaction. Together, these QTLs account for 24% of the
phenotypic variance observed in cardioteratogenicity resulting from PCB126
exposure (logarithm of the odds = 13.55, p = 1.89 × 10<U+207B>¹°). Candidate genes in
these QTL regions include the following: ahr2, bcor, and capn1 (Chr 22); e2f1 and
pdyn (Chr 23); ctnnt2, plcg1, eno3, tgm1, and tgm2 (interacting on Chr 23); and
vezf1 (Chr 15). These data demonstrate that DLC-induced cardiac teratogenicity is
a multifactorial complex trait influenced by gene × gene and gene × environment
interactions. The identified QTLs harbor many DLC-responsive genes critical to
cardiovascular development and provide insight into the genetic basis of
susceptibility to AHR-mediated developmental toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3203405
PMID: 21613231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Epigenetics. 2011 Jun;6(6):703-9. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Polycomb group genes are targets of aberrant DNA methylation in renal cell
carcinoma.

Avissar-Whiting M(1), Koestler DC, Houseman EA, Christensen BC, Kelsey KT, Marsit
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

The combined effects of genetic and epigenetic aberrations are well recognized as
causal in tumorigenesis. Here, we defined profiles of DNA methylation in primary 
renal cell carcinomas (RCC) and assessed the association of these profiles with
the expression of genes required for the establishment and maintenance of
epigenetic marks. A bead-based methylation array platform was used to measure
methylation of 1,413 CpG loci in ~800 cancer-associated genes and three
methylation classes were derived by unsupervised clustering of tumors using
recursively partitioned mixture modeling (RPMM). Quantitative RT-PCR was
performed on all tumor samples to determine the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3B,
VEZF1 and EZH2. Additionally, methylation at LINE-1 and AluYb8 repetitive
elements was measured using bisulfite pyrosequencing. Associations between
methylation class and tumor stage (p = 0.05), LINE-1 (p < 0.0001) and AluYb8 (p <
0.0001) methylation, as well as EZH2 expression (p < 0.0001) were noted following
univariate analyses. A multinomial logistic regression model controlling for
potential confounders revealed that AluYb8 (p < 0.003) methylation and EZH2
expression (p < 0.008) were significantly associated with methylation class
membership. Because EZH2 is a member of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2),
we next analyzed the distribution of Polycomb group (PcG) targets among
methylation classes derived by clustering the 1,413 array CpG loci using RPMM.
PcG target genes were significantly enriched (p < 0.0001) in methylation classes 
with greater differential methylation between RCC and non-diseased kidney tissue.
This work contributes to our understanding of how repressive marks on DNA and
chromatin are dysregulated in carcinogenesis, knowledge that might aid the
development of therapies or preventive strategies for human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3230543
PMID: 21610323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e15094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015094.

Association between acquired uniparental disomy and homozygous mutations and
HER2/ER/PR status in breast cancer.

Tuna M(1), Smid M, Zhu D, Martens JW, Amos CI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. mtuna9@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic alterations in cellular signaling networks are a hallmark of 
cancer, however, effective methods to discover them are lacking. A novel form of 
abnormality called acquired uniparental disomy (aUPD) was recently found to
pinpoint the region of mutated genes in various cancers, thereby identifying the 
region for next-generation sequencing.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We retrieved large genomic data sets from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database to perform genome-wide analysis of aUPD in breast
tumor samples and cell lines using approaches that can reliably detect aUPD. aUPD
was identified in 52.29% of the tumor samples. The most frequent aUPD regions
were located at chromosomes 2q, 3p, 5q, 9p, 9q, 10q, 11q, 13q, 14q and 17q. We
evaluated the data for any correlation between the most frequent aUPD regions and
HER2/neu, ER, and PR status, and found a statistically significant correlation
between the recurrent regions of aUPD and triple negative (TN) breast cancers.
aUPD at chromosome 17q (VEZF1, WNT3), 3p (SUMF1, GRM7), 9p (MTAP, NFIB) and 11q
(CASP1, CASP4, CASP5) are predictors for TN. The frequency of aUPD was found to
be significantly higher in TN breast cancer cases compared to HER2/neu-positive
and/or ER or PR-positive cases. Furthermore, using previously published mutation 
data, we found TP53 homozygously mutated in cell lines having aUPD in that locus.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that aUPD is a common and non-random
molecular feature of breast cancer that is most prominent in triple negative
cases. As aUPD regions are different among the main pathological subtypes,
specific aUPD regions may aid the sub-classification of breast cancer. In
addition, we provide statistical support using TP53 as an example that
identifying aUPD regions can be an effective approach in finding aberrant genes. 
We thus conclude that a genome-wide scale analysis of aUPD regions for homozygous
sequence alterations can provide valuable insights into breast tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2994899
PMID: 21152100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2011 Jul;60(3):199-207. doi: 10.1007/s12013-010-9140-x.

CREB5 computational regulation network construction and analysis between frontal 
cortex of HIV encephalitis (HIVE) and HIVE-control patients.

Wang L(1), Huang J, Jiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronics Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China. wanglin98@tsinghua.org.cn

CREB5 computational regulation network construction and analysis of frontal
cortex of HIV encephalitis (HIVE) is very useful to identify novel markers and
potential targets for prognosis and therapy. By integration of gene regulatory
network infer and the database for annotation, visualization and integrated
discovery we identified and constructed significant molecule CREB5 regulation
network from 12 frontal cortex of HIVE-control patients and 16 HIVE in the same
GEO Dataset GDS1726. Our result verified CREB5 biological regulation module in
the upstream of frontal cortex of HIVE-control patients (MAPKAPK3 activation;
DGKG, LY96, TNFRSF11B inhibition) and downstream (ATP6V0E1, CFB, DGKG, MX1,
TGFBR3 activation; LGALS3BP, RASGRP3, RDX, STAT1 inhibition), whereas in the
upstream of frontal cortex of HIVE (BST2, CFB, LCAT, TNFRSF11B activation; CFHR1,
LY96 inhibition) and downstream (GAS1, LCAT, LGALS3BP, NFAT5, VEZF1, ZNF652
activation; DGKG, IFITM1, LY96, TNFRSF11B inhibition). Importantly, we datamined 
that CREB5 regulation cluster of HIVE was involved in inflammatory response,
proteolysis, biological adhesion, and negative regulation of biological process
(only in HIVE terms) without positive regulation of cellular process,
phosphotransferase, kinase, post-translational protein modification, ATP binding,
transmembrane protein, calcium ion binding, acetylation, and hydrolase activity
(only in HIVE-control patients terms), the condition was vital to inflammation
and cognition impairment of HIVE. Our result demonstrated that common terms in
both HIVE-control patients and HIVE included biological regulation,
phosphoprotein, metabolic process, zinc, biosynthetic process, organelle, signal 
transduction, defense response, membrane, secreted, signal peptide, and
glycoprotein, and these terms were more relative to inflammation and cognition
impairment, therefore we deduced the stronger CREB5 regulation network in HIVE
consistent with our number computation. It would be necessary of the stronger
CREB5 regulation function to inflammation and cognition impairment of HIVE.

PMID: 21132541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Oct 12;11:77. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-77.

LKB1 tumor suppressor protein regulates actin filament assembly through Rho and
its exchange factor Dbl independently of kinase activity.

Xu X(1), Omelchenko T, Hall A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in LKB1 result in Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome
characterized by intestinal hamartomas and increased incidence of epithelial
cancers. LKB1 encodes a serine/threonine kinase that plays an important role in
regulating energy metabolism through the AMPK/mTOR signaling pathway. In
addition, LKB1 is homologous to PAR-4, a polarity protein first described in C.
elegans, while activation of LKB1 in mammalian epithelial cells induces the
polarized assembly of actin filaments.
RESULTS: To explore the mechanism by which LKB1 interacts with the actin
cytoskeleton, we introduced LKB1 into HeLa cells that lack endogenous LKB1. This 
results in activation of the small GTPase Rho and the assembly of linear actin
filaments associated with focal adhesions. These effects on the actin
cytoskeleton are attenuated by siRNA-mediated depletion of the guanine nucleotide
exchange factor Dbl. Co-expression of the LKB1 with the adaptor protein STRAD
induces actin filament puncta associated with phospho-ezrin.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that LKB1 regulates the actin cytoskeleton
through a Dbl/Rho pathway.

PMCID: PMC2964536
PMID: 20939895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Inflamm (Lond). 2010 Sep 30;7:50. doi: 10.1186/1476-9255-7-50.

TNFRSF11B computational development network construction and analysis between
frontal cortex of HIV encephalitis (HIVE) and HIVE-control patients.

Huang JX(1), Wang L, Jiang MH.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronics Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China. wanglin98@tsinghua.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: TNFRSF11B computational development network construction and analysis
of frontal cortex of HIV encephalitis (HIVE) is very useful to identify novel
markers and potential targets for prognosis and therapy.
METHODS: By integration of gene regulatory network infer (GRNInfer) and the
database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID) we
identified and constructed significant molecule TNFRSF11B development network
from 12 frontal cortex of HIVE-control patients and 16 HIVE in the same GEO
Dataset GDS1726.
RESULTS: Our result verified TNFRSF11B developmental process only in the
downstream of frontal cortex of HIVE-control patients (BST2, DGKG, GAS1, PDCD4,
TGFBR3, VEZF1 inhibition), whereas in the upstream of frontal cortex of HIVE
(DGKG, PDCD4 activation) and downstream (CFDP1, DGKG, GAS1, PAX6 activation;
BST2, PDCD4, TGFBR3, VEZF1 inhibition). Importantly, we datamined that TNFRSF11B 
development cluster of HIVE is involved in T-cell mediated immunity, cell
projection organization and cell motion (only in HIVE terms) without apoptosis,
plasma membrane and kinase activity (only in HIVE-control patients terms), the
condition is vital to inflammation, brain morphology and cognition impairment of 
HIVE. Our result demonstrated that common terms in both HIVE-control patients and
HIVE include developmental process, signal transduction, negative regulation of
cell proliferation, RNA-binding, zinc-finger, cell development, positive
regulation of biological process and cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We deduced the stronger TNFRSF11B development network in HIVE
consistent with our number computation. It would be necessary of the stronger
TNFRSF11B development function to inflammation, brain morphology and cognition of
HIVE.

PMCID: PMC2959006
PMID: 20920282  [PubMed]


21. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 8;5(9):e12630. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012630.

Complete biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 imprinting control region position 
results in fetal growth retardation and perinatal lethality.

Lee DH(1), Singh P, Tsark WM, Szabó PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The H19/Igf2 imprinting control region (ICR) functions as an
insulator exclusively in the unmethylated maternal allele, where
enhancer-blocking by CTCF protein prevents the interaction between the Igf2
promoter and the distant enhancers. DNA methylation inhibits CTCF binding in the 
paternal ICR allele. Two copies of the chicken ß-globin insulator (ChßGI)(2) are 
capable of substituting for the enhancer blocking function of the ICR.
Insulation, however, now also occurs upon paternal inheritance, because unlike
the H19 ICR, the (ChßGI)(2) does not become methylated in fetal male germ cells. 
The (ChßGI)(2) is a composite insulator, exhibiting enhancer blocking by CTCF and
chromatin barrier functions by USF1 and VEZF1. We asked the question whether
these barrier proteins protected the (ChßGI)(2) sequences from methylation in the
male germ line.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We genetically dissected the ChßGI in the mouse
by deleting the binding sites USF1 and VEZF1. The methylation of the mutant
versus normal (ChßGI)(2) significantly increased from 11% to 32% in perinatal
male germ cells, suggesting that the barrier proteins did have a role in
protecting the (ChßGI)(2) from methylation in the male germ line. Contrary to the
H19 ICR, however, the mutant (mChßGI)(2) lacked the potential to attain full de
novo methylation in the germ line and to maintain methylation in the paternal
allele in the soma, where it consequently functioned as a biallelic insulator.
Unexpectedly, a stricter enhancer blocking was achieved by CTCF alone than by a
combination of the CTCF, USF1 and VEZF1 sites, illustrated by undetectable Igf2
expression upon paternal transmission.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this in vivo model, hypomethylation at the ICR
position together with fetal growth retardation mimicked the human Silver-Russell
syndrome. Importantly, late fetal/perinatal death occurred arguing that strict
biallelic insulation at the H19/Igf2 ICR position is not tolerated in
development.

PMCID: PMC2935888
PMID: 20838620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Jul;30(7):1378-88. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.200428. Epub 2010 Apr 29.

Targeted Vezf1-null mutation impairs vascular structure formation during
embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Zou Z(1), Ocaya PA, Sun H, Kuhnert F, Stuhlmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Vezf1 encodes an early zinc finger transcription factor that is
essential for normal vascular development and functions in a dose-dependent
manner. Here, we investigated the role of Vezf1 during processes of endothelial
cell differentiation and maturation by studying mutant Vezf1 embryonic stem (ES) 
cells using the in vitro embryoid body differentiation model and the in vivo
teratocarcinoma model.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Vezf1-/- ES cell-derived embryoid bodies failed to form a
well-organized vascular network and showed dramatic vascular sprouting defects.
Our results indicate that the retinol pathway is an important mediator of Vezf1
function and that loss of Vezf1 results in reduced retinol/vitamin A signaling
and aberrant extracellular matrix (ECM) formation. Unexpectedly, we also
uncovered defects during in vitro differentiation of Vezf1-/- ES cells along
hematopoietic cell lineages. Vezf1-/- ES cell-derived teratocarcinomas were able 
to spontaneously differentiate into cell types of all 3 germ layers. However,
histological and immunohistochemical examination of these tumors showed decreased
cell proliferation, delayed differentiation, and large foci of cells with
extensive deposition of ECM. Embryoid bodies and teratocarcinomas derived from
heterozygous ES cells displayed an intermediate phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results suggest that Vezf1 is involved in early
differentiation processes of the vasculature by regulating cell differentiation, 
proliferation, and ECM distribution and deposition.

PMCID: PMC2903440
PMID: 20431070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jan;6(1):e1000804. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000804. Epub 2010 
Jan 8.

VEZF1 elements mediate protection from DNA methylation.

Dickson J(1), Gowher H, Strogantsev R, Gaszner M, Hair A, Felsenfeld G, West AG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pathology and Gene Regulation, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Glasgow, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

There is growing consensus that genome organization and long-range gene
regulation involves partitioning of the genome into domains of distinct
epigenetic chromatin states. Chromatin insulator or barrier elements are key
components of these processes as they can establish boundaries between chromatin 
states. The ability of elements such as the paradigm beta-globin HS4 insulator to
block the range of enhancers or the spread of repressive histone modifications is
well established. Here we have addressed the hypothesis that a barrier element in
vertebrates should be capable of defending a gene from silencing by DNA
methylation. Using an established stable reporter gene system, we find that HS4
acts specifically to protect a gene promoter from de novo DNA methylation.
Notably, protection from methylation can occur in the absence of histone
acetylation or transcription. There is a division of labor at HS4; the sequences 
that mediate protection from methylation are separable from those that mediate
CTCF-dependent enhancer blocking and USF-dependent histone modification
recruitment. The zinc finger protein VEZF1 was purified as the factor that
specifically interacts with the methylation protection elements. VEZF1 is a
candidate CpG island protection factor as the G-rich sequences bound by VEZF1 are
frequently found at CpG island promoters. Indeed, we show that VEZF1 elements are
sufficient to mediate demethylation and protection of the APRT CpG island
promoter from DNA methylation. We propose that many barrier elements in
vertebrates will prevent DNA methylation in addition to blocking the propagation 
of repressive histone modifications, as either process is sufficient to direct
the establishment of an epigenetically stable silent chromatin state.

PMCID: PMC2795164
PMID: 20062523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biomol NMR Assign. 2009 Dec;3(2):215-8. doi: 10.1007/s12104-009-9178-0. Epub 2009
Jul 18.

Resonance assignments of the human AKAP13-PH domain and stabilizing DH helix.

Sugawara M(1), Whittaker SB, Bishop S, Ball L, Overduin M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. 
m.sugawara@bham.ac.uk

The human AKAP13 protein contains DH and PH domains, which are responsible for
its cell transforming activity. Despite its biomedical importance, the
contribution of the PH domain to AKAP13 activity remains unclear and no three
dimensional structure is available to date. Here we report the backbone and side 
chain (1)H, (13)C and (15)N resonance assignments of a 20 kDa construct
comprising the uniformly (13)C and( 15)N labeled AKAP13-PH domain and an
associated helix from the DH domain which is required for its stable expression. 
Resonance assignment has been achieved using conventional triple resonance
experiments; 95% of all back bone resonances and more than 90% of side chain
resonances have been successfully assigned. The (1)H, (13)C and (15)N chemical
shifts have been deposited in BMRB with accession number of 16195.

PMID: 19888694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Differentiation. 2010 Jan;79(1):21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.08.002. Epub 2009
Sep 1.

Induced endothelial differentiation of cells from a murine embryonic mesenchymal 
cell line C3H/10T1/2 by angiogenic factors in vitro.

Wang M(1), Su Y, Sun H, Wang T, Yan G, Ran X, Wang F, Cheng T, Zou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Combined Injury, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and
Combined Injury, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, PR China.

A murine embryonic mesenchymal cell line C3H/10T1/2 possesses the potential to
differentiate into multiple cell phenotypes and has been recognized as
multipotent mesenchymal stem cells, but no in vitro model of its endothelial
differentiation has been established and the effect of angiogenic factors on the 
differentiation is unknown. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the role
of angiogenic factors in inducing endothelial differentiation of C3H/10T1/2 cells
in vitro. C3H/10T1/2 cells were treated with angiogenic factors, VEGF (10 ng/mL) 
and bFGF (5 ng/mL). At specified time points, cells were subjected to
morphological study, immunofluorescence staining, RT-PCR, LDL-uptake tests and
3-D culture for the examination of the structural and functional characteristics 
of endothelial cells. Classic cobblestone-like growth pattern appeared at 6 day
of the induced differentiation. Immunofluorescence staining and RT-PCR analyses
revealed that the induced cells exhibited endothelial cell-specific markers such 
as CD31, von Willebrand factor, Flk1, Flt1, VE-cadherin, Tie2, EphrinB2 and Vezf1
at 9 day. The induced C3H/10T1/2 cells exhibited functional characteristics of
the mature endothelial phenotype, such as uptake of acetylated low-density
lipoproteins (Ac-LDL) and formation of capillary-like structures in
three-dimensional culture. At 9 day, Weibel-Palade bodies were observed under a
transmission electron microscope. This study demonstrates, for the first time,
endothelial differentiation of C3H/10T1/2 cells induced by angiogenic factors,
VEGF and bFGF, and confirms the multipotential differentiation ability. This in
vitro model is useful for investigating the molecular events in endothelial
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

PMID: 19726123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genes Dev. 2008 Aug 1;22(15):2075-84. doi: 10.1101/gad.1658408.

Vezf1 regulates genomic DNA methylation through its effects on expression of DNA 
methyltransferase Dnmt3b.

Gowher H(1), Stuhlmann H, Felsenfeld G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

The zinc finger protein vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (Vezf1) has been
implicated in the development of the blood vascular and lymphatic system in mice,
and has been characterized as a transcriptional activator in some systems. The
chicken homolog, BGP1, has binding sites in the beta-globin locus, including the 
upstream insulator element. We report that in a mouse embryonic stem cell line
deletion of both copies of Vezf1 results in loss of DNA methylation at widespread
sites in the genome, including Line1 elements and minor satellite repeats, some
imprinted genes, and several CpG islands. Loss of methylation appears to arise
from a substantial decrease in the abundance of the de novo DNA
methyltransferase, Dnmt3b. These results suggest that naturally occurring
mutations in Vezf1/BGP1 might have widespread effects on DNA methylation patterns
and therefore on epigenetic regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2492749
PMID: 18676812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Circ Res. 2008 Jul 18;103(2):e15-26. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.177386. Epub
2008 Jun 19.

Neurotrophin p75 receptor (p75NTR) promotes endothelial cell apoptosis and
inhibits angiogenesis: implications for diabetes-induced impaired
neovascularization in ischemic limb muscles.

Caporali A(1), Pani E, Horrevoets AJ, Kraenkel N, Oikawa A, Sala-Newby GB, Meloni
M, Cristofaro B, Graiani G, Leroyer AS, Boulanger CM, Spinetti G, Yoon SO,
Madeddu P, Emanueli C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiovascular Medicine Division, Bristol Heart Institute,
University of Bristol, UK.

Diabetes impairs endothelial function and reparative neovascularization. The p75 
receptor of neurotrophins (p75(NTR)), which is scarcely present in healthy
endothelial cells (ECs), becomes strongly expressed by capillary ECs after
induction of peripheral ischemia in type-1 diabetic mice. Here, we show that gene
transfer-induced p75(NTR) expression impairs the survival, proliferation,
migration, and adhesion capacities of cultured ECs and endothelial progenitor
cells (EPCs) and inhibits angiogenesis in vitro. Moreover, intramuscular p75(NTR)
gene delivery impairs neovascularization and blood flow recovery in a mouse model
of limb ischemia. These disturbed functions are associated with suppression of
signaling mechanisms implicated in EC survival and angiogenesis. In fact,
p75(NTR) depresses the VEGF-A/Akt/eNOS/NO pathway and additionally reduces the
mRNA levels of ITGB1 [beta (1) integrin], BIRC5 (survivin), PTTG1 (securin) and
VEZF1. Diabetic mice, which typically show impaired postischemic muscular
neovascularization and blood perfusion recovery, have these defects corrected by 
intramuscular gene transfer of a dominant negative mutant form of p75(NTR).
Collectively, our data newly demonstrate the antiangiogenic action of p75(NTR)
and open new avenues for the therapeutic use of p75(NTR) inhibition to combat
diabetes-induced microvascular liabilities.

PMCID: PMC2640941
PMID: 18566344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Life Sci. 2008 Feb 27;82(9-10):512-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2007.12.005. Epub 2007
Dec 17.

Stimulation of endothelin-1 gene expression by insulin via phosphoinositide-3
kinase-glycogen synthase kinase-3beta signaling in endothelial cells.

Yang Z(1), Li JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Insulin stimulates secretion of the potent vasoactive and mitogenic peptide
endothelin-1 (ET-1) from endothelial cells. We sought to investigate whether
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)-dependent inactivation of glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) by insulin leads to elevation of ET-1 gene expression in 
endothelial cells. Inhibition of GSK3beta activity by LiCl or siRNA technique
mimicked insulin action to stimulate ET-1 gene expression. Luciferase reporter
assay showed insulin stimulated-elevation of ET-1 promoter activity can be
abolished by the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin, but not by the mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitor PD-98059. To further investigate whether the
transcription factor vascular endothelial zinc finger-1 (Vezf1) is involved in
ET-1 regulation, site-mutated reporter plasmid was used in luciferase reporter
assay. A 2-bp mutation in Vezf1 binding element abolished insulin-stimulated
elevation of ET-1 promoter activity. Furthermore, siRNA inhibition of Vezf1 led
to decline in the levels of ET-1 mRNA and ET-1 peptides. These observations
indicate that PI3K-dependent inactivation of GSK3beta by insulin leads to
upregulation of ET-1 gene expression and Vezf1 may be a target for ET-1
regulation by insulin. PI3K-GSK3beta signaling may be responsible for insulin
stimulation of ET-1 production associated with insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia.

PMID: 18201727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2512-22.

Embryonic cardiomyocyte expression of endothelial genes.

Welikson RE(1), Kaestner S, Evans AM, Hauschka SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

Vertebrate precardiac mesoderm contains cells destined to become cardiomyocyte or
endothelial cells. To determine the stability of these phenotypes freshly
isolated embryonic day (E) 2.5-E6 chicken hearts were immunostained for myosin
heavy chain (MyHC) to identify cardiomyocytes, and von Willebrand factor (vWF)
and Flk-1 to identify endothelial cells. At E2.5-E3, 90% of cells express only
MyHC and 6% express only vWF/Flk-1. However, 2% MyHC+ cells in E2.5-E3 hearts and
0.3% in E4-E6 hearts, also express vWF/Flk-1; and when cultured 3 days, >40% of
the MyHC+ cells express vWF/Flk-1, but they do not express Vezf1, vascular
endothelial cadherin, or Tie2. Thus, only a subset of endothelial genes are
induced in cultured cardiomyocytes. While the subsequent developmental fate of
embryonic heart cells exhibiting a vWF+/MyHC+ phenotype is unknown, analysis of
this phenotype may provide information pertinent to mechanisms of cell phenotype 
stability, cellular transdifferentiation, and induction of stable cell types from
embryonic stem cells.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17685474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Endothelium. 2005 Jul-Aug;12(4):163-70.

Metallothionein 1 is a downstream target of vascular endothelial zinc finger 1
(VEZF1) in endothelial cells and participates in the regulation of angiogenesis.

Miyashita H(1), Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (VEZF1) is a transcription factor that is
expressed in endothelial cells and plays a requisite role in the regulation of
angiogenesis. The authors' previous microarray analysis revealed that the
down-regulation of VEZF1 gene resulted in the decrease of metallothionein 1 (MT1)
gene in endothelial cells. Here the authors showed by Northern blotting that the 
down-regulation of VEZF1 decreased, whereas up-regulation of VEZF1 increased, the
expression of MT1 in endothelial cells. Moreover, MT1 was expressed in
endothelial cells at the site of angiogenesis in vivo. The authors therefore
examined whether MT1 played any role in the regulation of angiogenesis.
Down-regulation of MT1 in endothelial cells inhibited proliferation, migration,
and network formation in vitro, as well as angiogenesis in vivo. Moreover,
down-regulation of MT1 resulted in the cell cycle arrest at G1 phase. These
results indicate that MT1 is a downstream target of VEZF1 in endothelial cells
and is involved in the regulation of angiogenesis.

PMID: 16162438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):140-56.

Dosage-dependent requirement for mouse Vezf1 in vascular system development.

Kuhnert F(1), Campagnolo L, Xiong JW, Lemons D, Fitch MJ, Zou Z, Kiosses WB,
Gardner H, Stuhlmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Division of Vascular Biology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Vezf1 is an early development gene that encodes a zinc finger transcription
factor. In the developing embryo, Vezf1 is expressed in the yolk sac mesoderm and
the endothelium of the developing vasculature and, in addition, in mesodermal and
neuronal tissues. Targeted inactivation of Vezf1 in mice reveals that it acts in 
a closely regulated, dose-dependent fashion on the development of the blood
vascular and lymphatic system. Homozygous mutant embryos display vascular
remodeling defects and loss of vascular integrity leading to localized
hemorrhaging. Ultrastructural analysis shows defective endothelial cell adhesion 
and tight junction formation in the mutant vessels. Moreover, in heterozygous
embryos, haploinsufficiency is observed that is characterized by lymphatic
hypervascularization associated with hemorrhaging and edema in the jugular
region; a phenotype reminiscent of the human congenital lymphatic malformation
syndrome cystic hygroma.

PMCID: PMC1453095
PMID: 15882861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2004 May;24(5):878-84. Epub 2004 Mar 18.

Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 is involved in the regulation of angiogenesis:
possible contribution of stathmin/OP18 as a downstream target gene.

Miyashita H(1), Kanemura M, Yamazaki T, Abe M, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer,
Tohoku University, 4-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1 (Vezf1) is a recently identified
zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in endothelial cells (ECs)
during vascular development in mouse embryo. Here, we present that Vezf1 was
expressed in ECs at the site of postnatal angiogenesis. We therefore examined
whether Vezf1 was involved in the regulation of angiogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The specific downregulation of Vezf1 by antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide (AS-ODN) significantly inhibited the proliferation,
migration, and network formation of cultured ECs as well as angiogenesis in vivo.
Vezf1 AS-ODN downregulated the expression of stathmin/oncoprotein18 (OP18), a
microtubule-destabilizing protein, in ECs, whereas transient transfection of
Vezf1 cDNA increased the expression of stathmin/OP18 in ECs. To explore the
relationship between Vezf1 and stathmin/OP18, we specifically downregulated
stathmin/OP18. We found that stathmin/OP18 AS-ODN inhibited the proliferation,
migration, and network formation of ECs as Vezf1 AS-ODN did. Moreover, Vezf1
AS-ODN decreased G2/M population of ECs and increased apoptosis, which reproduced
the characteristic feature of stathmin/OP18 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Vezf1 is involved in the regulation of
angiogenesis, at least in part, through the expression of stathmin/OP18 in ECs.

PMID: 15031128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17963-72. Epub 2004 Feb 14.

p68RacGAP is a novel GTPase-activating protein that interacts with vascular
endothelial zinc finger-1 and modulates endothelial cell capillary formation.

Aitsebaomo J(1), Wennerberg K, Der CJ, Zhang C, Kedar V, Moser M,
Kingsley-Kallesen ML, Zeng GQ, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, the Department of Medicine, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The endothelium is required for maintenance of vascular integrity and homeostasis
during vascular development and in adulthood. However, little is known about the 
coordinated interplay between transcription factors and signaling molecules that 
regulate endothelial cell-dependent transcriptional events. Vascular endothelial 
zinc finger-1 (Vezf1) is a zinc finger-containing transcription factor that is
specifically expressed within the endothelium during vascular development. We
have previously shown that Vezf1 potently activates transcription of the
endothelin-1 promoter. We now report the identification of p68RacGAP, a novel
Vezf1-interacting 68-kDa RhoGAP domain-containing protein. p68RacGAP mRNA is
highly expressed in vascular endothelial cells by Northern blot analysis, and
immunohistochemical staining of adult mouse tissues identified p68RacGAP in
endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and epithelial cells in vivo.
Rac1 and Vezf1 both bind avidly to p68RacGAP, suggesting that p68RacGAP is not
only a GTPase-activating protein for Rac1 but that p68RacGAP may also be part of 
the protein complex that binds to and modulates Vezf1 transcriptional activity.
Functionally p68RacGAP specifically activates the GTPase activity of Rac1 in vivo
but not Cdc42 or RhoA. In addition, p68RacGAP potently inhibits
Vezf1/DB1-mediated transcriptional activation of the human endothelin-1 promoter 
and modulates endothelial cell capillary tube formation. Taken together, these
data suggest that p68RacGAP is a multifunctional regulatory protein that has a
Rac1-specific GTPase-activating activity, regulates transcriptional activity of
the endothelin-1 promoter, and is involved in the signal transduction pathway
that regulates endothelial cell capillary tube formation during angiogenesis.

PMID: 14966113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 23;313(4):969-76.

Human zinc finger protein 161, a novel transcriptional activator of the dopamine 
transporter.

Lee KH(1), Kwak YD, Kim DH, Chang MY, Lee YS, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea

The dopamine transporter (DAT) terminates dopaminergic neurotransmission via
reuptake of released dopamine into presynaptic neurons. We have cloned 2.5 kb of 
the regulatory region upstream of human DAT (hDAT) and constructed a series of
deletion mutants to test promoter activity. A comparison of promoter activity
between non-neural and neuronal cell lines reveals an interesting difference in
pattern. In the PC12 cell line, activity of the proximal promoter is strongly
silenced by one or more unidentified elements spanning positions -395 to -2465 of
the hDAT gene. Our studies focus on identifying and characterizing the activating
factor for hDAT transcription in the sequence between -2511 and -2492 (5(')-CTA
CCT GCA CAG TTC ACG GA-3('), termed HY1). In this investigation, we cloned the
zinc finger protein 161 (ZFP161) gene as a HY1-binding factor, using the yeast
one-hybrid screen. Recombinant ZFP161 was produced to evaluate the DNA-binding
properties of the protein. The ability of ZFP161 to directly bind HY1 was
examined in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. RT-PCR analyses revealed
that transfection of ZFP161 induced hDAT mRNA expression in HEK293 cells. We
additionally confirmed the expression and localization of the DAT protein, using 
a specific antibody. Both the HY1 sequence and the downstream region were
necessary for activation of the hDAT promoter by ZFP161. This finding suggests
that the site of cofactor interaction with ZFP161 may exist downstream of HY1.

PMID: 14706637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 3;22(21):5700-11.

VE-statin, an endothelial repressor of smooth muscle cell migration.

Soncin F(1), Mattot V, Lionneton F, Spruyt N, Lepretre F, Begue A, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille
Cedex, France. fabrice.soncin@ibl.fr

The recruitment and proliferation of smooth muscle cells and pericytes are two
key events for the stabilization of newly formed capillaries during angiogenesis 
and, when out of control in the adult, are the main causes of arteriosclerosis.
We have identified a novel gene, named VE-statin for vascular endothelial-statin,
which is expressed specifically by endothelial cells of the developing mouse
embryo and in the adult, and in early endothelial progenitors. The mouse and
human VE-statin genes have been located on chromosome 2 and 9, respectively, they
span >10 kbp and are transcribed in two major variants arising from independent
initiation sites. The VE-statin transcripts code for a unique protein of 30 kDa
that contains a signal peptide and two epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like
modules. VE-statin is found in the cellular endoplasmic reticulum and secreted in
the cell supernatant. Secreted VE-statin inhibits platelet-derived growth factor 
(PDGF)-BB-induced smooth muscle cell migration, but has no effects on endothelial
cell migration. VE-statin is the first identified inhibitor of mural cell
migration specifically produced by endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC275406
PMID: 14592969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):39197-205. Epub 2001 Aug 14.

Vezf1/DB1 is an endothelial cell-specific transcription factor that regulates
expression of the endothelin-1 promoter.

Aitsebaomo J(1), Kingsley-Kallesen ML, Wu Y, Quertermous T, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Cardiology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7075, USA.

Coordinated gene regulation within the vascular endothelium is required for
normal cardiovascular patterning during development and for vascular homeostasis 
during adulthood, yet little is known about the mechanisms that regulate
endothelial transcriptional events. Vascular endothelial zinc finger 1
(Vezf1)/DB1 is a recently identified zinc finger-containing protein that is
expressed specifically within endothelial cells during development. In this
report, we demonstrate that Vezf1/DB1 is a nuclear localizing protein that
potently and specifically activates transcription mediated by the human
endothelin-1 promoter, in a Tax-independent manner, in transient transfection
assays. Using a combination of deletion mutagenesis and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays, a novel Vezf1/DB1-responsive element was localized to a 6-base pair
(bp) motif, ACCCCC, located 47 bp upstream of the endothelin-1 transcription
start site. Recombinant Vezf1/DB1 also bound to this sequence, and a 2-bp
mutation in this element abolished Vezf1/DB1 responsiveness by the endothelin-1
promoter. Vezf1/DB1 could be identified with a specific antibody in nuclear
complexes from endothelial cells that bound to this element. Regulation of
endothelin-1 promoter activity by Vezf1/DB1 provides a mechanism for endothelin-1
expression in the vascular endothelium during development and to maintain
vascular tone; Vezf1/DB1 itself is a candidate transcription factor for modifying
endothelial cell phenotypes in order to appropriately assemble and maintain the
cardiovascular system.

PMID: 11504723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Br J Haematol. 2001 Jul;114(1):191-7.

Profiling of genes expressed in human monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic
cells using cDNA expression array.

Lapteva N(1), Ando Y, Nieda M, Hohjoh H, Okai M, Kikuchi A, Dymshits G, Ishikawa 
Y, Juji T, Tokunaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Using a human cDNA expression array, we obtained expression profiles of 588 genes
in CD14+ monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs). Overall, 22 genes 
were upregulated, and nine genes were downregulated in DCs of both samples from
two different individuals. Many of the genes that were upregulated in DCs encode 
proteins that are related to differentiation, cell structure, migration,
termination of cell cycle as well as proliferation, e.g. tumour necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), tumour necrosis factor receptor II (TNFRII), thymosin
beta-10, epithelial discoidin domain receptor 1, replication factor C, putative
transcription factor DB1, alpha catenin, transforming growth factor-beta 1,
prohibitin, p53-regulating protein and neu differentiation factor. Among the
downregulated genes in DCs were genes that encode proteins of cell cycle
regulation: mitotic growth and transcription activator, platelet-derived growth
factor receptor-beta subunit, interleukin 2 receptor (IL-2R)-gamma subunit,
IL-7R-alpha subunit, leucocyte interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR).
Semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction method
confirmed the upregulated expression levels in DCs for TNFRII, TNF-alpha, alpha
catenin and downregulation of IFN-gamma, GM-CSFR on four different donor samples 
of DCs and monocytes. Moreover, our data show the presence of a 'switch-on' step 
for the TNF-alpha and TNFRII gene expression in immature DCs for further
differentiation into mature DCs.

PMID: 11472367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Biol. 1999 Feb 15;206(2):123-41.

Vezf1: A Zn finger transcription factor restricted to endothelial cells and their
precursors.

Xiong JW(1), Leahy A, Lee HH, Stuhlmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York, 10029, USA.

Using retroviral entrapment vectors, we identified a novel mouse gene whose
expression is restricted to vascular endothelial cells and their precursors in
the yolk sac blood islands. A 3.68-kb cDNA corresponding to the endogenous
transcript was isolated using genomic DNA flanking the entrapment vector
insertion as a probe. We have named this gene Vezf1 for vascular endothelial zinc
finger 1. Vezf1 encodes a protein with a predicted molecular mass of 56 kDa and
that contains six putative zinc finger domains and shows high homology to a
previously identified human gene, DB1, that is believed to be involved in
regulating expression of cytokine genes such as interleukin-3. In situ
hybridization analysis revealed the onset of expression in advanced primitive
streak-stage embryos being located in the extraembryonic mesodermal component of 
the visceral yolk sac and in the anteriormost mesoderm of the embryo proper.
During head-fold and somite stages, expression was restricted to vascular
endothelial cells that arise during both vasculogenesis and angiogenesis.
Vezf1-related sequences were found to be highly conserved among higher vertebrate
species that have acquired extraembryonic yolk sac membranes during evolution.
The Vezf1 locus mapped to the proximal part of mouse chromosome 2, a region which
has homology to human chromosome 9q. Vezf1 expression correlates temporally and
spatially with the early differentiation of angioblasts into the endothelial cell
lineage and the proliferation of endothelial cells of the embryonic vascular
system. Thus, Vezf1 may play an important role in the endothelial lineage
determination and may have an additional role during later stages of embryonic
vasculogenesis and angiogenesis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9986727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Adhes Commun. 1998;6(4):277-87.

Functional interaction between RhoB and the transcription factor DB1.

Lebowitz PF(1), Prendergast GC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

RhoB has been implicated in cell growth control, actin regulation,
adhesion-dependent viability, and gene expression, but its effector functions are
poorly defined. Prenylation is important for the physiological functions of Rho
proteins, so to identify RhoB effector functions we identified proteins whose
interaction was sensitive to prenylation. Here we report the investigation of one
such protein, an ubiquitously expressed transcription factor termed DB1 that was 
originally cloned as a Tax-activated regulator of the IL3 promoter. The
RhoB-binding domain in DB1 was located in a functionally undefined region
upstream and separable from its zinc finger DNA binding domain. DB1 interacted
strongly with prenylated RhoB but weakly with RhoA and not at all with H-Ras.
Functional interaction was supported by the identification of prenylated species 
of RhoB in the nuclear membrane and in an intranuclear laminar region, where they
were available for DB1 association in principle, and by the ability of RhoB to
inhibit transcriptional activation by DB1, whereas RhoA or Ras had little or no
effect, respectively. The results of this study suggest a novel mechanism by
which certain Rho proteins may regulate transcription, through sequestration of a
transcription factor.

PMID: 9865462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5099-107.

Molecular cloning of a novel human cDNA encoding a zinc finger protein that binds
to the interleukin-3 promoter.

Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Nishida J, Baldwin D, Arai K, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Development Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The CT/GC-rich region (-76 to -47) is one transcriptional regulatory region of
the interleukin-3 (IL-3) gene which confers basic transcriptional activity and
responds to trans-activation by human T-cell leukemia virus type I-encoded Tax.
We isolated three types of cDNAs encoding Cys2/His2-type zinc finger proteins
that bind to this region. Two were identical to known transcription factors, EGR1
and EGR2, and the other clone, named DB1, encoded a novel protein of 516 amino
acids with six zinc finger motifs. DB1 mRNA was present in human tissues,
ubiquitously. Two constitutive transcripts of 4.0 and 4.8 kb in length were
present in Jurkat cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay, with specific
antibodies, showed that DB1 constitutively binds to this region whereas EGR1
binds in a T-cell activation-dependent manner. Overexpression of DB1 in Jurkat
cells had no detectable effect on the transcription activity of the IL-3
promoter, in a transient-transfection assay. EGR1 and EGR2 increased IL-3
promoter activity when the transfected cells were stimulated with
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate and A23187. When DB1 was cotransfected with a Tax
expression vector, transcription activity of the IL-3 promoter induced by Tax was
significantly increased, while EGR1 and EGR2 were without effect. These results
suggest that EGR1 has a role in inducible transcription of the IL-3 gene, while
DB1 sustains basal transcriptional activity and also cooperates with Tax to
activate the IL-3 promoter.

PMCID: PMC359028
PMID: 8035792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


