
1. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar 16;146:163-171. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2016.03.014. [Epub
ahead of print]

Genetic analysis of consanguineous families presenting with congenital ocular
defects.

Ullah E(1), Nadeem Saqib MA(2), Sajid S(3), Shah N(3), Zubair M(4), Khan MA(5),
Ahmed I(6), Ali G(7), Dutta AK(8), Danda S(8), Lao R(9), Ling-Fung Tang P(9),
Kwok PY(9), Ansar M(10), Slavotinek A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan; Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 
USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan; Pakistan Medical Research Council, Islamabad, Pakistan. (3)Department
of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320, Pakistan. (4)Gomal
Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Gomal University, Dera Ismail Khan,
Pakistan. (5)Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Gomal University,
Dera Ismail Khan, Pakistan; Genomic Core Facility, Interim Translational Research
Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(6)Department of Community Medicine, Gomal Medical College, Dera Ismail Khan,
Khyber- Pakhtoonkhuwa, Pakistan. (7)Department of Biotechnology, University of
Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Muzaffarabad, Azad Jammu & Kashmir, Pakistan. (8)Medical 
Genetics Unit, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India. (9)Cardiovascular
Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan. Electronic address: ansar@qau.edu.pk. (11)Department of Pediatrics,
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address:
slavotia@peds.ucsf.edu.

Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (A/M) are a group of rare developmental disorders
that affect the size of the ocular globe. A/M may present as the sole clinical
feature, but are also frequently found in a variety of syndromes. A/M is
genetically heterogeneous and can be caused by chromosomal aberrations, copy
number variations and single gene mutations. To date, A/M has been caused by
mutations in at least 20 genes that show different modes of inheritance. In this 
study, we enrolled eight consanguineous families with A/M, including seven from
Pakistan and one from India. Sanger and exome sequencing of DNA samples from
these families identified three novel mutations including two mutations in the
Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 1 Family Member A3 (ALDH1A3) gene, [c.1310_1311delAT;
p.(Tyr437Trpfs*44) and c.964G > A; p.(Val322Met)] and a single missense mutation 
in Forkhead Box E3 (FOXE3) gene, [c.289A > G p.(Ile97Val)]. Additionally two
previously reported mutations were identified in FOXE3 and in Visual System
Homeobox 2 (VSX2). This is the first comprehensive study on families with A/M
from the Indian subcontinent which provides further evidence for the involvement 
of known genes with novel and recurrent mutations.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26995144  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 20;10(8):e0135830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135830.
eCollection 2015.

VSX2 and ASCL1 Are Indicators of Neurogenic Competence in Human Retinal
Progenitor Cultures.

Wright LS(1), Pinilla I(2), Saha J(3), Clermont JM(4), Lien JS(3), Borys KD(3),
Capowski EE(3), Phillips MJ(1), Gamm DM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of 
America; McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Lozano Blesa
University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain; Aragones Health Sciences Institute,
Zaragoza, Spain. (3)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 
United States of America. (4)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America; New England College of Optometry, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)Waisman Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America; McPherson Eye Research
Institute, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America;
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Three dimensional (3D) culture techniques are frequently used for CNS tissue
modeling and organoid production, including generation of retina-like tissues. A 
proposed advantage of these 3D systems is their potential to more closely
approximate in vivo cellular microenvironments, which could translate into
improved manufacture and/or maintenance of neuronal populations. Visual System
Homeobox 2 (VSX2) labels all multipotent retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) and is
known to play important roles in retinal development. In contrast, the proneural 
transcription factor Acheate scute-like 1 (ASCL1) is expressed transiently in a
subset of RPCs, but is required for the production of most retinal neurons.
Therefore, we asked whether the presence of VSX2 and ASCL1 could gauge neurogenic
potential in 3D retinal cultures derived from human prenatal tissue or ES cells
(hESCs). Short term prenatal 3D retinal cultures displayed multiple
characteristics of human RPCs (hRPCs) found in situ, including robust expression 
of VSX2. Upon initiation of hRPC differentiation, there was a small increase in
co-labeling of VSX2+ cells with ASCL1, along with a modest increase in the number
of PKCa+ neurons. However, 3D prenatal retinal cultures lost expression of VSX2
and ASCL1 over time while concurrently becoming refractory to neuronal
differentiation. Conversely, 3D optic vesicles derived from hESCs (hESC-OVs)
maintained a robust VSX2+ hRPC population that could spontaneously co-express
ASCL1 and generate photoreceptors and other retinal neurons for an extended
period of time. These results show that VSX2 and ASCL1 can serve as markers for
neurogenic potential in cultured hRPCs. Furthermore, unlike hESC-OVs, maintenance
of 3D structure does not independently convey an advantage in the culture of
prenatal hRPCs, further illustrating differences in the survival and
differentiation requirements of hRPCs extracted from native tissue vs. those
generated entirely in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4546156
PMID: 26292211  [PubMed - in process]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):E3010-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1505870112. Epub 2015 May 28.

Transcription factor PRDM8 is required for rod bipolar and type 2 OFF-cone
bipolar cell survival and amacrine subtype identity.

Jung CC(1), Atan D(2), Ng D(1), Ploder L(1), Ross SE(3), Klein M(4), Birch DG(4),
Diez E(5), McInnes RR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
M5G 1X8; Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
ON, Canada M5G 1X8; (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8; Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8; Academic Department of Ophthalmology,
School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, United
Kingdom; (3)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213; Department of Anesthesiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213; Center for Pain Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; 
(4)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX 75231; (5)Lady Davis Research
Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 1E2; (6)Department
of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8;
Program in Developmental Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
M5G 1X8; Lady Davis Research Institute, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC,
Canada H3T 1E2; Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada H3A 1B1; Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC,
Canada H3G 1Y6 rod.mcinnes@mcgill.ca.

Retinal bipolar (BP) cells mediate the earliest steps in image processing in the 
visual system, but the genetic pathways that regulate their development and
function are incompletely known. We identified PRDI-BF1 and RIZ homology domain
containing 8 (PRDM8) as a highly conserved transcription factor that is
abundantly expressed in mouse retina. During development and in maturity, PRDM8
is expressed strongly in BP cells and a fraction of amacrine and ganglion cells. 
To determine whether Prdm8 is essential to BP cell development or physiology, we 
targeted the gene in mice. Prdm8(EGFP/EGFP) mice showed nonprogressive b-wave
deficits on electroretinograms, consistent with compromised BP cell function or
circuitry resembling the incomplete form of human congenital stationary night
blindness (CSNB). BP cell specification was normal in Prdm8(EGFP/EGFP) retina as 
determined by VSX2(+) cell numbers and retinal morphology at postnatal day 6. BP 
subtype differentiation was impaired, however, as indicated by absent or
diminished expression of BP subtype-specific markers, including the putative
PRDM8 regulatory target PKCa (Prkca) and its protein. By adulthood, rod bipolar
(RB) and type 2 OFF-cone bipolar (CB) cells were nearly absent from Prdm8-null
mice. Although no change was detected in total amacrine cell (AC) numbers,
increased PRKCA(+) and cholinergic ACs and decreased GABAergic ACs were seen,
suggesting an alteration in amacrine subtype identity. These findings establish
that PRDM8 is required for RB and type 2 OFF-CB cell survival and amacrine
subtype identity, and they present PRDM8 as a candidate gene for human CSNB.

PMCID: PMC4466745
PMID: 26023183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):7903-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3045-14.2015.

A structural and genotypic scaffold underlying temporal integration.

Lee MM(1), Arrenberg AB(2), Aksay ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Computational Biomedicine and the Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, and.
(2)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology 1, Faculty of Biology and Center for 
Biological Signaling Studies, University of Freiburg, D-79104, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Computational Biomedicine and the Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, and
ema2004@med.cornell.edu.

The accumulation and storage of information over time, temporal integration, is
key to numerous behaviors. Many oculomotor tasks depend on integration of
eye-velocity signals to eye-position commands, a transformation achieved by a
hindbrain cell group termed the velocity-to-position neural integrator (VPNI).
Although the VPNI's coding properties have been well characterized, its mechanism
of function remains poorly understood because few links exist between neuronal
activity, structure, and genotypic identity. To fill this gap, we used calcium
imaging and single-cell electroporation during oculomotor behaviors to map VPNI
neural activity in zebrafish onto a hindbrain scaffold consisting of alternating 
excitatory and inhibitory parasagittal stripes. Three distinct classes of VPNI
cells were identified. One glutamatergic class was medially located along a
stripe associated with the alx transcription factor; these cells had ipsilateral 
projections terminating near abducens motoneurons and collateralized extensively 
within the ipsilateral VPNI in a manner consistent with integration through
recurrent excitation. A second glutamatergic class was more laterally located
along a stripe associated with transcription factor dbx1b; these glutamatergic
cells had contralateral projections collateralizing near abducens motoneurons,
consistent with a role in disconjugate eye movements. A third class,
immunohistochemically suggested to be GABAergic, was located primarily in the
dbx1b stripe and also had contralateral projections terminating near abducens
motoneurons; these cells collateralized extensively in the dendritic field of
contralateral VPNI neurons, consistent with a role in coordinating activity
between functionally opposing populations. This mapping between VPNI activity,
structure, and genotype may provide a blueprint for understanding the mechanisms 
governing temporal integration.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357903-18$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4438132
PMID: 25995475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Commun. 2015 May 12;6:7054. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8054.

Analysis of opo cis-regulatory landscape uncovers Vsx2 requirement in early eye
morphogenesis.

Gago-Rodrigues I(1), Fernández-Miñán A(1), Letelier J(1), Naranjo S(1), Tena
JJ(1), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(1), Martinez-Morales JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biologia del Desarrollo (CSIC/UPO/JA), 41013 Sevilla, Spain.

The self-organized morphogenesis of the vertebrate optic cup entails coupling the
activation of the retinal gene regulatory network to the constriction-driven
infolding of the retinal epithelium. Yet the genetic mechanisms underlying this
coordination remain largely unexplored. Through phylogenetic footprinting and
transgenesis in zebrafish, here we examine the cis-regulatory landscape of opo,
an endocytosis regulator essential for eye morphogenesis. Among the different
conserved enhancers identified, we isolate a single retina-specific element
(H6_10137) and show that its activity depends on binding sites for the retinal
determinant Vsx2. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments and ChIP analyses reveal
that Vsx2 regulates opo expression through direct binding to this retinal
enhancer. Furthermore, we show that vsx2 knockdown impairs the primary optic cup 
folding. These data support a model by which vsx2, operating through the effector
gene opo, acts as a central transcriptional node that coordinates neural retina
patterning and optic cup invagination in zebrafish.

PMID: 25963169  [PubMed - in process]


6. Glia. 2015 Oct;63(10):1809-24. doi: 10.1002/glia.22846. Epub 2015 May 6.

Age-dependent Müller glia neurogenic competence in the mouse retina.

Löffler K(1), Schäfer P(1,)(2), Völkner M(2), Holdt T(2), Karl MO(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CRTD-Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Technische Universität
Dresden, Dresden, 01307, Germany. (2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases
(DZNE) Dresden, Dresden, 01307, Germany.

The mechanisms limiting neuronal regeneration in mammals and their relationship
with reactive gliosis are unknown. Müller glia (MG), common to all vertebrate
retinas, readily regenerate neuron loss in some species, but normally not in
mammals. However, experimental stimulation of limited mammalian retina
regeneration has been reported. Here, we use a mouse retina organ culture
approach to investigate the MG responses at different mouse ages. We found that
MG undergo defined spatio-temporal changes upon stimulation. In EGF-stimulated
juvenile postmitotic retinas, most MG upregulate cell-cycle regulators (Mcm6,
Pcna, Ki67, Ccnd1) within 48 h ex vivo; some also express the neurogenic factors 
Ascl1, Pax6, and Vsx2; up to 60% re-enter the cell cycle, some of which
delaminate to divide mostly apically; and the majority cease to proliferate after
stimulation. A subpopulation of MG progeny starts to express transcription
factors (Ptf1a, Nr4a2) and neuronal (Calb1, Calb2, Rbfox3), but not glial,
markers, indicating neurogenesis. BrdU-tracking, genetic lineage-tracing, and
transgenic-reporter experiments suggest that MG reprogram to a neurogenic stage
and proliferate; and that some MG progeny differentiate into neuronal-like cells,
most likely amacrines, no photoreceptors; most others remain in a
de-differentiated state. The mouse MG regeneration potential becomes restricted, 
dependent on the age of the animal, as observed by limited activation of the cell
cycle and neurogenic factors. The stage-dependent analysis of mouse MG revealed
similarities and differences when compared with MG-derived regeneration in fish
and chicks. Therefore, the mouse retina ex vivo approach is a potential assay for
understanding and overcoming the limitations of mammalian MG-derived neuronal
regeneration. Postmitotic MG in mouse retina ex vivo can be stimulated to
proliferate, express neurogenic factors, and generate progeny expressing neuronal
or glial markers. This potential regenerative competence becomes limited with
increasing mouse age.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25943952  [PubMed - in process]


7. Neural Dev. 2015 Apr 27;10:12. doi: 10.1186/s13064-015-0039-5.

Genetic chimeras reveal the autonomy requirements for Vsx2 in embryonic retinal
progenitor cells.

Sigulinsky CL(1,)(2), German ML(3), Leung AM(4,)(5), Clark AM(6), Yun S(7,)(8),
Levine EM(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, 65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA.
crystal.cornett@utah.edu. (2)Interdepartmental Program in Neuroscience,
University of Utah, 20 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA.
crystal.cornett@utah.edu. (3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
John A Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, 65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake
City, UT, 84132, USA. massiell.german@hsc.utah.edu. (4)Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A Moran Eye Center, University of Utah,
65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA. amanda.leung@utah.edu.
(5)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, 20 North 1900
East, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA. amanda.leung@utah.edu. (6)Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A Moran Eye Center, University of Utah,
65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA. anna.clark@hsc.utah.edu.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, 65 Mario Capecchi Drive, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA.
sanghee.yun@utsouthwestern.edu. (8)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Utah, 20 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA.
sanghee.yun@utsouthwestern.edu. (9)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences, John A Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, 65 Mario Capecchi Drive,
Salt Lake City, UT, 84132, USA. ed.levine@utah.edu. (10)Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, 20 North 1900 East, Salt Lake City,
UT, 84132, USA. ed.levine@utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: Vertebrate retinal development is a complex process, requiring the
specification and maintenance of retinal identity, proliferative expansion of
retinal progenitor cells (RPCs), and their differentiation into retinal neurons
and glia. The homeobox gene Vsx2 is expressed in RPCs and required for the proper
execution of this retinal program. However, our understanding of the mechanisms
by which Vsx2 does this is still rudimentary. To define the autonomy requirements
for Vsx2 in the regulation of RPC properties, we generated chimeric mouse embryos
comprised of wild-type and Vsx2-deficient cells.
RESULTS: We show that Vsx2 maintains retinal identity in part through the
cell-autonomous repression of the retinal pigment epithelium determinant Mitf,
and that Lhx2 is required cell autonomously for the ectopic Mitf expression in
Vsx2-deficient cells. We also found significant cell-nonautonomous contributions 
to Vsx2-mediated regulation of RPC proliferation, pointing to an important role
for Vsx2 in establishing a growth-promoting extracellular environment.
Additionally, we report a cell-autonomous requirement for Vsx2 in controlling
when neurogenesis is initiated, indicating that Vsx2 is an important mediator of 
neurogenic competence. Finally, the distribution of wild-type cells shifted away 
from RPCs and toward retinal ganglion cell precursors in patches of high
Vsx2-deficient cell density to potentially compensate for the lack of fated
precursors in these areas.
CONCLUSIONS: Through the generation and analysis of genetic chimeras, we
demonstrate that Vsx2 utilizes both cell-autonomous and cell-nonautonomous
mechanisms to regulate progenitor properties in the embryonic retina.
Importantly, Vsx2's role in regulating Mitf is in part separable from its role in
promoting proliferation, and proliferation is excluded as the intrinsic timer
that determines when neurogenesis is initiated. These findings highlight the
complexity of Vsx2 function during retinal development and provide a framework
for identifying the molecular mechanisms mediating these functions.

PMCID: PMC4450477
PMID: 25927996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 2015 Jun 15;402(2):216-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.020. Epub 2015 
Apr 11.

Mutual antagonism of the paired-type homeobox genes, vsx2 and dmbx1, regulates
retinal progenitor cell cycle exit upstream of ccnd1 expression.

Wong L(1), Power N(1), Miles A(1), Tropepe V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 3G5. (2)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3G5; Department of Ophthalmology and Vision
Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5T 3A9; Centre for the
Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5S 3B2. Electronic address: v.tropepe@utoronto.ca.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the transition between the
proliferative and a post-mitotic state of retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) is key 
to advancing our knowledge of retinal growth and maturation. In the present study
we determined that during zebrafish embryonic retinal neurogenesis, two
paired-type homeobox genes - vsx2 and dmbx1 - function in a mutually antagonistic
manner. We demonstrate that vsx2 gene expression requires active Fgf signaling
and that this in turn suppresses dmbx1 expression and maintains cells in an
undifferentiated, proliferative RPC state. This vsx2-dependent RPC state can be
prolonged cell-autonomously by knockdown of dmbx1, or it can be suppressed
prematurely by the over-expression of dmbx1, which we show can inhibit vsx2
expression and lead to precocious neuronal differentiation. dmbx1 loss of
function also results in altered expression of canonical cell cycle genes, and in
particular up-regulation of ccnd1, which correlates with our previous finding of 
a prolonged RPC cell cycle. By knocking down ccnd1 and dmbx1 simultaneously, we
show that RPCs can overcome this phenotype to exit the cell cycle on time and
differentiate normally into retinal neurons. Collectively, our data provide novel
insight into the mechanism that enables RPCs to exit the cell cycle through a
previously unrecognized antagonistic interaction of two paired-type homeobox
genes that are central regulators of an Fgf-vsx2-dmbx1-ccnd1 signaling axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25872183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Meta Gene. 2014 Feb 15;2:164-75. doi: 10.1016/j.mgene.2014.01.004. eCollection
2014.

Genetic analysis of axial length genes in high grade myopia from Indian
population.

Sharmila F(1), Abinayapriya(2), Ramprabhu K(3), Kumaramanickavel G(3), R R
Sudhir(4), Sripriya S(3).

Author information: 
(1)SN ONGC, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Vision Research
Foundation, India ; Birla Institute of Technology & Science (BITS), Pilani, 333
031 Rajasthan, India. (2)Medical Research Foundation, Sankara Nethralaya,
Chennai, India. (3)SN ONGC, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Vision 
Research Foundation, India. (4)Preventive Ophthalmology Department, Sankara
Nethralaya, Chennai, India.

PURPOSE: To study the putative association of Membrane frizzled related protein
(MFRP) and Visual system homeobox protein (VSX2) gene variants with axial length 
(AL) in myopia.
METHOD: A total of 189 samples with (N = 98) and without (N = 91) myopia were
genotyped for the MRFP and VSX2 variations in ABI Prism 3100 AVANT genetic
analyzer. Genotype/haplotype analysis was performed using PLINK, Haploview and
THESIAS softwares.
RESULTS: Fifteen variations were observed in the MFRP gene of which, rs36015759
(c.492C > T, T164T) in exon 5 was distributed at a high frequency in the controls
and significantly associated with a low risk for myopia (P = 4.10 * e(- 07) OR
< 1.0). An increased frequency for the coding haplotype block [CGTCGG] harboring 
rs36015759 was observed in controls (31%) than cases (8%) that also correlated
with a decreased mean AL (- 1.35085; P = 0.000444) by THESIAS analysis. The 'T'
allele of rs36015759 was predicted to abolish the binding site for splicing
enhancer (SRp40) by FASTSNP analysis.
CONCLUSION: Myopia is a complex disorder influenced by genetic and environmental 
factors. Our work shows evidence of association of a specific MFRP haplotype
which was more prevalent in controls with decreased AL. However, replication and 
functional studies are warranted to confirm these findings.

PMCID: PMC4287827
PMID: 25606400  [PubMed]


10. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):721-37. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22244. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Genetic dissection of Gata2 selective functions during specification of V2
interneurons in the developing spinal cord.

Francius C(1,)(2), Ravassard P(1), Hidalgo-Figueroa M(2), Mallet J(1), Clotman
F(2), Nardelli J(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CRICM, UPMC/Inserm UMR_S 975; CNRS UMR 7225, Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et 
Biotherapie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, CERVI, 83 bd de l'Hôpital, F-75013,
Paris, France. (2)Laboratory of Neural Differentiation (NEDI), Université
Catholique de Louvain (UCL), Institute of Neuroscience (IoNS), box UCL-5511, 55
Avenue Hippocrate, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. (3)Inserm U676, Hôpital Robert
Debré, 48 bd Serurier, F-75019, Paris, France.

Motor activities are controlled by neural networks in the ventral spinal cord and
consist in motor neurons and a set of distinct cardinal classes of spinal
interneurons. These interneurons arise from distinct progenitor domains (p0-p3)
delineated according to a transcriptional code. Neural progenitors of each domain
express a unique combination of transcription factors (TFs) that largely
contribute to determine the fate of four classes of interneurons (V0-V3) and
motor neurons. In p2 domain, at least four subtypes of interneurons namely V2a,
V2b, V2c, and Pax6(+) V2 are generated. Although genetic and molecular mechanisms
that specify V2a and V2b are dependent on complex interplay between several TFs
including Nkx6.1, Irx3, Gata2, Foxn4, and Ascl1, and signaling pathways such as
Notch and TGF-ß, the sequence order of the activation of these regulators and
their respective contribution are not completely elucidated yet. Here, we provide
evidence by loss- or gain-of-function experiments that Gata2 is necessary for the
normal development of both V2a and V2b neurons. We demonstrate that Nkx6.1 and
Dll4 positively regulate the activation of Gata2 and Foxn4 in p2 progenitors.
Gata2 also participates in the maintenance of p2 domain by repressing motor
neuron differentiation and exerting a feedback control on patterning genes.
Finally, Gata2 promotes the selective activation of V2b program at the expense of
V2a fate. Thus our results provide new insights on the hierarchy and complex
interactions between regulators of V2 genetic program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25369423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Nov;3(11):1295-304. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0094. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

Engineering efficient retinal pigment epithelium differentiation from human
pluripotent stem cells.

Lane A(1), Philip LR(2), Ruban L(2), Fynes K(2), Smart M(2), Carr A(2), Mason
C(2), Coffey P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ophthalmology and Advanced Centre for Biochemical Engineering,
University College London, London, United Kingdom amelia.lane@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Institute of Ophthalmology and Advanced Centre for Biochemical Engineering,
University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are a promising source of retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) cells: cells that can be used for the treatment of common and
incurable forms of blindness, such as age-related macular degeneration. Although 
most hESC lines will produce a number of clusters of pigmented RPE cells within
30-50 days when allowed to spontaneously differentiate, the timing and efficiency
of differentiation is highly variable. This could prove problematic in the design
of robust processes for the large scale production of RPE cells for cell therapy.
In this study we sought to identify, quantify, and reduce the sources of
variability in hESC-RPE differentiation. By monitoring the emergence of pigmented
cells over time, we show how the cell line, passaging method, passage number, and
seeding density have a significant and reproducible effect on the RPE yield. To
counter this variability, we describe the production of RPE cells from two cell
lines in feeder-free, density controlled conditions using single cell
dissociation and seeding that is more amenable to scaled up production. The
efficacy of small molecules in directing differentiation toward the RPE lineage
was tested in two hESC lines with divergent RPE differentiation capacities.
Neural induction by treatment with a bone morphogenetic protein inhibitor,
dorsomorphin, significantly enhanced the RPE yield in one cell line but
significantly reduce it in another, generating instead a Chx10 positive neural
progenitor phenotype. This result underlines the necessity to tailor
differentiation protocols to suit the innate properties of different cell lines.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4214845
PMID: 25273541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Cell. 2014 Sep 8;30(5):513-27. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.07.018. Epub 2014
Aug 21.

A gene regulatory network controls the binary fate decision of rod and bipolar
cells in the vertebrate retina.

Wang S(1), Sengel C(2), Emerson MM(3), Cepko CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Biology, The City College of New 
York, City University of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA. (4)Department of
Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic
address: cepko@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) regulate critical events during development. In
complex tissues, such as the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), networks
likely provide the complex regulatory interactions needed to direct the
specification of the many CNS cell types. Here, we dissect a GRN that regulates a
binary fate decision between two siblings in the murine retina, the rod
photoreceptor and bipolar interneuron. The GRN centers on Blimp1, one of the
transcription factors (TFs) that regulates the rod versus bipolar cell fate
decision. We identified a cis-regulatory module (CRM), B108, that mimics Blimp1
expression. Deletion of genomic B108 by CRISPR/Cas9 in vivo using electroporation
abolished the function of Blimp1. Otx2 and RORß were found to regulate Blimp1
expression via B108, and Blimp1 and Otx2 were shown to form a negative feedback
loop that regulates the level of Otx2, which regulates the production of the
correct ratio of rods and bipolar cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4304698
PMID: 25155555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):6332-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu351. Epub 2014 Jul 
9.

Loss of MITF expression during human embryonic stem cell differentiation disrupts
retinal pigment epithelium development and optic vesicle cell proliferation.

Capowski EE(1), Simonett JM(1), Clark EM(1), Wright LS(1), Howden SE(2), Wallace 
KA(1), Petelinsek AM(1), Pinilla I(3), Phillips MJ(4), Meyer JS(5), Schneider
BL(6), Thomson JA(7), Gamm DM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center. (2)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza 50009,
Spain, Aragon Institute of Health Sciences, Zaragoza 50009, Spain. (4)Waisman
Center, McPherson Eye Research Institute and. (5)Department of Biology, Indiana
University-Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. (6)Brain Mind
Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland. (7)Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, USA,
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53715, USA and Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. (8)Waisman
Center, McPherson Eye Research Institute and Department of Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA,
dgamm@wisc.edu.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is a master regulator of
pigmented cell survival and differentiation with direct transcriptional links to 
cell cycle, apoptosis and pigmentation. In mouse, Mitf is expressed early and
uniformly in optic vesicle (OV) cells as they evaginate from the developing
neural tube, and null Mitf mutations result in microphthalmia and pigmentation
defects. However, homozygous mutations in MITF have not been identified in
humans; therefore, little is known about its role in human retinogenesis. We used
a human embryonic stem cell (hESC) model that recapitulates numerous aspects of
retinal development, including OV specification and formation of retinal pigment 
epithelium (RPE) and neural retina progenitor cells (NRPCs), to investigate the
earliest roles of MITF. During hESC differentiation toward a retinal lineage, a
subset of MITF isoforms was expressed in a sequence and tissue distribution
similar to that observed in mice. In addition, we found that promoters for the
MITF-A, -D and -H isoforms were directly targeted by Visual Systems Homeobox 2
(VSX2), a transcription factor involved in patterning the OV toward a NRPC fate. 
We then manipulated MITF RNA and protein levels at early developmental stages and
observed decreased expression of eye field transcription factors, reduced early
OV cell proliferation and disrupted RPE maturation. This work provides a
foundation for investigating MITF and other highly complex, multi-purposed
transcription factors in a dynamic human developmental model system.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4222367
PMID: 25008112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Aug;57(8):369-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.05.002. Epub
2014 May 22.

The genetic architecture of microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma.

Williamson KA(1), FitzPatrick DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. (2)Medical
Research Council Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. Electronic address:
david.fitzpatrick@igmm.ed.ac.uk.

Microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma (MAC) are distinct phenotypes that
represent a continuum of structural developmental eye defects. In severe
bilateral cases (anophthalmia or severe microphthalmia) the genetic cause is now 
identifiable in approximately 80 percent of cases, with de novo heterozygous
loss-of-function mutations in SOX2 or OTX2 being the most common. The genetic
cause of other forms of MAC, in particular isolated coloboma, remains unknown in 
the majority of cases. This review will focus on MAC phenotypes that are
associated with mutation of the genes SOX2, OTX2, PAX6, STRA6, ALDH1A3, RARB,
VSX2, RAX, FOXE3, BMP4, BMP7, GDF3, GDF6, ABCB6, ATOH7, C12orf57, TENM3 (ODZ3),
and VAX1. Recently reported mutation of the SALL2 and YAP1 genes are discussed in
brief. Clinical and genetic features were reviewed in a total of 283 unrelated
MAC cases or families that were mutation-positive from these 20 genes. Both the
relative frequency of mutations in MAC cohort screens and the level of confidence
in the assignment of disease-causing status were evaluated for each gene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Aug 1;23(15):1765-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0628. Epub 2014 
Apr 25.

Generation of v2a interneurons from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Brown CR(1), Butts JC, McCreedy DA, Sakiyama-Elbert SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis , St.
Louis, Missouri.

V2a interneurons of the ventral spinal cord and hindbrain play an important role 
in the central pattern generators (CPGs) involved in locomotion, skilled
reaching, and respiration. However, sources of V2a interneurons for in vitro
studies are limited. In this study, we developed a differentiation protocol for
V2a interneurons from mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Cells were induced in a
2(-)/4(+) induction protocol with varying concentrations of retinoic acid (RA)
and the mild sonic hedgehog (Shh) agonist purmorphamine (Pur) in order to
increase the expression of V2a interneuron transcription factors (eg, Chx10).
Notch signaling, which influences the commitment of p2 progenitor cells to V2a or
V2b interneurons, was inhibited in cell cultures to increase the percentage of
V2a interneurons. At the end of the induction period, cell commitment was
assessed using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction,
immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry to quantify expression of transcription
factors specific to V2a interneurons and the adjacent ventral spinal cord
regions. Low concentrations of RA and high concentrations of Pur led to greater
expression of transcription factors specific for V2a interneurons. Notch
inhibition favored V2a interneuron over V2b interneuron differentiation. The
protocol established in this study can be used to further elucidate the pathways 
involved in V2a interneuron differentiation and help produce sources of V2a
interneurons for developmental neurobiology, electrophysiology, and
transplantation studies.

PMCID: PMC4103263
PMID: 24650073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1480-92. doi: 10.1002/stem.1667.

Modeling human retinal development with patient-specific induced pluripotent stem
cells reveals multiple roles for visual system homeobox 2.

Phillips MJ(1), Perez ET, Martin JM, Reshel ST, Wallace KA, Capowski EE, Singh R,
Wright LS, Clark EM, Barney PM, Stewart R, Dickerson SJ, Miller MJ, Percin EF,
Thomson JA, Gamm DM.

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA;
McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have been shown to differentiate
along the retinal lineage in a manner that mimics normal mammalian development.
Under certain culture conditions, hiPSCs form optic vesicle-like structures
(OVs), which contain proliferating progenitors capable of yielding all neural
retina (NR) cell types over time. Such observations imply conserved roles for
regulators of retinogenesis in hiPSC-derived cultures and the developing embryo. 
However, whether and to what extent this assumption holds true has remained
largely uninvestigated. We examined the role of a key NR transcription factor,
visual system homeobox 2 (VSX2), using hiPSCs derived from a patient with
microphthalmia caused by an R200Q mutation in the VSX2 homeodomain region. No
differences were noted between (R200Q)VSX2 and sibling control hiPSCs prior to OV
generation. Thereafter, (R200Q)VSX2 hiPSC-OVs displayed a significant growth
deficit compared to control hiPSC-OVs, as well as increased production of retinal
pigmented epithelium at the expense of NR cell derivatives. Furthermore,
(R200Q)VSX2 hiPSC-OVs failed to produce bipolar cells, a distinctive feature
previously observed in Vsx2 mutant mice. (R200Q)VSX2 hiPSC-OVs also demonstrated 
delayed photoreceptor maturation, which could be overcome via exogenous
expression of wild-type VSX2 at early stages of retinal differentiation. Finally,
RNAseq analysis on isolated hiPSC-OVs implicated key transcription factors and
extracellular signaling pathways as potential downstream effectors of
VSX2-mediated gene regulation. Our results establish hiPSC-OVs as versatile model
systems to study retinal development at stages not previously accessible in
humans and support the bona fide nature of hiPSC-OV-derived retinal progeny.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4037340
PMID: 24532057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Dyn. 2014 May;243(5):712-29. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24103. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Induction of the ganglion cell differentiation program in human retinal
progenitors before cell cycle exit.

Pacal M(1), Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto
Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Despite the disease relevance, understanding of human retinal
development lags behind that of other species. We compared the kinetics of gene
silencing or induction during ganglion cell development in human and murine
retina.
RESULTS: Induction of POU4F2 (BRN3B) marks ganglion cell commitment, and we
detected this factor in S-phase progenitors that had already silenced Cyclin D1
and VSX2 (CHX10). This feature was conserved in human and mouse retina, and the
fraction of Pou4f2+ murine progenitors labeled with a 30 min pulse of BrdU
matched the fraction of ganglion cells predicted to be born in a half-hour
period. Additional analysis of 18 markers revealed many with conserved kinetics, 
such as the POU4F2 pattern above, as well as the surprising maintenance of "cell 
cycle" proteins KI67, PCNA, and MCM6 well after terminal mitosis. However, four
proteins (TUBB3, MTAP1B, UCHL1, and RBFOX3) showed considerably delayed induction
in human relative to mouse retina, and two proteins (ISL1, CALB2) showed opposite
kinetics, appearing on either side of terminal mitosis depending on the species.
CONCLUSION: With some notable exceptions, human and murine ganglion cell
differentiation show similar kinetics, and the data add weight to prior studies
supporting the existence of biased ganglion cell progenitors.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24339342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Development. 2013 Dec;140(24):4959-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.096990. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

RPE specification in the chick is mediated by surface ectoderm-derived BMP and
Wnt signalling.

Steinfeld J(1), Steinfeld I, Coronato N, Hampel ML, Layer PG, Araki M,
Vogel-Höpker A.

Author information: 
(1)Fachgebiet Entwicklungsbiologie und Neurogenetik, Technische Universität
Darmstadt, Schnittspahnstrasse 13, D-64287 Darmstadt, Germany.

The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is indispensable for vertebrate eye
development and vision. In the classical model of optic vesicle patterning, the
surface ectoderm produces fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) that specify the
neural retina (NR) distally, whereas TGFß family members released from the
proximal mesenchyme are involved in RPE specification. However, we previously
proposed that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) released from the surface
ectoderm are essential for RPE specification in chick. We now show that the BMP- 
and Wnt-expressing surface ectoderm is required for RPE specification. We reveal 
that Wnt signalling from the overlying surface ectoderm is involved in
restricting BMP-mediated RPE specification to the dorsal optic vesicle. Wnt2b is 
expressed in the dorsal surface ectoderm and subsequently in dorsal optic vesicle
cells. Activation of Wnt signalling by implanting Wnt3a-soaked beads or
inhibiting GSK3ß at optic vesicle stages inhibits NR development and converts the
entire optic vesicle into RPE. Surface ectoderm removal at early optic vesicle
stages or inhibition of Wnt, but not Wnt/ß-catenin, signalling prevents
pigmentation and downregulates the RPE regulatory gene Mitf. Activation of BMP or
Wnt signalling can replace the surface ectoderm to rescue MITF expression and
optic cup formation. We provide evidence that BMPs and Wnts cooperate via a
GSK3ß-dependent but ß-catenin-independent pathway at the level of pSmad to ensure
RPE specification in dorsal optic vesicle cells. We propose a new dorsoventral
model of optic vesicle patterning, whereby initially surface ectoderm-derived Wnt
signalling directs dorsal optic vesicle cells to develop into RPE through a
stabilising effect of BMP signalling.

PMID: 24227655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Dec;16(12):1773-82. doi: 10.1038/nn.3560. Epub 2013 Oct 27.

TGF-ß signaling regulates neuronal C1q expression and developmental synaptic
refinement.

Bialas AR(1), Stevens B.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurology, F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2013 Dec;16(12):1712-3.

Immune molecules, including complement proteins C1q and C3, have emerged as
critical mediators of synaptic refinement and plasticity. Complement localizes to
synapses and refines the developing visual system through C3-dependent microglial
phagocytosis of synapses. Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) express C1q, the
initiating protein of the classical complement cascade, during retinogeniculate
refinement; however, the signals controlling C1q expression and function remain
elusive. Previous work implicated an astrocyte-derived factor in regulating
neuronal C1q expression. Here we identify retinal transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß as a key regulator of neuronal C1q expression and synaptic pruning in the
developing visual system. Mice lacking TGF-ß receptor II (TGFßRII) in retinal
neurons had reduced C1q expression in RGCs and reduced synaptic localization of
complement, and phenocopied refinement defects observed in complement-deficient
mice, including reduced eye-specific segregation and microglial engulfment of RGC
inputs. These data implicate TGF-ß in regulating neuronal C1q expression to
initiate complement- and microglia-mediated synaptic pruning.

PMCID: PMC3973738
PMID: 24162655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Apr 15;522(6):1232-48. doi: 10.1002/cne.23465.

Differences in the morphology of spinal V2a neurons reflect their recruitment
order during swimming in larval zebrafish.

Menelaou E(1), VanDunk C, McLean DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois,
60208.

Networks of neurons in spinal cord generate locomotion. However, little is known 
about potential differences in network architecture that underlie the production 
of varying speeds of movement. In larval zebrafish, as swimming speed increases, 
Chx10-positive V2a excitatory premotor interneurons are activated from ventral to
dorsal in a topographic pattern that parallels axial motoneuron recruitment.
Here, we examined whether differences in the morphology and synaptic output of
V2a neurons reflect their recruitment order during swimming. To do so, we used in
vivo single-cell labeling approaches to quantify the dorsoventral distribution of
V2a axonal projections and synapses. Two different classes of V2a neurons are
described, cells with ascending and descending axons and cells that are only
descending. Among the purely descending V2a cells, more dorsal cells project
longer distances than ventral ones. Proximally, all V2a neurons have axonal
distributions that suggest potential connections to cells at and below their own 
soma positions. At more distal locations, V2a axons project dorsally, which
creates a cumulative intersegmental bias to dorsally located spinal neurons.
Assessments of the synapse distribution of V2a cells, reported by synaptophysin
expression, support the morphological observations and also demonstrate that
dorsal V2a cells have higher synapse densities proximally. Our results suggest
that V2a cells with more potential output to spinal neurons are systematically
engaged during increases in swimming frequency. The findings help explain
patterns of axial motoneuron recruitment and set up clear predictions for future 
physiological studies examining the nature of spinal excitatory network
connectivity as it relates to movement intensity.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4692166
PMID: 24114934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 20;8(9):e76489. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076489. eCollection
2013.

Pax6 is required for normal cell-cycle exit and the differentiation kinetics of
retinal progenitor cells.

Farhy C(1), Elgart M, Shapira Z, Oron-Karni V, Yaron O, Menuchin Y, Rechavi G,
Ashery-Padan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of
Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

The coupling between cell-cycle exit and onset of differentiation is a common
feature throughout the developing nervous system, but the mechanisms that link
these processes are mostly unknown. Although the transcription factor Pax6 has
been implicated in both proliferation and differentiation of multiple regions
within the central nervous system (CNS), its contribution to the transition
between these successive states remains elusive. To gain insight into the role of
Pax6 during the transition from proliferating progenitors to differentiating
precursors, we investigated cell-cycle and transcriptomic changes occurring in
Pax6 (-) retinal progenitor cells (RPCs). Our analyses revealed a unique
cell-cycle phenotype of the Pax6-deficient RPCs, which included a reduced number 
of cells in the S phase, an increased number of cells exiting the cell cycle, and
delayed differentiation kinetics of Pax6 (-) precursors. These alterations were
accompanied by coexpression of factors that promote (Ccnd1, Ccnd2, Ccnd3) and
inhibit (P27 (kip1) and P27 (kip2) ) the cell cycle. Further characterization of 
the changes in transcription profile of the Pax6-deficient RPCs revealed
abrogated expression of multiple factors which are known to be involved in
regulating proliferation of RPCs, including the transcription factors Vsx2,
Nr2e1, Plagl1 and Hedgehog signaling. These findings provide novel insight into
the molecular mechanism mediating the pleiotropic activity of Pax6 in RPCs. The
results further suggest that rather than conveying a linear effect on RPCs, such 
as promoting their proliferation and inhibiting their differentiation, Pax6
regulates multiple transcriptional networks that function simultaneously, thereby
conferring the capacity to proliferate, assume multiple cell fates and execute
the differentiation program into retinal lineages.

PMCID: PMC3779171
PMID: 24073291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Clin Genet. 2014 Oct;86(4):326-34. doi: 10.1111/cge.12275. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Molecular findings and clinical data in a cohort of 150 patients with
anophthalmia/microphthalmia.

Chassaing N(1), Causse A, Vigouroux A, Delahaye A, Alessandri JL,
Boespflug-Tanguy O, Boute-Benejean O, Dollfus H, Duban-Bedu B, Gilbert-Dussardier
B, Giuliano F, Gonzales M, Holder-Espinasse M, Isidor B, Jacquemont ML, Lacombe
D, Martin-Coignard D, Mathieu-Dramard M, Odent S, Picone O, Pinson L, Quelin C,
Sigaudy S, Toutain A, Thauvin-Robinet C, Kaplan J, Calvas P.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France;
Université Paul-Sabatier Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.

Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (AM) are the most severe malformations of the
eye, corresponding respectively to reduced size or absent ocular globe. Wide
genetic heterogeneity has been reported and different genes have been
demonstrated to be causative of syndromic and non-syndromic forms of AM. We
screened seven AM genes [GDF6 (growth differentiation factor 6), FOXE3 (forkhead 
box E3), OTX2 (orthodenticle protein homolog 2), PAX6 (paired box 6), RAX (retina
and anterior neural fold homeobox), SOX2 (SRY sex determining region Y-box 2),
and VSX2 (visual system homeobox 2 gene)] in a cohort of 150 patients with
isolated or syndromic AM. The causative genetic defect was identified in 21% of
the patients (32/150). Point mutations were identified by direct sequencing of
these genes in 25 patients (13 in SOX2, 4 in RAX, 3 in OTX2, 2 in FOXE3, 1 in
VSX2, 1 in PAX6, and 1 in GDF6). In addition eight gene deletions (five SOX2, two
OTX2 and one RAX) were identified using a semi-quantitative multiplex polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) [quantitative multiplex PCR amplification of short
fluorescent fragments (QMPSF)]. The causative genetic defect was identified in
21% of the patients. This result contributes to our knowledge of the molecular
basis of AM, and will facilitate accurate genetic counselling.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24033328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 11;33(37):14681-92. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5231-12.2013.

Lhx3-Chx10 reticulospinal neurons in locomotor circuits.

Bretzner F(1), Brownstone RM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, CHUL-Neurosciences, Québec City, Québec 
G1V 4G2, Canada, Département de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Université Laval,
Québec City, Québec G1K 7P4, Canada, Department of Medical Neuroscience,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2, Canada, and Department of
Surgery (Neurosurgery), Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4R2,
Canada.

Motor behaviors result from the interplay between the brain and the spinal cord. 
Reticulospinal neurons, situated between the supraspinal structures that initiate
motor movements and the spinal cord that executes them, play key integrative
roles in these behaviors. However, the molecular identities of mammalian
reticular formation neurons that mediate motor behaviors have not yet been
determined, thus limiting their study in health and disease. In the medullary
reticular formation of the mouse, we identified neurons that express the
transcription factors Lhx3 and/or Chx10, and demonstrate that these neurons form 
a significant component of glutamatergic reticulospinal pathways. Lhx3-positive
medullary reticular formation neurons express Fos following a locomotor task in
the adult, indicating that they are active during walking. Furthermore, they
receive functional inputs from the mesencephalic locomotor region and have
electrophysiological properties to support tonic repetitive firing, both of which
are necessary for neurons that mediate the descending command for locomotion.
Together, these results suggest that Lhx3/Chx10 medullary reticular formation
neurons are involved in locomotion.

PMID: 24027269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Mar;36(1):8-13. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.827217. Epub
2013 Sep 3.

Lens subluxation and retinal dysfunction in a girl with homozygous VSX2 mutation.

Khan AO(1), Aldahmesh MA, Noor J, Salem A, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

OBJECTIVE: To describe a unique lens subluxation phenotype in a child from a
consanguineous family and to determine its genetic basis.
METHODS: Ophthalmologic examination (including ocular biometry and
electroretinography [ERG] for the proband) and autozygosity-analysis-guided exome
sequencing for the family; confirmatory candidate gene sequencing in the family
and ethnically matched controls.
RESULTS: An otherwise healthy 3-year-old Saudi Arabian girl with poor vision
since birth had smooth irides, lens subluxation, cone-rod dysfunction, and high
myopia - features resembling Knobloch syndrome but differing in regard to
direction of lens subluxation (superior rather than temporal) and the pattern of 
chorioretinal atrophy (without vitreous condensations or distinct macular
atrophy). Autozygome-guided exome sequencing revealed the girl to harbor a
homozygous exon 5 mutation in the ocular transcription factor gene visual
homeobox 2 (VSX2) [c.773delA; p.Lys258SerfsX44] that was heterozygous in the
unaffected brother and parents and absent in 100 healthy ethnically matched
controls and on-line databases. Previously reported VSX2 mutations have affected 
the DNA-binding domains and only been associated with microphthalmia. Unlike
previously reported mutations, the current VSX2 mutation is downstream to the
protein's DNA binding domains.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of this girl is unique and suggests a normal
regulatory role for VSX2 in iris, zonule, and cone-rod development. For a
consanguineous family with suspected recessive ocular disease but without a clear
candidate gene, autozygome-guided exome analysis is a powerful technique, even
when only a single patient is affected.

PMID: 24001013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Vis. 2013 Jun 12;19:1310-20. Print 2013.

Cre-mediated recombination efficiency and transgene expression patterns of three 
retinal bipolar cell-expressing Cre transgenic mouse lines.

Lu Q(1), Ivanova E, Ganjawala TH, Pan ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Anatomy & Cell Biology, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.

PURPOSE: Retinal bipolar cells, comprising multiple types, play an essential role
in segregating visual information into multiple parallel pathways in the retina. 
The ability to manipulate gene expression in specific bipolar cell type(s) in the
retina is important for understanding the molecular basis of their normal
physiological functions and diseases/disorders. The Cre/LoxP recombination system
has become an important tool for allowing gene manipulation in vivo, especially
with the increasing availability of cell- and tissue-specific Cre transgenic
mouse lines. Detailed in vivo examination of the Cre/LoxP recombination
efficiency and the transgene expression patterns for cell- and tissue-specific
Cre transgenic mouse lines is essential for evaluating their utility. In this
study, we investigated the Cre-mediated recombination efficiency and transgene
expression patterns of retinal bipolar cell-expressing Cre transgenic lines by
crossing with a Cre reporter mouse line and through Cre-dependent recombinant
adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vector-mediated transgene delivery.
METHODS: Three retinal bipolar cell-expressing Cre-transgenic mouse lines,
5-HTR2a-cre, Pcp2-cre, and Chx10-cre, were crossed with a strong Cre reporter
mouse line that expresses a red fluorescent protein variant, tdTomato. rAAV2
vectors carrying a double-floxed inverted open-reading frame sequence encoding
channelrhodopsin-2-mCherry (ChR2-mCherry) driven by a ubiquitous neuronal EF1a or
a ubiquitous CMV promoter with a rAAV2 capsid mutation (Y444F) were injected into
the intravitreal space of the eyes. Immunohistochemistry using retinal bipolar
cell type-specific markers was performed to examine Cre-mediated recombination
efficiency and the transgene expression patterns in bipolar cells in retinal
whole mounts and vertical sections.
RESULTS: For the 5-HTR2a-cre and Pcp2-cre mouse lines, the expression pattern of 
the Cre-mediated recombination by crossing the reporter line largely resembled
the expression pattern of Cre. The bipolar cells showing Cre-mediated
recombination in the 5-HTR2a-cre line and the Pcp2-cre line were predominantly
type 4 cone bipolar cells and rod bipolar cells, respectively. For the Chx10-cre 
mouse line, the expression pattern of the Cre-mediated recombination by crossing 
the reporter line was different from that of Cre. The Cre-mediated transgene
expression in retinal bipolar cells in the Chx10-cre line was not observed by
crossing with the reporter mouse line but through Cre-dependent rAAV vector
delivery. A rAAV2 vector with the combination of a CMV promoter and the Y444F
capsid mutation achieved Cre-dependent transgene expression in retinal bipolar
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The retinal bipolar cell-expressing Cre-transgenic lines and the
Cre-dependent rAAV vector reported in this study could be valuable tools for gene
targeting and manipulation in retinal bipolar cells in mice.

PMCID: PMC3692404
PMID: 23805038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 17;33(16):6877-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4216-12.2013.

LHX2 is necessary for the maintenance of optic identity and for the progression
of optic morphogenesis.

Roy A(1), de Melo J, Chaturvedi D, Thein T, Cabrera-Socorro A, Houart C, Meyer G,
Blackshaw S, Tole S.

Author information: 
(1)Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India 400005.

Eye formation is regulated by a complex network of eye field transcription
factors (EFTFs), including LIM-homeodomain gene LHX2. We disrupted LHX2 function 
at different stages during this process using a conditional knock-out strategy in
mice. We find that LHX2 function is required in an ongoing fashion to maintain
optic identity across multiple stages, from the formation of the optic vesicle to
the differentiation of the neuroretina. At each stage, loss of Lhx2 led to
upregulation of a set of molecular markers that are normally expressed in the
thalamic eminence and in the anterodorsal hypothalamus in a portion of the optic 
vesicle or retina. Furthermore, the longer LHX2 function was maintained, the
further optic morphogenesis progressed. Early loss of function caused profound
mispatterning of the entire telencephalic-optic-hypothalamic field, such that the
optic vesicle became mispositioned and appeared to arise from the
diencephalic-telencephalic boundary. At subsequent stages, loss of Lhx2 did not
affect optic vesicle position but caused arrest of optic cup formation. If Lhx2
was selectively disrupted in the neuroretina from E11.5, the neuroretina showed
gross dysmorphology along with aberrant expression of markers specific to the
thalamic eminence and anterodorsal hypothalamus. Our findings indicate a
continual requirement for LHX2 throughout the early stages of optic development, 
not only to maintain optic identity by suppressing alternative fates but also to 
mediate multiple steps of optic morphogenesis. These findings provide new insight
into the anophthalmic phenotype of the Lhx2 mutant and reveal novel roles for
this transcription factor in eye development.

PMCID: PMC3664457
PMID: 23595746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Mar-Apr;13(3-4):78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2012.12.001.
Epub 2012 Dec 28.

The expression of NOTCH2, HES1 and SOX9 during mouse retinal development.

Zhu MY(1), Gasperowicz M, Chow RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada, V8W 3N5.

Notch signaling is an important regulator of both developmental and
post-developmental processes. In the developing retina, Notch1 is required for
the maintenance of retinal progenitor cells and for inhibiting photoreceptor cell
fate, while Notch3 is required for inhibiting ganglion cell fate. Here we used
immunolabeling coupled with a knock-in reporter approach to obtain a detailed
spatiotemporal expression pattern of Notch2 during mouse retinal development.
Although previous in situ hybridization studies did not reveal appreciable levels
of Notch2 in the developing retina, we detected NOTCH2 protein and reporter
expression in early embryonic retinal progenitors that also expressed the Notch
downstream gene, HES1. In the postnatal retina, NOTCH2, as well as the Notch
downstream genes, HES1 and SOX9, were detected in VSX2/Cyclin D1/SOX2-expressing 
cells in the postnatal retina, and in the mature retina NOTCH2 was most abundant 
in Müller glia. Our findings indicate a potential role for Notch2 in the
developing and mature retina.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23277114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):239-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds423. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Defective neural crest migration revealed by a Zebrafish model of Alx1-related
frontonasal dysplasia.

Dee CT(1), Szymoniuk CR, Mills PE, Takahashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

Frontonasal dysplasia (FND) refers to a class of midline facial malformations
caused by abnormal development of the facial primordia. The term encompasses a
spectrum of severities but characteristic features include combinations of ocular
hypertelorism, malformations of the nose and forehead and clefting of the facial 
midline. Several recent studies have drawn attention to the importance of Alx
homeobox transcription factors during craniofacial development. Most notably,
loss of Alx1 has devastating consequences resulting in severe orofacial clefting 
and extreme microphthalmia. In contrast, mutations of Alx3 or Alx4 cause milder
forms of FND. Whilst Alx1, Alx3 and Alx4 are all known to be expressed in the
facial mesenchyme of vertebrate embryos, little is known about the function of
these proteins during development. Here, we report the establishment of a
zebrafish model of Alx-related FND. Morpholino knock-down of zebrafish alx1
expression causes a profound craniofacial phenotype including loss of the facial 
cartilages and defective ocular development. We demonstrate for the first time
that Alx1 plays a crucial role in regulating the migration of cranial neural
crest (CNC) cells into the frontonasal primordia. Abnormal neural crest migration
is coincident with aberrant expression of foxd3 and sox10, two genes previously
suggested to play key roles during neural crest development, including migration,
differentiation and the maintenance of progenitor cells. This novel function is
specific to Alx1, and likely explains the marked clinical severity of Alx1
mutation within the spectrum of Alx-related FND.

PMID: 23059813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS Genet. 2012 Sep;8(9):e1002924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002924. Epub 2012 
Sep 20.

Vsx2 controls eye organogenesis and retinal progenitor identity via homeodomain
and non-homeodomain residues required for high affinity DNA binding.

Zou C(1), Levine EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

The homeodomain and adjacent CVC domain in the visual system homeobox (VSX)
proteins are conserved from nematodes to humans. Humans with missense mutations
in these regions of VSX2 have microphthalmia, suggesting both regions are
critical for function. To assess this, we generated the corresponding mutations
in mouse Vsx2. The homeodomain mutant protein lacked DNA binding activity and the
knock-in mutant phenocopied the null mutant, ocular retardation J. The CVC mutant
protein exhibited weakened DNA binding; and, although the corresponding knock-in 
allele was recessive, it unexpectedly caused the strongest phenotype, as
indicated by severe microphthalmia and hyperpigmentation of the neural retina.
This occurred through a cryptic transcriptional feedback loop involving the
transcription factors Mitf and Otx1 and the Cdk inhibitor p27(Kip1). Our data
suggest that the phenotypic severity of the CVC mutant depends on the weakened
DNA binding activity elicited by the CVC mutation and a previously unknown
protein interaction between Vsx2 and its regulatory target Mitf. Our data also
suggest that an essential function of the CVC domain is to assist the homeodomain
in high-affinity DNA binding, which is required for eye organogenesis and
unhindered execution of the retinal progenitor program in mammals. Finally, the
genetic and phenotypic behaviors of the CVC mutation suggest it has the
characteristics of a recessive neomorph, a rare type of genetic allele.

PMCID: PMC3447932
PMID: 23028343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 19;32(38):13145-54.

Spinal cord injury induces serotonin supersensitivity without increasing
intrinsic excitability of mouse V2a interneurons.

Husch A(1), Van Patten GN, Hong DN, Scaperotti MM, Cramer N, Harris-Warrick RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Seeley Mudd Hall, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Denervation-induced plastic changes impair locomotor recovery after spinal cord
injury (SCI). Spinal motoneurons become hyperexcitable after SCI, but the plastic
responses of locomotor network interneurons (INs) after SCI have not been
studied. Using an adult mouse SCI model, we analyzed the effects of complete
spinal cord lesions on the intrinsic electrophysiological properties,
excitability, and neuromodulatory responses to serotonin (5-HT) in mouse lumbar
V2a spinal INs, which help regulate left-right alternation during locomotion.
Four weeks after SCI, V2a INs showed almost no changes in baseline excitability
or action potential properties; the only parameter that changed was a reduced
input resistance. However, V2a INs became 100- to 1000-fold more sensitive to
5-HT. Immunocytochemical analysis showed that SCI caused a coordinated loss of
serotonergic fibers and the 5-HT transporter (SERT). Blocking the SERT with
citalopram in intact mice did not increase 5-HT sensitivity to the level seen
after SCI. SCI also evoked an increase in 5-HT(2C) receptor cluster number and
intensity, suggesting that several plastic changes cooperate in increasing 5-HT
sensitivity. Our results suggest that different components of the spinal neuronal
network responsible for coordinating locomotion are differentially affected by
SCI, and highlight the importance of understanding these changes when considering
therapies targeted at functional recovery.

PMCID: PMC3506248
PMID: 22993431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Neural Dev. 2012 Aug 24;7:30. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-7-30.

ß-catenin/Wnt signaling controls progenitor fate in the developing and
regenerating zebrafish retina.

Meyers JR(1), Hu L, Moses A, Kaboli K, Papandrea A, Raymond PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Colgate University, Hamilton, NY 13346, USA.
jmeyers@colgate.edu

BACKGROUND: The zebrafish retina maintains two populations of stem cells: first, 
the germinal zone or ciliary marginal zone (CMZ) contains multipotent retinal
progenitors that add cells to the retinal periphery as the fish continue to grow;
second, radial glia (Müller cells) occasionally divide asymmetrically to generate
committed progenitors that differentiate into rod photoreceptors, which are added
interstitially throughout the retina with growth. Retinal injury stimulates
Müller glia to dedifferentiate, re-enter the cell cycle, and generate multipotent
retinal progenitors similar to those in the CMZ to replace missing neurons. The
specific signals that maintain these two distinct populations of endogenous
retinal stem cells are not understood.
RESULTS: We used genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the ß-catenin/Wnt
signaling pathway to show that it is required to maintain proliferation in the
CMZ and that hyperstimulation of ß-catenin/Wnt signaling inhibits normal retinal 
differentiation and expands the population of proliferative retinal progenitors. 
To test whether similar effects occur during regeneration, we developed a method 
for making rapid, selective photoreceptor ablations in larval zebrafish with
intense light. We found that dephosphorylated ß-catenin accumulates in Müller
glia as they re-enter the cell cycle following injury, but not in Müller glia
that remain quiescent. Activation of Wnt signaling is required for regenerative
proliferation, and hyperstimulation results in loss of Müller glia from the INL
as all proliferative cells move into the ONL.
CONCLUSIONS: ß-catenin/Wnt signaling is thus required for the maintenance of
retinal progenitors during both initial development and lesion-induced
regeneration, and is sufficient to prevent differentiation of those progenitors
and maintain them in a proliferative state. This suggests that the ß-catenin/Wnt 
cascade is part of the shared molecular circuitry that maintains retinal stem
cells for both homeostatic growth and epimorphic regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3549768
PMID: 22920725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jul;8(7):e1002757. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002757. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

A regulatory loop involving PAX6, MITF, and WNT signaling controls retinal
pigment epithelium development.

Bharti K(1), Gasper M, Ou J, Brucato M, Clore-Gronenborn K, Pickel J, Arnheiter
H.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America. kapilbharti@ninds.nih.gov

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2012 Sep;25(5):541-3.

The separation of the optic neuroepithelium into future retina and retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) is a critical event in early eye development in
vertebrates. Here we show in mice that the transcription factor PAX6, well-known 
for its retina-promoting activity, also plays a crucial role in early pigment
epithelium development. This role is seen, however, only in a background
genetically sensitized by mutations in the pigment cell transcription factor
MITF. In fact, a reduction in Pax6 gene dose exacerbates the RPE-to-retina
transdifferentiation seen in embryos homozygous for an Mitf null allele, and it
induces such a transdifferentiation in embryos that are either heterozygous for
the Mitf null allele or homozygous for an RPE-specific hypomorphic Mitf allele
generated by targeted mutation. Conversely, an increase in Pax6 gene dose
interferes with transdifferentiation even in homozygous Mitf null embryos. Gene
expression analyses show that, together with MITF or its paralog TFEC, PAX6
suppresses the expression of Fgf15 and Dkk3. Explant culture experiments indicate
that a combination of FGF and DKK3 promote retina formation by inhibiting
canonical WNT signaling and stimulating the expression of retinogenic genes,
including Six6 and Vsx2. Our results demonstrate that in conjunction with
Mitf/Tfec Pax6 acts as an anti-retinogenic factor, whereas in conjunction with
retinogenic genes it acts as a pro-retinogenic factor. The results suggest that
careful manipulation of the Pax6 regulatory circuit may facilitate the generation
of retinal and pigment epithelium cells from embryonic or induced pluripotent
stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3390378
PMID: 22792072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Development. 2012 Aug;139(15):2703-10. doi: 10.1242/dev.081448. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Regulatory role for a conserved motif adjacent to the homeodomain of Hox10
proteins.

Guerreiro I(1), Casaca A, Nunes A, Monteiro S, Nóvoa A, Ferreira RB, Bom J, Mallo
M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras. Portugal.

Development of the vertebrate axial skeleton requires the concerted activity of
several Hox genes. Among them, Hox genes belonging to the paralog group 10 are
essential for the formation of the lumbar region of the vertebral column, owing
to their capacity to block rib formation. In this work, we explored the basis for
the rib-repressing activity of Hox10 proteins. Because genetic experiments in
mice demonstrated that Hox10 proteins are strongly redundant in this function, we
first searched for common motifs among the group members. We identified the
presence of two small sequences flanking the homeodomain that are
phylogenetically conserved among Hox10 proteins and that seem to be specific for 
this group. We show here that one of these motifs is required but not sufficient 
for the rib-repressing activity of Hox10 proteins. This motif includes two
potential phosphorylation sites, which are essential for protein activity as
their mutation to alanines resulted in a total loss of rib-repressing properties.
Our data indicates that this motif has a significant regulatory function,
modulating interactions with more N-terminal parts of the Hox protein, eventually
triggering the rib-repressing program. In addition, this motif might also
regulate protein activity by alteration of the protein's DNA-binding affinity
through changes in the phosphorylation state of two conserved tyrosine residues
within the homeodomain.

PMID: 22721778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 6;32(23):7895-906. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0445-12.2012.

Irregular Breathing in Mice following Genetic Ablation of V2a Neurons.

Crone SA(1), Viemari JC, Droho S, Mrejeru A, Ramirez JM, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Neural networks called central pattern generators (CPGs) generate repetitive
motor behaviors such as locomotion and breathing. Glutamatergic neurons are
required for the generation and inhibitory neurons for the patterning of the
motor activity associated with repetitive motor behaviors. In the mouse,
glutamatergic V2a neurons coordinate the activity of left and right leg CPGs in
the spinal cord enabling mice to generate an alternating gait. Here, we
investigate the role of V2a neurons in the neural control of breathing, an
essential repetitive motor behavior. We find that, following the ablation of V2a 
neurons, newborn mice breathe at a lower frequency. Recordings of respiratory
activity in brainstem-spinal cord and respiratory slice preparations demonstrate 
that mice lacking V2a neurons are deficient in central respiratory rhythm
generation. The absence of V2a neurons in the respiratory slice preparation can
be compensated for by bath application of neurochemicals known to accelerate the 
breathing rhythm. In this slice preparation, V2a neurons exhibit a tonic firing
pattern. The existence of direct connections between V2a neurons in the medial
reticular formation and neurons of the pre-Bötzinger complex indicates that V2a
neurons play a direct role in the function of the respiratory CPG in newborn
mice. Thus, neurons of the embryonic V2a lineage appear to have been recruited to
neural networks that control breathing and locomotion, two prominent CPG-driven, 
repetitive motor behaviors.

PMCID: PMC3652431
PMID: 22674265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Res Notes. 2012 Apr 10;5:182. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-182.

Enhanced generation of retinal progenitor cells from human retinal pigment
epithelial cells induced by amniotic fluid.

Sanie-Jahromi F(1), Ahmadieh H, Soheili ZS, Davari M, Ghaderi S, Kanavi MR,
Samiei S, Deezagi A, Pakravesh J, Bagheri A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran.
fsanie@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Retinal progenitor cells are a convenient source of cell replacement 
therapy in retinal degenerative disorders. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the expression patterns of the homeobox genes PAX6 and CHX10 (retinal
progenitor markers) during treatment of human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
cells with amniotic fluid (AF), RPE cells harvested from neonatal cadaver globes 
were cultured in a mixture of DMEM and Ham's F12 supplemented with 10% FBS. At
different passages, cells were trypsinized and co-cultured with 30% AF obtained
from normal fetuses of 1416 weeks gestational age.
RESULTS: Compared to FBS-treated controls, AF-treated cultures exhibited special 
morphological changes in culture, including appearance of spheroid colonies,
improved initial cell adhesion and ordered cell alignment. Cell proliferation
assays indicated a remarkable increase in the proliferation rate of RPE cells
cultivated in 30% AF-supplemented medium, compared with those grown in the
absence of AF. Immunocytochemical analyses exhibited nuclear localization of
retinal progenitor markers at a ratio of 33% and 27% for CHX10 and PAX6,
respectively. This indicated a 3-fold increase in retinal progenitor markers in
AF-treated cultures compared to FBS-treated controls. Real-time PCR data of
retinal progenitor genes (PAX6, CHX10 and VSX-1) confirmed these results and
demonstrated AF's capacity for promoting retinal progenitor cell generation.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the results suggest that AF significantly promotes
the rate of retinal progenitor cell generation, indicating that AF can be used as
an enriched supplement for serum-free media used for the in vitro propagation of 
human progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3428660
PMID: 22490806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Dec 28;12:172. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-172.

Targeted 'next-generation' sequencing in anophthalmia and microphthalmia patients
confirms SOX2, OTX2 and FOXE3 mutations.

Jimenez NL(1), Flannick J, Yahyavi M, Li J, Bardakjian T, Tonkin L, Schneider A, 
Sherr EH, Slavotinek AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of California, San 
Francisco, 533 Parnassus St, Room U585P, San Francisco, CA 94143-0748 USA.

BACKGROUND: Anophthalmia/microphthalmia (A/M) is caused by mutations in several
different transcription factors, but mutations in each causative gene are
relatively rare, emphasizing the need for a testing approach that screens
multiple genes simultaneously. We used next-generation sequencing to screen 15
A/M patients for mutations in 9 pathogenic genes to evaluate this technology for 
screening in A/M.
METHODS: We used a pooled sequencing design, together with custom single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calling software. We verified predicted sequence
alterations using Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We verified three mutations - c.542delC in SOX2, resulting in
p.Pro181Argfs*22, p.Glu105X in OTX2 and p.Cys240X in FOXE3. We found several
novel sequence alterations and SNPs that were likely to be non-pathogenic -
p.Glu42Lys in CRYBA4, p.Val201Met in FOXE3 and p.Asp291Asn in VSX2. Our analysis 
methodology gave one false positive result comprising a mutation in PAX6 (c.1268A
> T, predicting p.X423LeuextX*15) that was not verified by Sanger sequencing. We 
also failed to detect one 20 base pair (bp) deletion and one 3 bp duplication in 
SOX2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated the power of next-generation sequencing
with pooled sample groups for the rapid screening of candidate genes for A/M as
we were correctly able to identify disease-causing mutations. However,
next-generation sequencing was less useful for small, intragenic deletions and
duplications. We did not find mutations in 10/15 patients and conclude that there
is a need for further gene discovery in A/M.

PMCID: PMC3262754
PMID: 22204637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:671-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_85.

Restoration of retinal development in Vsx2 deficient mice by reduction of Gdf11
levels.

Santos R(1), Wu J, Hamilton JA, Pinter R, Hindges R, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Center for Complex Biological Systems,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-1275, USA.

PMCID: PMC3790663
PMID: 22183392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e27145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027145. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

A transgenic mouse line expressing cre recombinase in undifferentiated
postmitotic mouse retinal bipolar cell precursors.

Nickerson PE(1), Ronellenfitch K, McEwan J, Kim H, McInnes RR, Chow RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia,
Canada.

Approaches for manipulating cell type-specific gene expression during development
depend on the identification of novel genetic tools. Here, we report the
generation of a transgenic mouse line that utilizes Vsx2 upstream sequences to
direct Cre recombinase to developing retinal bipolar cells. In contrast to the
endogenous Vsx2 expression pattern, transgene expression was not detected in
proliferating retinal progenitor cells and was restricted to post-mitotic bipolar
cells. Cre immunolabeling was detected in rod bipolar cells and a subset of ON
and OFF cone bipolar cells. Expression was first observed at postnatal day 3 and 
was detectable between 24 hours and 36 hours after the last S-phase of the cell
cycle. The appearance of Cre-immunolabeled cells preceded the expression of
bipolar cell type-specific markers such as PKCa and Cabp5 suggesting that
transgene expression is initiated prior to terminal differentiation. In the
presence of a constitutive conditional reporter transgene, reporter fluorescence 
was detected in Cre-expressing bipolar cells in the mature retina as expected,
but was also observed in Cre-negative Type 2 bipolar cells and occasionally in
Cre-negative photoreceptor cells. Together these findings reveal a new transgenic
tool for directing gene expression to post-mitotic retinal precursors that are
mostly committed to a bipolar cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3205053
PMID: 22073130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Dec;104(4):448-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2011.09.029. Epub
2011 Sep 29.

Eye development genes and known syndromes.

Slavotinek AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0748, USA. slavotia@peds.ucsf.edu

Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (A/M) are significant eye defects because they
can have profound effects on visual acuity. A/M is associated with non-ocular
abnormalities in an estimated 33-95% of cases and around 25% of patients have an 
underlying genetic syndrome that is diagnosable. Syndrome recognition is
important for targeted molecular genetic testing, prognosis and for counseling
regarding recurrence risks. This review provides clinical and molecular
information for several of the commonest syndromes associated with A/M:
Anophthalmia-Esophageal-Genital syndrome, caused by SOX2 mutations, Anophthalmia 
and pituitary abnormalities caused by OTX2 mutations, Matthew-Wood syndrome
caused by STRA6 mutations, oculofaciocardiodental syndrome and Lenz
microphthalmia caused by BCOR mutations, Microphthalmia Linear Skin pigmentation 
syndrome caused by HCCS mutations, Anophthalmia, pituitary abnormalities,
polysyndactyly caused by BMP4 mutations and Waardenburg anophthalmia caused by
mutations in SMOC1. In addition, we briefly discuss the ocular and extraocular
phenotypes associated with several other important eye developmental genes,
including GDF6, VSX2, RAX, SHH, SIX6 and PAX6.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3224152
PMID: 22005280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Vis. 2011;17:2527-32. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

VSX2 mutations in autosomal recessive microphthalmia.

Reis LM(1), Khan A, Kariminejad A, Ebadi F, Tyler RC, Semina EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Childrens Research Institute at the Medical
College of Wisconsin, Childrens Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

PURPOSE: To further explore the spectrum of mutations in the Visual System
Homeobox 2 (VSX2/CHX10) gene previously found to be associated with autosomal
recessive microphthalmia.
METHODS: We screened 95 probands with syndromic or isolated developmental ocular 
conditions (including 55 with anophthalmia/microphthalmia) for mutations in VSX2.
RESULTS: Homozygous mutations in VSX2 were identified in two out of five
consanguineous families with isolated microphthalmia. A novel missense mutation, 
c.668G>C (p.G223A), was identified in a large Pakistani family with multiple
sibships affected with bilateral microphthalmia. This p.G223A mutation affects
the conserved CVC motif that was shown to be important for DNA binding and
repression activities of VSX2. The second mutation, c.249delG (p.Leu84SerfsX57), 
was identified in an Iranian family with microphthalmia; this mutation has been
previously reported and is predicted to generate a severely truncated mutant
protein completely lacking the VSX2 homeodomain, CVC domain and COOH-terminal
regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in VSX2 represent an important cause of autosomal
recessive microphthalmia in consanguineous pedigrees. Identification of a second 
missense mutation in the CVC motif emphasizes the importance of this region for
normal VSX2 function.

PMCID: PMC3185030
PMID: 21976963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2011 Sep 14;31(37):13118-27. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2331-11.2011.

Vsx1 regulates terminal differentiation of type 7 ON bipolar cells.

Shi Z(1), Trenholm S, Zhu M, Buddingh S, Star EN, Awatramani GB, Chow RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia V8W 
3N5, Canada.

Although retinal bipolar cells represent a morphologically well defined
population of retinal interneurons, very little is known about the developmental 
mechanisms that regulate their processing. Furthermore, the identity of specific 
bipolar cell types that function in distinct visual circuits remains poorly
understood. Here, we show that the homeobox gene Vsx1 is expressed in Type 7 ON
bipolar cells. In the absence of Vsx1, Type 7 bipolar cells exhibit proper
morphological specification but show defects in terminal gene expression. Vsx1 is
required for the repression of bipolar cell-specific markers, including
Calcium-binding protein 5 and Chx10. This contrasts its genetic requirement as an
activator of gene expression in OFF bipolar cells. To assess possible ON
signaling defects in Vsx1-null mice, we recorded specifically from ON-OFF
directionally selective ganglion cells (DSGCs), which cofasciculate with Type 7
bipolar cell terminals. Vsx1-null ON-OFF DSGCs received more sustained excitatory
synaptic input, possibly due to Type 7 bipolar cell defects. Interestingly, in
Vsx1-null mice, the directionally selective circuit is functional but
compromised. Together, these findings indicate that Vsx1 regulates terminal gene 
expression in Type 7 bipolar cells and is necessary for proper ON visual
signaling within a directionally selective circuit.

PMID: 21917795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023410. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Hox10 genes function in kidney development in the differentiation and integration
of the cortical stroma.

Yallowitz AR(1), Hrycaj SM, Short KM, Smyth IM, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Organogenesis requires the differentiation and integration of distinct
populations of cells to form a functional organ. In the kidney, reciprocal
interactions between the ureter and the nephrogenic mesenchyme are required for
organ formation. Additionally, the differentiation and integration of stromal
cells are also necessary for the proper development of this organ. Much remains
to be understood regarding the origin of cortical stromal cells and the pathways 
involved in their formation and function. By generating triple mutants in the
Hox10 paralogous group genes, we demonstrate that Hox10 genes play a critical
role in the developing kidney. Careful examination of control kidneys show that
Foxd1-expressing stromal precursor cells are first observed in a cap-like pattern
anterior to the metanephric mesenchyme and these cells subsequently integrate
posteriorly into the kidney periphery as development proceeds. While the initial 
cap-like pattern of Foxd1-expressing cortical stromal cells is unaffected in
Hox10 mutants, these cells fail to become properly integrated into the kidney,
and do not differentiate to form the kidney capsule. Consistent with loss of
cortical stromal cell function, Hox10 mutant kidneys display reduced and aberrant
ureter branching, decreased nephrogenesis. These data therefore provide critical 
novel insights into the cellular and genetic mechanisms governing cortical cell
development during kidney organogenesis. These results, combined with previous
evidence demonstrating that Hox11 genes are necessary for patterning the
metanephric mesenchyme, support a model whereby distinct populations in the
nephrogenic cord are regulated by unique Hox codes, and that differential Hox
function along the AP axis of the nephrogenic cord is critical for the
differentiation and integration of these cell types during kidney organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3156768
PMID: 21858105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Jul 4;18(4):465-78. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0083. Print
2011 Aug.

Novel candidate colorectal cancer biomarkers identified by methylation
microarray-based scanning.

Mori Y(1), Olaru AV, Cheng Y, Agarwal R, Yang J, Luvsanjav D, Yu W, Selaru FM,
Hutfless S, Lazarev M, Kwon JH, Brant SR, Marohn MR, Hutcheon DF, Duncan MD, Goel
A, Meltzer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 720
Rutland Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA. ymori3@jhmi.edu

DNA hypermethylation is a common epigenetic abnormality in colorectal cancers
(CRCs) and a promising class of CRC screening biomarkers. We conducted a
genome-wide search for novel neoplasia-specific hypermethylation events in the
colon. We applied methylation microarray analysis to identify loci
hypermethylated in 17 primary CRCs relative to eight non-neoplastic colonic
mucosae (NCs) from neoplasia-free subjects. These CRC-associated hypermethylation
events were then individually evaluated for their ability to discriminate
neoplastic from non-neoplastic cases, based on real-time quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (qMSP) assays in 113 colonic tissues: 51 CRCs, nine
adenomas, 19 NCs from CRC patients (CRC-NCs), and 34 NCs from neoplasia-free
subjects (control NCs). A strict microarray data filtering identified 169
candidate CRC-associated hypermethylation events. Fourteen of these 169 loci were
evaluated using qMSP assays. Ten of these 14 methylation events significantly
distinguished CRCs from age-matched control NCs (P<0.05 by receiver operator
characteristic curve analysis); methylation of visual system homeobox 2 (VSX2)
achieved the highest discriminative accuracy (83.3% sensitivity and 92.3%
specificity, P<1×10(-6)), followed by BEN domain containing 4 (BEND4), neuronal
pentraxin I (NPTX1), ALX homeobox 3 (ALX3), miR-34b, glucagon-like peptide 1
receptor (GLP1R), BTG4, homer homolog 2 (HOMER2), zinc finger protein 583
(ZNF583), and gap junction protein, gamma 1 (GJC1). Adenomas were significantly
discriminated from control NCs by hypermethylation of VSX2, BEND4, NPTX1,
miR-34b, GLP1R, and HOMER2 (P<0.05). CRC-NCs were significantly distinguished
from control NCs by methylation of ALX3 (P<1×10(-4)). In conclusion, systematic
methylome-wide analysis has identified ten novel methylation events in neoplastic
and non-neoplastic colonic mucosae from CRC patients. These potential biomarkers 
significantly discriminate CRC patients from controls. Thus, they merit further
evaluation in stool- and circulating DNA-based CRC detection studies.

PMCID: PMC3464012
PMID: 21636702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 30;31(13):5169-80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5495-10.2011.

Suppressor of fused is required to maintain the multipotency of neural progenitor
cells in the retina.

Cwinn MA(1), Mazerolle C, McNeill B, Ringuette R, Thurig S, Hui CC, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8L6,
Canada.

The morphogen sonic hedgehog (Shh) plays a crucial role in development of the
CNS, including the neural retina. Suppressor of fused (Sufu) has been recently
identified as a critical regulator of Hh signaling in mammals. However, the
precise roles that Sufu plays in the regulation of proliferation and cell-fate
decisions in neural progenitors is unknown. Here, we have addressed these
questions by conditionally deleting Sufu in mouse multipotent retinal progenitor 
cells (RPCs). Sufu deletion in RPCs results in transient increases in Hh activity
and proliferation followed by developmentally premature cell-cycle exit.
Importantly, we demonstrate a novel role for Sufu in the maintenance of
multipotency in RPCs. Sufu-null RPCs downregulate transcription factors required 
to specify or maintain RPC identity (Rax, Vsx2) and multipotency (Pax6) but
continue to express the neural progenitor marker Sox2. These cells fail to
express retinal lineage-specific transcription factors, such as Math5, and adopt 
an amacrine or horizontal cell fate at the expense of all other classes of
retinal neurons. Genetic elimination of Gli2 in Sufu-null RPCs attenuates Hh
pathway activity and restores multipotency in neural progenitors. These data
provide novel evidence that Sufu-mediated antagonism of Hh/Gli2 signaling is
required to maintain RPC multipotency and identity.

PMID: 21451052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Arch Ophthalmol. 2010 Sep;128(9):1191-5. doi: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2010.200.

Evidence for keratoconus susceptibility locus on chromosome 14: a genome-wide
linkage screen using single-nucleotide polymorphism markers.

Liskova P(1), Hysi PG, Waseem N, Ebenezer ND, Bhattacharya SS, Tuft SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London,
London, England. p.liskova@ucl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Arch Ophthalmol. 2010 Nov;128(11):1431.

OBJECTIVE: To search for genetic factors that could increase susceptibility to
keratoconus.
METHODS: A single-nucleotide polymorphism chip method was used to generate
whole-genome data in a multiethnic panel of 6 families with 3 to 5 members
affected by keratoconus. Candidate gene screening was performed by direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Linkage analysis results were strongest for a locus on chromosome
14q24.3. This region contains a relatively small number of genes of potential
interest, including VSX2, a homeobox gene known to be involved in eye development
and implicated in a spectrum of ocular disorders. However, sequencing the coding 
region of VSX2 did not reveal a sequence variant segregating with disease in any 
of the families described.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first report of linkage for keratoconus
to 14q24.3 and the region is likely to harbor important inheritable genetic
factors that may affect susceptibility to keratoconus.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Further genetic research is needed to identify the genes
responsible for keratoconus. This knowledge will aid in understanding the
molecular pathophysiology of this condition and may lead to improved treatment
strategies.

PMID: 20837804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jul;239(7):2066-77. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22325.

Loss of adenomatous polyposis coli (apc) results in an expanded ciliary marginal 
zone in the zebrafish eye.

Stephens WZ(1), Senecal M, Nguyen M, Piotrowski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah Medical School, 20N
Medical Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

The distal region of neural retina (ciliary marginal zone [CMZ]) contains stem
cells that produce non-neural and neuronal progenitors. We provide a detailed
gene expression analysis of the eyes of apc mutant zebrafish where the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is constitutively active. Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
leads to an expansion of the CMZ accompanied by a central shift of the retinal
identity gene sox2 and the proneural gene atoh7. This suggests an important role 
for peripheral Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in regulating the expression and
localization of neurogenic genes in the central retina. Retinal identity genes
rx1 and vsx2, as well as meis1 and pax6a act upstream of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
activation. Peripheral cells that likely contain stem cells can be identified by 
the expression of follistatin, otx1, and axin2 and the lack of expression of myca
and cyclinD1. Our results introduce the zebrafish apc mutation as a new model to 
study signaling pathways regulating the CMZ.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20549742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Jun;1198:85-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05502.x.

Functional organization of V2a-related locomotor circuits in the rodent spinal
cord.

Dougherty KJ(1), Kiehn O.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Locomotor Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Studies of mammalian locomotion have been greatly facilitated by the use of the
isolated rodent spinal cord preparation that retains the locomotor circuits
needed to execute the movement. Physiological and molecular genetic experiments
in this preparation have started to unravel the basic circuit organization
responsible for walking in mammals. Here, we review these experiments with a
focus on the functional role of excitatory V2a interneurons in the mammalian
locomotor network. With regard to these neurons and other network structures we
also discuss similarities and differences between the mammalian walking central
pattern generator (CPG) and the fish swimming CPG.

PMID: 20536923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Br J Ophthalmol. 2010 Aug;94(8):1100-4. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2009.173500. Epub 2010
May 21.

Mutational screening of CHX10, GDF6, OTX2, RAX and SOX2 genes in 50 unrelated
microphthalmia-anophthalmia-coloboma (MAC) spectrum cases.

Gonzalez-Rodriguez J(1), Pelcastre EL, Tovilla-Canales JL, Garcia-Ortiz JE,
Amato-Almanza M, Villanueva-Mendoza C, Espinosa-Mattar Z, Zenteno JC.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Institute of Ophthalmology Conde de Valenciana, Chimalpopoca
14, Col. Obrera, CP 06800, Mexico City, Mexico.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Microphthalmia-anophthalmia-coloboma (MAC) are congenital eye
malformations causing a significant percentage of visually impairments in
children. Although these anomalies can arise from prenatal exposure to
teratogens, mutations in well-defined genes originate potentially heritable forms
of MAC. Mutations in genes such as CHX10, GDF6, RAX, SOX2 and OTX2, among others,
have been recognised in dominant or recessive MAC. SOX2 and OTX2 are the two most
commonly mutated genes in monogenic MAC. However, as more numerous samples of MAC
subjects would be analysed, a better estimation of the actual involvement of
specific MAC-genes could be made. Here, a comprehensive mutational analysis of
the CHX10, GDF6, RAX, SOX2 and OTX2 genes was performed in 50 MAC subjects.
METHODS: PCR amplification and direct automated DNA sequencing of all five genes 
in 50 unrelated subjects.
RESULTS: Eight mutations (16% prevalence) were recognised, including four GDF6
mutations (one novel), two novel RAX mutations, one novel OTX2 mutation and one
SOX2 mutation. Anophthalmia and nanophthalmia, not previously associated with
GDF6 mutations, were observed in two subjects carrying defects in this gene,
expanding the spectrum of GDF6-linked ocular anomalies.
CONCLUSION: Our study underscores the importance of genotyping large groups of
patients from distinct ethnic origins for improving the estimation of the global 
involvement of particular MAC-causing genes.

PMID: 20494911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Neurosci. 2010 May 12;30(19):6515-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0771-10.2010.

Blimp1 suppresses Chx10 expression in differentiating retinal photoreceptor
precursors to ensure proper photoreceptor development.

Katoh K(1), Omori Y, Onishi A, Sato S, Kondo M, Furukawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, Suita, Osaka 
565-0874, Japan.

The zinc finger transcription factor Blimp1 plays fundamentally important roles
in many cell lineages and in the early development of several cell types,
including B and T lymphocytes and germ cells. Although Blimp1 expression in
developing retinal photoreceptor cells has been reported, its function remains
unclear. We identified Blimp1 as a downstream factor of Otx2, which plays an
essential role in photoreceptor cell fate determination. To investigate Blimp1
function in the mouse retina, we ablated Blimp1 in the developing retina by
conditional gene targeting. In the Blimp1 conditional knockout (CKO) retina, the 
number of photoreceptor cells was markedly reduced in the differentiated retina. 
We found that the numbers of both bipolar-like cells and proliferating retinal
cells increased noticeably, with ectopic localizations in the postnatal
developing retina. In contrast, a reduction of the number of photoreceptor
precursors was observed during development. Forced expression of Blimp1 by in
vivo electroporation suppressed bipolar cell genesis in the developing retina.
Multiple genes involved in bipolar development, including Chx10, were upregulated
in the Blimp1 CKO retina. Furthermore, we showed that Blimp1 can bind to the
Chx10 enhancer and repress Chx10 enhancer activity. These results suggest that
Blimp1 plays a crucial role in photoreceptor development by repressing genes
involved in bipolar cell fate specification and retinal cell proliferation in
differentiating photoreceptor precursors.

PMID: 20463215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;128(1):51-60. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0823-6. Epub 2010 Apr
23.

Use of genome-wide SNP homozygosity mapping in small pedigrees to identify new
mutations in VSX2 causing recessive microphthalmia and a semidominant inner
retinal dystrophy.

Iseri SU(1), Wyatt AW, Nürnberg G, Kluck C, Nürnberg P, Holder GE, Blair E, Salt 
A, Ragge NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy, and Genetics, University of Oxford, Le Gros
Clark Building, South Parks Rd, Oxford, OX1 3QX, UK.

Mutations in the visual system homeobox 2 gene (VSX2, also known as CHX10), which
encodes a retinal transcription factor from the paired homeobox family, have been
implicated in recessive isolated microphthalmia. In this study, we use
genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism homozygosity mapping in unrelated
small consanguineous pedigrees and a candidate gene approach to identify three
further causative VSX2 mutations (two novel and one previously reported). All
affected individuals with homozygous mutations had bilateral anophthalmia or
severe microphthalmia with absent vision. In addition, we identified a novel
inner retinal dystrophy in two carrier parents suggesting a semidominant effect
for this particular VSX2 mutation. A further study of individuals with retinal
degenerative conditions may reveal a causative role for heterozygous mutations in
VSX2.

PMID: 20414678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Br J Ophthalmol. 2010 Mar;94(3):386-8. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2009.159996.

VSX2 in microphthalmia: a novel splice site mutation producing a severe
microphthalmia phenotype.

Burkitt Wright EM, Perveen R, Bowers N, Ramsden S, McCann E, O'Driscoll M, Lloyd 
IC, Clayton-Smith J, Black GC.

PMID: 20215382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2010 Feb;137(4):619-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.043968.

Blimp1 controls photoreceptor versus bipolar cell fate choice during retinal
development.

Brzezinski JA 4th(1), Lamba DA, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Department of Biological Structure, Seattle, WA
98195, USA.

Photoreceptors, rods and cones are the most abundant cell type in the mammalian
retina. However, the molecules that control their development are not fully
understood. In studies of photoreceptor fate determination, we found that Blimp1 
(Prdm1) is expressed transiently in developing photoreceptors. We analyzed the
function of Blimp1 in the mouse retina using a conditional deletion approach.
Developmental analysis of mutants showed that Otx2(+) photoreceptor precursors
ectopically express the bipolar cell markers Chx10 (Vsx2) and Vsx1, adopting
bipolar instead of photoreceptor fate. However, this fate shift did not occur
until the time when bipolar cells are normally specified during development. Most
of the excess bipolar cells died around the time of bipolar cell maturation. Our 
results suggest that Blimp1 expression stabilizes immature photoreceptors by
preventing bipolar cell induction. We conclude that Blimp1 regulates the decision
between photoreceptor and bipolar cell fates in the Otx2(+) cell population
during retinal development.

PMCID: PMC2827615
PMID: 20110327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Vis. 2009 Dec 27;15:2911-8.

Mutational screening of 10 genes in Chinese patients with microphthalmia and/or
coloboma.

Zhang X(1), Li S, Xiao X, Jia X, Wang P, Shen H, Guo X, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To screen ten genes for mutations in 32 Chinese patients with
microphthalmia and/or coloboma.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was prepared from 32 unrelated patients with microphthalmia 
(nine probands) and uveal coloboma (23 probands). Cycle sequencing was used to
detect sequence variations in ten genes, including BMP4, VSX2, CRYBA4, GDF6,
OTX2, RAX, SIX3, SIX6, SOX2, and LRP6. Variations were further evaluated in 96
unrelated controls by using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) or
heteroduplex-single strand conformation polymorphism (HA-SSCP) analysis.
RESULTS: In the ten genes, a novel c.751C>T (p.H251Y) in BMP4 was detected in a
patient with bilateral microphthalmia and unilateral cataract. The c.751C>T
variation is also present in his healthy brother (and possibly one of the normal 
parents). In addition, a novel c.608G>A (p.R203Q) in SIX6 was identified in an
internal control for optimizing experimental conditions. The internal control was
from a girl with typical aniridia and an identified c.718C>T (p.R240X) mutation
in PAX6, suggesting the c.608G>A variation in SIX6 was unlikely to play a role in
her ocular phenotype. The c.751C>T in BMP4 and the c.608G>A in SIX6 were not
present in the 96 normal controls. In addition, 16 nucleotide substitutions,
including eight known SNPs and eight new synonymous changes, were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the genetic etiology for microphthalmia and/or coloboma is 
still elusive, rare variations in the related genes, such as c.608 G>A in SIX6
and c.751C>T in BMP4, may not be causative. These results further emphasize the
importance of careful clinical and genetic analysis in making mutation-disease
associations.

PMCID: PMC2802294
PMID: 20057906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 6;30(1):170-82. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4849-09.2010.

Electrophysiological characterization of V2a interneurons and their
locomotor-related activity in the neonatal mouse spinal cord.

Zhong G(1), Droho S, Crone SA, Dietz S, Kwan AC, Webb WW, Sharma K,
Harris-Warrick RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 
14853, USA.

The V2a class of Chx10-expressing interneurons has been implicated in
frequency-dependent control of left-right phase during locomotion in the mouse.
We have used the Chx10::CFP mouse line to further investigate the properties and 
locomotion-related activity of V2a interneurons in the isolated neonatal spinal
cord. V2a interneurons can be divided into three classes, based on their tonic,
phasic, or delayed-onset responses to step depolarization. Electrical coupling is
found only between neurons of same class and helps to synchronize neuronal
activity within the class. Serotonin (5-HT) excites isolated tonic V2a
interneurons by depolarizing the neurons and increasing their membrane input
resistance, with no significant effects on action potential properties, a
mechanism distinct from 5-HT excitation of commissural interneurons. During
NMDA-/5-HT-induced locomotor-like activity, patch-clamp recordings and two-photon
calcium imaging experiments show that approximately half of V2a interneurons fire
rhythmically with ventral root-recorded motor activity; the rhythmic V2a
interneurons fired during one half of the cycle, in phase with either the
ipsilateral or the contralateral L2 ventral root bursts. The percentage of
rhythmically firing V2a interneurons increases during higher-frequency fictive
locomotion, and they become significantly more rhythmic in their firing during
the locomotor cycle; this may help to explain the frequency-dependent shift in
left-right coupling in Chx10::DTA mice, which lack these neurons. Our results
together with data from the accompanying paper (Dougherty and Kiehn, 2009)
reinforce earlier proposals that the V2a interneurons are components of the
hindlimb central pattern generator, helping to organize left-right locomotor
coordination in the neonatal mouse spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2824326
PMID: 20053899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 6;30(1):24-37. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4821-09.2010.

Firing and cellular properties of V2a interneurons in the rodent spinal cord.

Dougherty KJ(1), Kiehn O.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Locomotor Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm S-171 77, Sweden.

Previous studies have shown that a group of ventrally located neurons, designated
V2a interneurons, play a key role in maintaining locomotor rhythmicity and in
ensuring appropriate left-right alternation during locomotion (Crone et al.,
2008, 2009). These V2a interneurons express the transcription factor Chx10. The
aim of the present study was to characterize the locomotor-related activity of
individual V2a interneurons, their cellular properties, and their detailed
anatomical attributes in Chx10-GFP mice. A dorsal horn-removed preparation was
developed to allow for visual whole-cell patch recordings from V2a interneurons
along the entire lumbar spinal cord while at the same time leaving enough of the 
spinal cord intact to generate fictive locomotion. During drug-evoked
locomotor-like activity, a large proportion of Chx10 cells showed rhythmic firing
or membrane potential fluctuations related to either flexor or extensor activity 
in every lumbar segment. Chx10 cells received predominantly rhythmic excitatory
input. Chx10 neurons displayed a wide variety of firing and potential
rhythmogenic properties. However, none of these properties was obviously related 
to the observed rhythmicity during locomotor-like activity. In dual recordings,
we found no evidence of Chx10 neuron interconnectivity. Intracellular fills
revealed diverse projection patterns with most Chx10 interneurons being local
with projections to the central pattern generator and motor neuron regions of the
spinal cord and others with long ascending and/or descending branches. These data
are compatible with V2a neurons having a role in regulating segmental left-right 
alternation and ipsilateral motor neuron firing with little effect on rhythm
generation.

PMCID: PMC3842458
PMID: 20053884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Stem Cells. 2010 Mar 31;28(3):489-500. doi: 10.1002/stem.279.

Maximizing functional photoreceptor differentiation from adult human retinal stem
cells.

Inoue T(1), Coles BL, Dorval K, Bremner R, Bessho Y, Kageyama R, Hino S, Matsuoka
M, Craft CM, McInnes RR, Tremblay F, Prusky GT, van der Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. tinoue@ophthal.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Retinal stem cells (RSCs) are present in the ciliary margin of the adult human
eye and can give rise to all retinal cell types. Here we show that modulation of 
retinal transcription factor gene expression in human RSCs greatly enriches
photoreceptor progeny, and that strong enrichment was obtained with the combined 
transduction of OTX2 and CRX together with the modulation of CHX10. When these
genetically modified human RSC progeny are transplanted into mouse eyes, their
retinal integration and differentiation is superior to unmodified RSC progeny.
Moreover, electrophysiologic and behavioral tests show that these transplanted
cells promote functional recovery in transducin mutant mice. This study suggests 
that gene modulation in human RSCs may provide a source of photoreceptor cells
for the treatment of photoreceptor disease.

PMCID: PMC2933833
PMID: 20014120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Development. 2009 Dec;136(23):3895-906. doi: 10.1242/dev.041202.

Lhx2 links the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that control optic cup formation.

Yun S(1), Saijoh Y, Hirokawa KE, Kopinke D, Murtaugh LC, Monuki ES, Levine EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

A crucial step in eye organogenesis is the transition of the optic vesicle into
the optic cup. Several transcription factors and extracellular signals mediate
this transition, but whether a single factor links them into a common genetic
network is unclear. Here, we provide evidence that the LIM homeobox gene Lhx2,
which is expressed in the optic neuroepithelium, fulfils such a role. In
Lhx2(-/-) mouse embryos, eye field specification and optic vesicle morphogenesis 
occur, but development arrests prior to optic cup formation in both the optic
neuroepithelium and lens ectoderm. This is accompanied by failure to maintain or 
initiate the expression patterns of optic-vesicle-patterning and lens-inducing
determinants. Of the signaling pathways examined, only BMP signaling is
noticeably altered and Bmp4 and Bmp7 mRNAs are undetectable. Lhx2(-/-) optic
vesicles and lens ectoderm upregulate Pax2, Fgf15 and Sox2 in response to BMP
treatments, and Lhx2 genetic mosaics reveal that transcription factors, including
Vsx2 and Mitf, require Lhx2 cell-autonomously for their expression. Our data
indicate that Lhx2 is required for optic vesicle patterning and lens formation in
part by regulating BMP signaling in an autocrine manner in the optic
neuroepithelium and in a paracrine manner in the lens ectoderm. We propose a
model in which Lhx2 is a central link in a genetic network that coordinates the
multiple pathways leading to optic cup formation.

PMCID: PMC2778739
PMID: 19906857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Eye Res. 2009 Jul;34(7):523-35.

Rescue from light-induced retinal degeneration by human fetal retinal
transplantation in minipigs.

Li SY(1), Yin ZQ, Chen SJ, Chen LF, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Southwest Eye Hospital, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

PURPOSE: To evaluate changes in retinal morphology and visual function after
transplantation of human fetal neuroretina and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
in a minipig model of light-induced retinal degeneration.
METHODS: Photoreceptor degeneration was induced by 2500 lux white light exposure 
for six months in 16 minipigs. Human fetal (12-24 week) neuroretina and RPE were 
transplanted into the subretinal space adjacent to the central retina in 25 eyes.
Sham operation was performed in three eyes. The operated eyes were examined by
multifocal electroretinogram (mfERG), fundus fluorescence angiography (FFA), and 
histology for up to 12 months.
RESULTS: Subretinal transplantation of neuroretina and RPE was successful in 15
out of 25 eyes (60%), among which 10/15 eyes showed evidence of the grafted
tissue in subsequent histology. Structural processes between the graft and host
tissue were observed from one month post implantation, accompanied by increased
numbers of GFAP-positive cells over time. Immunohistochemistry showed the
presence of GFAP- and Chx10-positive cells, but rhodopsin staining was not
observed within the grafted tissue. In 15 eyes, mfERG revealed retinal functional
improvement in regions both inside and outside of the grafted area, but this was 
not observed in sham-operated eyes. FFA showed no vascular leakage or
inflammatory cells in eyes receiving tissue transplants.
CONCLUSIONS: Following subretinal transplantation, the grafted fetal neuroretina 
and RPE can survive for up to 12 months without signs of graft rejection, and the
host retinas showed functional improvement over the same period. Our data suggest
that subretinal transplantation of neuronal retina and RPE might be beneficial in
improving retinal function in cases of retinal degeneration.

PMID: 19899965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jan 15;19(2):250-61. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp484. Epub 2009 Oct
20.

The homeobox gene CHX10/VSX2 regulates RdCVF promoter activity in the inner
retina.

Reichman S(1), Kalathur RK, Lambard S, Aït-Ali N, Yang Y, Lardenois A, Ripp R,
Poch O, Zack DJ, Sahel JA, Léveillard T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institut de la Vision, INSERM Université Pierre et
Marie Curie-Paris 6, UMR-S 968, Paris, France.

Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor (RdCVF) is a trophic factor with therapeutic
potential for the treatment of retinitis pigmentosa, a retinal disease that
commonly results in blindness. RdCVF is encoded by Nucleoredoxin-like 1 (Nxnl1), 
a gene homologous with the family of thioredoxins that participate in the defense
against oxidative stress. RdCVF expression is lost after rod degeneration in the 
first phase of retinitis pigmentosa, and this loss has been implicated in the
more clinically significant secondary cone degeneration that often occurs. Here, 
we describe a study of the Nxnl1 promoter using an approach that combines
promoter and transcriptomic analysis. By transfection of selected candidate
transcription factors, chosen based upon their expression pattern, we identified 
the homeodomain proteins CHX10/VSX2, VSX1 and PAX4, as well as the zinc finger
protein SP3, as factors that can stimulate both the mouse and human Nxnl1
promoter. In addition, CHX10/VSX2 binds to the Nxnl1 promoter in vivo. Since
CHX10/VSX2 is expressed predominantly in the inner retina, this finding motivated
us to demonstrate that RdCVF is expressed in the inner as well as the outer
retina. Interestingly, the loss of rods in the rd1 mouse, a model of retinitis
pigmentosa, is associated with decreased expression of RdCVF by inner retinal
cells as well as by rods. Based upon these results, we propose an alternative
therapeutic strategy aimed at recapitulating RdCVF expression in the inner
retina, where cell loss is not significant, to prevent secondary cone death and
central vision loss in patients suffering from retinitis pigmentosa.

PMCID: PMC2796890
PMID: 19843539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Neurosci. 2009 Oct 14;29(41):12865-77. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3382-09.2009.

Rbpj cell autonomous regulation of retinal ganglion cell and cone photoreceptor
fates in the mouse retina.

Riesenberg AN(1), Liu Z, Kopan R, Brown NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Vertebrate retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) are pluripotent, but pass through
competence states that progressively restrict their developmental potential
(Cepko et al., 1996; Livesey and Cepko, 2001; Cayouette et al., 2006). In the
rodent eye, seven retinal cell classes differentiate in overlapping waves, with
RGCs, cone photoreceptors, horizontals, and amacrines forming predominantly
before birth, and rod photoreceptors, bipolars, and Müller glia differentiating
postnatally. Both intrinsic and extrinsic factors regulate each retinal cell type
(for review, see Livesey and Cepko, 2001). Here, we conditionally deleted the
transcription factor Rbpj, a critical integrator of multiple Notch signals
(Jarriault et al., 1995; Honjo, 1996; Kato et al., 1997; Han et al., 2002),
during prenatal mouse retinal neurogenesis. Removal of Rbpj caused reduced
proliferation, premature neuronal differentiation, apoptosis, and profound
mispatterning. To determine the cell autonomous requirements for Rbpj during RGC 
and cone formation, we marked Cre-generated retinal lineages with GFP expression,
which showed that Rbpj autonomously promotes RPC mitotic activity, and suppresses
RGC and cone fates. In addition, the progressive loss of Rbpj-/- RPCs resulted in
a diminished progenitor pool available for rod photoreceptor formation. This
circumstance, along with the overproduction of Rbpj-/- cones, revealed that
photoreceptor development is under homeostatic regulation. Finally, to understand
how the Notch pathway regulates the simultaneous formation of multiple cell
types, we compared the RGC and cone phenotypes of Rbpj to Notch1 (Jadhav et al., 
2006b; Yaron et al., 2006), Notch3, and Hes1 mutants. We found particular
combinations of Notch pathway genes regulate the development of each retinal cell
type.

PMCID: PMC2788434
PMID: 19828801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 25;284(39):26978-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034850. Epub
2009 Jul 28.

Identification and functional characterization of cytoplasmic determinants of
plasmid DNA nuclear import.

Munkonge FM(1), Amin V, Hyde SC, Green AM, Pringle IA, Gill DR, Smith JW, Hooley 
RP, Xenariou S, Ward MA, Leeds N, Leung KY, Chan M, Hillery E, Geddes DM,
Griesenbach U, Postel EH, Dean DA, Dunn MJ, Alton EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Therapy, National Heart & Lung Institute, Faculty of
Medicine, Imperial College London, London SW3 6LR, United Kingdom.
f.munkonge@imperial.ac.uk

Import of exogenous plasmid DNA (pDNA) into mammalian cell nuclei represents a
key intracellular obstacle to efficient non-viral gene delivery. This includes
access of the pDNA to the nuclei of non-dividing cells where the presence of an
intact nuclear membrane is limiting for gene transfer. Here we identify, isolate,
and characterize, cytoplasmic determinants of pDNA nuclear import into
digitonin-permeabilized HeLa cells. Depletion of putative DNA-binding proteins,
on the basis of their ability to bind immobilized pDNA, abolished pDNA nuclear
import supporting the critical role of cytoplasmic factors in this process.
Elution of pDNA-bound proteins, followed by two-dimensional sodium dodecyl
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis identified several candidate DNA shuttle
proteins. We show that two of these, NM23-H2, a ubiquitous c-Myc
transcription-activating nucleoside diphosphate kinase, and the core histone H2B 
can both reconstitute pDNA nuclear import. Further, we demonstrate a significant 
increase in gene transfer in non-dividing HeLa cells transiently transfected with
pDNA containing binding sequences from two of the DNA shuttle proteins, NM23-H2
and the homeobox transcription factor Chx10. These data support the hypothesis
that exogenous pDNA binds to cytoplasmic shuttle proteins and is then
translocated to the nucleus using the minimal import machinery. Importantly,
increasing the binding of pDNA to shuttle proteins by re-engineering reporter
plasmids with shuttle binding sequences enhances gene transfer. Increasing the
potential for exogenously added pDNA to bind intracellular transport cofactors
may enhance the potency of non-viral gene transfer.

PMCID: PMC2785383
PMID: 19638341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Dec;50(12):5901-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3067.
Epub 2009 Jun 24.

Molecular characterization of human retinal progenitor cells.

Schmitt S(1), Aftab U, Jiang C, Redenti S, Klassen H, Miljan E, Sinden J, Young
M.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: To examine the molecular profile of fetal human retinal progenitor cells
(hRPCs) expanded in vitro and those grown in a co-culture system with mouse
retina through the analysis of protein and gene expression and
neurotransmitter-stimulated calcium dynamics.
METHODS: hRPCS were isolated from human retina of 14 to 18 weeks gestational age 
(GA) and expanded in vitro. Immunoblot, microarray, and immunocytochemistry (ICC)
assays were performed on undifferentiated hRPCs and those co-cultured with mouse 
retinas for 2 weeks. Cell function was assessed by using calcium imaging.
RESULTS: The ICC results showed a gradual decrease in the percentages of KI67-,
SOX2-, and vimentin-positive cells from passages (P) 1 to P6, whereas a sustained
expression of nestin and PAX6 was observed through P6. Microarray analysis of P1 
hRPCs showed the expression of early retinal developmental genes: VIM (vimentin),
KI67, NES (nestin), PAX6, SOX2, HES5, GNL3, OTX2, DACH1, SIX6, and CHX10 (VSX2). 
At P6, hRPCs continued to express VIM, KI67, NES, PAX6, SOX2, GNL3, and SIX6. On 
co-culture, there was a significant increase in the expression of MKI67, PAX6,
SOX2, GNL3, SIX3, and RHO (rhodopsin). Calcium imaging showed a functional
response to excitatory neurotransmitters.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetal-derived hRPCs show molecular characteristics indicative of a
retinal progenitor state up to P6 (latest passage studied). They show a
progressive decrease in the expression of immature markers as they reach P6.
These cells are functional, respond to excitatory neurotransmitters, and exhibit 
changes in expression patterns in response to co-culture with mouse retina.

PMID: 19553622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Neurosci. 2009 May 27;29(21):7098-109. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1206-09.2009.

In mice lacking V2a interneurons, gait depends on speed of locomotion.

Crone SA(1), Zhong G, Harris-Warrick R, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Many animals are capable of changing gait with speed of locomotion. The neural
basis of gait control and its dependence on speed are not fully understood. Mice 
normally use a single "trotting" gait while running at all speeds, either over
ground or on a treadmill. Transgenic mouse mutants in which the trotting is
replaced by hopping also lack a speed-dependent change in gait. Here we describe 
a transgenic mouse model in which the V2a interneurons have been ablated by
targeted expression of diphtheria toxin A chain (DTA) under the control of the
Chx10 gene promoter (Chx10::DTA mice). Chx10::DTA mice show normal trotting gait 
at slow speeds but transition to a galloping gait as speed increases. Although
left-right limb coordination is altered in Chx10::DTA mice at fast speed,
alternation of forelegs and hindlegs and the relative duration of swing and
stance phases for individual limbs is unchanged compared with wild-type mice. The
speed-dependent loss of left-right alternation is recapitulated during
drug-induced fictive locomotion in spinal cords isolated from neonatal Chx10::DTA
mice, and high-speed fictive locomotion evoked by caudal spinal cord stimulation 
also shows synchronous left-right bursting. These results show that spinal V2a
interneurons are required for maintaining left-right alternation at high speeds. 
Whether animals that generate galloping or hopping gaits, characterized by
synchronous movement of left and right forelegs and hindlegs, have lost or
modified the function of V2a interneurons is an intriguing question.

PMCID: PMC2731420
PMID: 19474336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Neurosci. 2009 May 27;29(21):6932-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0289-09.2009.

Distinct effects of Hedgehog signaling on neuronal fate specification and cell
cycle progression in the embryonic mouse retina.

Sakagami K(1), Gan L, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Cell-extrinsic signals can profoundly influence the production of various neurons
from common progenitors. Yet mechanisms by which extrinsic signals coordinate
progenitor cell proliferation, cell cycle exit, and cell fate choices are not
well understood. Here, we address whether Hedgehog (Hh) signals independently
regulate progenitor proliferation and neuronal fate decisions in the embryonic
mouse retina. Conditional ablation of the essential Hh signaling component
Smoothened (Smo) in proliferating progenitors, rather than in nascent postmitotic
neurons, leads to a dramatic increase of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and a mild
increase of cone photoreceptor precursors without significantly affecting other
early-born neuronal cell types. In addition, Smo-deficient progenitors exhibit
aberrant expression of cell cycle regulators and delayed G(1)/S transition,
especially during the late embryonic stages, resulting in a reduced progenitor
pool by birth. Deficiency in Smo function also causes reduced expression of the
basic helix-loop-helix transcription repressor Hes1 and preferential elevation of
the proneural gene Math5. In Smo and Math5 double knock-out mutants, the enhanced
RGC production observed in Smo-deficient retinas is abolished, whereas defects in
the G(1)/S transition persist, suggesting that Math5 mediates the Hh effect on
neuronal fate specification but not on cell proliferation. These findings
demonstrate that Hh signals regulate progenitor pool expansion primarily by
promoting cell cycle progression and influence cell cycle exit and neuronal fates
by controlling specific proneural genes. Together, these distinct cellular
effects of Hh signaling in neural progenitor cells coordinate a balanced
production of diverse neuronal cell types.

PMCID: PMC2715855
PMID: 19474320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neural Dev. 2009 Apr 3;4:14. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-14.

Vsx2 in the zebrafish retina: restricted lineages through derepression.

Vitorino M(1), Jusuf PR, Maurus D, Kimura Y, Higashijima S, Harris WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK. mspdcv2@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The neurons in the vertebrate retina arise from multipotent retinal
progenitor cells (RPCs). It is not clear, however, which progenitors are
multipotent or why they are multipotent.
RESULTS: In this study we show that the homeodomain transcription factor Vsx2 is 
initially expressed throughout the retinal epithelium, but later it is
downregulated in all but a minor population of bipolar cells and all Müller glia.
The Vsx2-negative daughters of Vsx2-positive RPCs divide and give rise to all
other cell types in the retina. Vsx2 is a repressor whose targets include
transcription factors such as Vsx1, which is expressed in the progenitors of
distinct non-Vsx2 bipolars, and the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
Ath5, which restricts the fate of progenitors to retinal ganglion cells,
horizontal cells, amacrine cells and photoreceptors fates. Foxn4, expressed in
the progenitors of amacrine and horizontal cells, is also negatively regulated by
Vsx2.
CONCLUSION: Our data thus suggest Vsx2-positive RPCs are fully multipotent
retinal progenitors and that when Vsx2 is downregulated, Vsx2-negative
progenitors escape Vsx2 repression and so are able to express factors that
restrict lineage potential.

PMCID: PMC2683830
PMID: 19344499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Neurosci. 2009 Apr 1;29(13):3992-4003. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5237-08.2009.

BARHL2 differentially regulates the development of retinal amacrine and ganglion 
neurons.

Ding Q(1), Chen H, Xie X, Libby RT, Tian N, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester Eye Institute, University of Rochester, Rochester, New
York 14642, USA.

Through transcriptional regulations, the BarH family of homeodomain proteins play
essential roles in cell fate specification, cell differentiation, migration, and 
survival. Barhl2, a member of the Barh gene family, is expressed in retinal
ganglion cells (RGCs), amacrine cells (ACs), and horizontal cells. Here, to
investigate the role of Barhl2 in retinal development, Barhl2-deficient mice were
generated. Analysis of AC subtypes in Barhl2-deficient retinas suggests that
Barhl2 plays a critical role in AC subtype determination. A significant reduction
of glycinergic and GABAergic ACs with a substantial increase in the number of
cholinergic ACs was observed in Barhl2-null retinas. Barhl2 is also critical for 
the development of a normal complement of RGCs. Barhl2 deficiency resulted in a
35% increase in RGCs undergoing apoptosis during development. Genetic analysis
revealed that Barhl2 functions downstream of the Atoh7-Pou4f3 regulatory pathway 
and regulates the maturation and/or survival of RGCs. Thus, BARHL2 appears to
have numerous roles in retinal development, including regulating neuronal subtype
specification, differentiation, and survival.

PMCID: PMC2756297
PMID: 19339595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Neuron. 2009 Mar 26;61(6):839-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.02.011.

LMO4 controls the balance between excitatory and inhibitory spinal V2
interneurons.

Joshi K(1), Lee S, Lee B, Lee JW, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Multiple excitatory and inhibitory interneurons form the motor circuit with motor
neurons in the ventral spinal cord. Notch signaling initiates the diversification
of immature V2-interneurons into excitatory V2a-interneurons and inhibitory
V2b-interneurons. Here, we provide a transcriptional regulatory mechanism
underlying their balanced production. LIM-only protein LMO4 controls this binary 
cell fate choice by regulating the activity of V2a- and V2b-specific LIM
complexes inversely. In the spinal cord, LMO4 induces GABAergic V2b-interneurons 
in collaboration with SCL and inhibits Lhx3 from generating glutamatergic
V2a-interneuons. In LMO4;SCL compound mutant embryos, V2a-interneurons increase
markedly at the expense of V2b-interneurons. We further demonstrate that LMO4
nucleates the assembly of a novel LIM-complex containing SCL, Gata2, and NLI.
This complex activates specific enhancers in V2b-genes consisting of binding
sites for SCL and Gata2, thereby promoting V2b-interneuron fate. Thus, LMO4 plays
essential roles in directing a balanced generation of inhibitory and excitatory
neurons in the ventral spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2848494
PMID: 19323994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neuron. 2008 Oct 9;60(1):70-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.08.009.

Genetic ablation of V2a ipsilateral interneurons disrupts left-right locomotor
coordination in mammalian spinal cord.

Crone SA(1), Quinlan KA, Zagoraiou L, Droho S, Restrepo CE, Lundfald L, Endo T,
Setlak J, Jessell TM, Kiehn O, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2008 Oct 9;60(1):1-4.

The initiation and coordination of activity in limb muscles are the main
functions of neural circuits that control locomotion. Commissural neurons connect
locomotor circuits on the two sides of the spinal cord, and represent the known
neural substrate for left-right coordination. Here we demonstrate that a group of
ipsilateral interneurons, V2a interneurons, plays an essential role in the
control of left-right alternation. In the absence of V2a interneurons, the spinal
cord fails to exhibit consistent left-right alternation. Locomotor burst activity
shows increased variability, but flexor-extensor coordination is unaffected.
Anatomical tracing studies reveal a direct excitatory input of V2a interneurons
onto commissural interneurons, including a set of molecularly defined V0 neurons 
that drive left-right alternation. Our findings imply that the neural substrate
for left-right coordination consists of at least two components; commissural
neurons and a class of ipsilateral interneurons that activate commissural
pathways.

PMID: 18940589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Neuron. 2008 Jul 31;59(2):226-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.025.

Coordinated actions of the forkhead protein Foxp1 and Hox proteins in the
columnar organization of spinal motor neurons.

Rousso DL(1), Gaber ZB, Wellik D, Morrisey EE, Novitch BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The formation of locomotor circuits depends on the spatially organized generation
of motor columns that innervate distinct muscle and autonomic nervous system
targets along the body axis. Within each spinal segment, multiple motor neuron
classes arise from a common progenitor population; however, the mechanisms
underlying their diversification remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the
Forkhead domain transcription factor Foxp1 plays a critical role in defining the 
columnar identity of motor neurons at each axial position. Using genetic
manipulations, we demonstrate that Foxp1 establishes the pattern of LIM-HD
protein expression and accordingly organizes motor axon projections, their
connectivity with peripheral targets, and the establishment of motor pools. These
functions of Foxp1 act in accordance with the rostrocaudal pattern provided by
Hox proteins along the length of the spinal cord, suggesting a model by which
motor neuron diversity is achieved through the coordinated actions of Foxp1 and
Hox proteins.

PMCID: PMC2547125
PMID: 18667151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Vis. 2008 Jul 17;14:1313-8.

Molecular analysis of CHX10 and MFRP in Chinese subjects with primary angle
closure glaucoma and short axial length eyes.

Aung T(1), Lim MC, Wong TT, Thalamuthu A, Yong VH, Venkataraman D, Venkatraman A,
Chew PT, Vithana EN.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore; 2Singapore Eye Research Institute,
Singapore. tin11@pacific.net.sg

PURPOSE: The genetic basis of primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG) has yet to be
elucidated. Ocular characteristics related to PACG such as short hyperopic eyes
with shallow anterior chambers suggest the involvement of genes that regulate
ocular size. CHX10, a retinal homeobox gene associated with microphthalmia, and
MFRP, the membrane-type frizzled-related protein gene underlying recessive
nanophthalmos, represent good candidate genes for PACG due to the association
with small eyes. To investigate the possible involvement of CHX10 and MFRP in
PACG, we sequenced both genes in PACG patients with small ocular dimensions.
METHODS: One hundred and eight Chinese patients with axial lengths measuring
22.50 mm or less were selected for analysis. Ninety-three age- and
ethnically-matched control subjects were also screened. Genomic DNA was extracted
from leukocytes of peripheral blood samples, and the exons of CHX10 and MFRP were
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subjected to bidirectional
sequencing and analysis.
RESULTS: All study patients were Chinese with a mean age of 66.2+/-9.1 years
(range 46-86). There were 77 females (71.3%). Forty-nine out of the one hundred
and eight subjects had previous symptomatic PACG, and 59 had asymptomatic PACG.
The mean axial length was 21.90+/-0.50 mm (range 19.98-22.50 mm). We identified a
possible disease-causing variant in CHX10 (c.728G>A) resulting in Gly243Asp
substitution in one patient. This variant was not found in 215 normal controls.
Several CHX10 and MFRP polymorphisms were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not support a significant role for CHX10 or MFRP
mutations in PACG.

PMCID: PMC2480479
PMID: 18648522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Brain Res. 2008 Jul 30;1222:42-50. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.04.072. Epub 2008
May 6.

Expression and function of Nkx6.3 in vertebrate hindbrain.

Hafler BP(1), Choi MY, Shivdasani RA, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, USA.

Homeodomain transcription factors serve important functions in organogenesis and 
tissue differentiation, particularly with respect to the positional identity of
individual cells. The Nkx6 subfamily controls tissue differentiation in the
developing central nervous system where they function as transcriptional
repressor proteins. Recent work indicates that Nkx6.3 is expressed in hindbrain
V2 interneurons that co-express Nkx6.1, suggesting the possibility of functional 
redundancy. Here, we report that Nkx6.3 expression is specific to Chx10+ V2a
interneurons but not to Gata3+ V2b interneurons of the hindbrain, and that Nkx6.3
expression appears to mark cells of the prospective medullary reticular
formation. Molecular analysis of Nkx6.3 null embryonic mouse hindbrain did not
reveal detectable defects in progenitor markers, motor neuron or V2 interneuron
sub-types. Forced expression of Nkx6.3 and Nkx6.1 promote V2 interneuron
differentiation in the developing chick hindbrain. These findings indicate Nkx6.3
function is dispensable for CNS development and lead to the proposal that absence
of overt defects is due to functional compensation from a related homeodomain
transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2555971
PMID: 18586225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Cell. 2008 Jun;14(6):877-89. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.03.021.

A regulatory network to segregate the identity of neuronal subtypes.

Lee S(1), Lee B, Joshi K, Pfaff SL, Lee JW, Lee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX 77030, USA. sklee@bcm.edu

Spinal motor neurons (MNs) and V2 interneurons (V2-INs) are specified by two
related LIM-complexes, MN-hexamer and V2-tetramer, respectively. Here we show how
multiple parallel and complementary feedback loops are integrated to assign these
two cell fates accurately. While MN-hexamer response elements (REs) are specific 
to MN-hexamer, V2-tetramer-REs can bind both LIM-complexes. In embryonic MNs,
however, two factors cooperatively suppress the aberrant activation of
V2-tetramer-REs. First, LMO4 blocks V2-tetramer assembly. Second, MN-hexamer
induces a repressor, Hb9, which binds V2-tetramer-REs and suppresses their
activation. V2-INs use a similar approach; V2-tetramer induces a repressor,
Chx10, which binds MN-hexamer-REs and blocks their activation. Thus, our study
uncovers a regulatory network to segregate related cell fates, which involves
reciprocal feedforward gene regulatory loops.

PMCID: PMC3071743
PMID: 18539116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Jul;38(3):359-73. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.03.008. Epub
2008 Apr 10.

Isolation and characterisation of neural progenitor cells from the adult
Chx10(orJ/orJ) central neural retina.

Kokkinopoulos I(1), Pearson RA, Macneil A, Dhomen NS, MacLaren RE, Ali RR, Sowden
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, University College London Institute of Child
Health, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Retinal stem cells have been isolated from the ciliary epithelium (CE) of the
mammalian retina. However, the central neural retina (CNR) lacks the capability
to regenerate, a phenomenon retained by lower vertebrates. Mutations in the Chx10
homeobox gene cause reduced proliferation of retinal progenitor cells during
development, leading to microphthalmia. Recently, we showed that in
Chx10(orJ/orJ) mice, dividing cells persist in the adult CNR, suggesting the
existence of a dormant progenitor population. Here, we show that these cells are 
proliferative and give rise to neurospheres in vitro, a characteristic of neural 
stem cells. However, these adult-derived CNR progenitors differ from those of the
wildtype CE, leading to de-pigmented, larger and more numerous neurospheres
expressing Müller glial cell markers. Our results suggest that lack of Chx10
leads to maintenance of a dormant neural progenitor population in the adult CNR. 
Furthermore, Chx10 is not required for in vitro proliferation of these
progenitors.

PMID: 18514541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):560-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.055. Epub 2008 
Mar 14.

Vsx2/Chx10 ensures the correct timing and magnitude of Hedgehog signaling in the 
mouse retina.

Sigulinsky CL(1), Green ES, Clark AM, Levine EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Vertebrate retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) undergo a robust proliferative
expansion to produce enough cells for the retina to form appropriately. Vsx2
(formerly Chx10), a homeodomain protein expressed in RPCs, is required for
sufficient proliferation to occur. Sonic Hedgehog protein (SHH), secreted by
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), activates Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in RPCs and is
also required for sufficient proliferation to occur. Therefore, we sought to
determine if reduced Hh signaling is a contributing factor to the proliferation
changes that occur in the absence of Vsx2. To do this, we examined Shh expression
and Hh signaling activity in the homozygous ocular retardation J (orJ) mouse,
which harbors a recessive null allele in the Vsx2 gene. We found that Shh
expression and Hh signaling activity are delayed during early retinal development
in orJ mice and this correlates with a delay in the onset of RGC differentiation.
At birth, reduced expression of genes regulated by Hh signaling was observed
despite the production of SHH ligand. orJ RPCs respond to pre-processed
recombinant SHH ligand (SHH-N) in explant culture as evidenced by increased
proliferation and expression of Hh target genes. Interestingly, proliferation in 
the orJ retina is further inhibited by cyclopamine, an antagonist of Hh
signaling. Our results suggest that reduced Hh signaling contributes to the
reduced level of RPC proliferation in the orJ retina, thereby revealing a role
for Vsx2 in mediating mitogen signaling.

PMCID: PMC2671289
PMID: 18417110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Vis. 2008 Mar 24;14:583-92.

Identification of novel mutations and sequence variants in the SOX2 and CHX10
genes in patients with anophthalmia/microphthalmia.

Zhou J(1), Kherani F, Bardakjian TM, Katowitz J, Hughes N, Schimmenti LA,
Schneider A, Young TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the SOX2 and CHX10 genes have been reported in patients
with anophthalmia and/or microphthalmia. In this study, we evaluated 34
anophthalmic/microphthalmic patient DNA samples (two sets of siblings included)
for mutations and sequence variants in SOX2 and CHX10.
METHODS: Conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) was used for the
initial SOX2 and CHX10 screening of 34 affected individuals (two sets of
siblings), five unaffected family members, and 80 healthy controls. Patient
samples containing heteroduplexes were selected for sequence analysis. Base pair 
changes in SOX2 and CHX10 were confirmed by sequencing bidirectionally in patient
samples.
RESULTS: Two novel heterozygous mutations and two sequence variants (one known)
in SOX2 were identified in this cohort. Mutation c.310 G>T (p. Glu104X), found in
one patient, was in the region encoding the high mobility group (HMG) DNA-binding
domain and resulted in a change from glutamic acid to a stop codon. The second
mutation, noted in two affected siblings, was a single nucleotide deletion
c.549delC (p. Pro184ArgfsX19) in the region encoding the activation domain,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination of the coding sequence. The
shortened protein products may result in the loss of function. In addition, a
novel nucleotide substitution c.*557G>A was identified in the 3'-untranslated
region in one patient. The relationship between the nucleotide change and the
protein function is indeterminate. A known single nucleotide polymorphism (c.
*469 C>A, SNP rs11915160) was also detected in 2 of the 34 patients. Screening of
CHX10 identified two synonymous sequence variants, c.471 C>T (p.Ser157Ser,
rs35435463) and c.579 G>A (p. Gln193Gln, novel SNP), and one non-synonymous
sequence variant, c.871 G>A (p. Asp291Asn, novel SNP). The non-synonymous
polymorphism was also present in healthy controls, suggesting non-causality.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the role of SOX2 in ocular development. Loss
of SOX2 function results in severe eye malformation. CHX10 was not implicated
with microphthalmia/anophthalmia in our patient cohort.

PMCID: PMC2275209
PMID: 18385794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Development. 2008 Mar;135(6):1169-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.014142. Epub 2008 Feb 13.

Alternative promoter use in eye development: the complex role and regulation of
the transcription factor MITF.

Bharti K(1), Liu W, Csermely T, Bertuzzi S, Arnheiter H.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Development Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

During vertebrate eye development, the transcription factor MITF plays central
roles in neuroepithelial domain specification and differentiation of the retinal 
pigment epithelium. MITF is not a single protein but represents a family of
isoforms generated from a common gene by alternative promoter/exon use. To
address the question of the role and regulation of these isoforms, we first
determined their expression patterns in developing mouse eyes and analyzed the
role of some of them in genetic models. We found that two isoforms, A- and
J-Mitf, are present throughout development in both retina and pigment epithelium,
whereas H-Mitf is detected preferentially and D-Mitf exclusively in the pigment
epithelium. We further found that a genomic deletion encompassing the
promoter/exon regions of H-, D- and B-Mitf leads to novel mRNA isoforms and
proteins translated from internal start sites. These novel proteins lack the
normal, isoform-specific N-terminal sequences and are unable to support the
development of the pigment epithelium, but are capable of inducing pigmentation
in the ciliary margin and the iris. Moreover, in mutants of the retinal Mitf
regulator Chx10 (Vsx2), reduced cell proliferation and abnormal pigmentation of
the retina are associated with a preferential upregulation of H- and D-Mitf. This
retinal phenotype is corrected when H- and D-Mitf are missing in double
Mitf/Chx10 mutants. The results suggest that Mitf regulation in the developing
eye is isoform-selective, both temporally and spatially, and that some isoforms, 
including H- and D-Mitf, are more crucial than others in effecting normal retina 
and pigment epithelium development.

PMCID: PMC2276638
PMID: 18272592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Nov;48(11):5266-75.

Proliferation and expression of progenitor and mature retinal phenotypes in the
adult mammalian ciliary body after retinal ganglion cell injury.

Nickerson PE(1), Emsley JG, Myers T, Clarke DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

PURPOSE: Despite the identification of a small population of cells residing in
the ciliary body (CB) of the adult mammalian eye that have the capacity to
generate retina-like cells in vitro, their activity in vivo remains quiescent.
The authors sought to identify whether the predictable and time-dependent death
of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) results in activation of progenitor-like cells
within the CB.
METHODS: RGC injury was induced by optic nerve axotomy in adult mice.
Thymidine-analogue lineage tracing and immunocytochemistry were used to identify 
dividing cells and the phenotype of newly generated progeny.
RESULTS: Two populations of nestin-expressing cells are present in the CB of the 
uninjured eye. One population resides in periendothelial cells of blood vessels, 
and a second resides in the ciliary epithelium. Axotomy increases proliferation
in the CB, a response that begins before the onset of RGC death and continues
during a time that corresponds with the peak in RGC death. In addition, a
subpopulation of nestin-positive cells in the CB upregulates the homeodomain
protein Chx10. Finally, recoverin, the expression of which is normally restricted
to photoreceptors and bipolar cells of the retina, is upregulated in the CB in a 
manner that is independent of proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results suggest that progenitorlike cells of the CB 
respond to cues associated with the loss of a single retinal cell type and that a
subpopulation of those cells may differentiate into a cell that bears phenotypic 
resemblance to those seen in the retina.

PMID: 17962482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Brain Res. 2008 Feb 4;1192:99-113. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Negative regulation of Vsx1 by its paralog Chx10/Vsx2 is conserved in the
vertebrate retina.

Clark AM(1), Yun S, Veien ES, Wu YY, Chow RL, Dorsky RI, Levine EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Chx10/Vsx2 and Vsx1 are the only Paired-like CVC (Prd-L:CVC) homeobox genes in
the mouse genome. Both are expressed in the retina and have important but
distinct roles in retinal development. Mutations in Chx10/Vsx2 cause reduced
retinal progenitor cell (RPC) proliferation and an absence of bipolar cells,
while mutations in Vsx1 impair differentiation of cone bipolar cells. Given their
structural similarities and importance in retinal development, we sought to
determine if a regulatory interaction exists between these genes and whether
inactivation of both genes blocks initiation of retinal development. We found
that Chx10/Vsx2 binds to a specific sequence in the Vsx1 5'-intergenic region and
represses the activity of a luciferase reporter under the control of the Vsx1
promoter. This is consistent with our observation that there is an inverse
relationship between the levels of Chx10/Vsx2 and Vsx1 immunostaining within the 
bipolar cell class. Furthermore, Vsx1 mRNA is upregulated in the RPCs of
Chx10/Vsx2 deficient mice and zebrafish embryos injected with a chx10/vsx2
morpholino. In mice deficient for both Chx10/Vsx2 and Vsx1 and zebrafish embryos 
co-injected with chx10/Vsx2 and vsx1 morpholinos, the changes in embryonic
retinal development and marker expression are similar in magnitude to embryos
with Chx10/Vsx2 loss of function only. From these studies, we propose that Vsx1
is a direct target of Chx10/Vsx2-mediated transcriptional repression. Although
Vsx1 mRNA is upregulated in Chx10/Vsx2 deficient RPCs, Vsx1 does not genetically 
compensate for loss of Chx10/Vsx2, demonstrating that Prd-L:CVC genes, although
important, are not absolutely required to initiate retinal development.

PMCID: PMC3315787
PMID: 17919464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Clin Genet. 2007 Aug;72(2):164-6.

Mutations in the CHX10 gene in non-syndromic microphthalmia/anophthalmia patients
from Qatar.

Faiyaz-Ul-Haque M, Zaidi SH, Al-Mureikhi MS, Peltekova I, Tsui LC, Teebi AS.

PMID: 17661825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Exp Eye Res. 2008 Apr;86(4):541-2. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

Focus on molecules: homeobox protein Chx10.

Liang L(1), Sandell JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine,
715 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

PMID: 17582398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Apr;48(4):1674-82.

Characteristics of progenitor cells derived from adult ciliary body in mouse,
rat, and human eyes.

Xu H(1), Sta Iglesia DD, Kielczewski JL, Valenta DF, Pease ME, Zack DJ, Quigley
HA.

Author information: 
(1)Glaucoma Research Laboratory, Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
hxu13@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE: To isolate and characterize progenitor cells derived from adult
mammalian ciliary body.
METHODS: The authors isolated progenitor cells from the ciliary body of adult
mice, rats, and human cadaver eyes and determined quantitative growth
characteristics of groups of progenitor cells called neurosphere (NS) cells,
including individual cell diameter, NS diameter, percentage of NS-forming cells, 
and cell number per eye in mouse, rat, and human eyes. The immunolabeling and
ultrastructure of NS cells were investigated by confocal and transmission
electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Average diameters of individual cells and neurospheres after 1 week in
culture were similar in mice, rats, and humans (cell diameters: 22 +/- 1.1, 21
+/- 0.3, 25 +/- 0.4 mum; NS diameters: 139 +/- 22, 137 +/- 9, 141 +/- 11 mum,
respectively). Mean numbers of cells per NS were estimated to be 1183 in mice,
5360 in rats, and 685 in humans. Molecules that were identified by immunolabeling
in NS cells included nestin, Chx-10, vimentin, GFAP, and Pax-6. Thy-1 was
expressed in some NS cells. Ultrastructurally, NS cells displayed abundant rough 
endoplasmic reticulum and many cellular processes but no characteristics of
mature retinal neurons or glia.
CONCLUSIONS: Progenitor cells from adult mammalian ciliary body have significant,
but limited, proliferation potential and express markers characteristic of other 
progenitor cells and seen during early retinal development. The ciliary body
could be a source of cells for transplantation in experimental rodent eyes and
for autotransplantation in human eyes.

PMID: 17389499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Eye (Lond). 2008 May;22(5):678-83. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Expression of immature and mature retinal cell markers in retinoblastoma.

Sakata R(1), Yanagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tokyo School of Medicine, 7-3-1,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: To clarify the expression of immature and mature retinal cell makers in
retinoblastoma cells and to give insights into the cell origin of the
retinoblastoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five samples from five eyes diagnosed with retinoblastomas
were analysed by a standard immunohistochemistry using antibodies against Nestin 
and the hairy and enhancer of split mammalian homologue-1 (HES-1), both as
markers for undifferentiated cells, and against Chx10, as a marker for both
undifferentiated retinal cells and mature bipolar cells. Photoreceptor-specific
nuclear receptor (PNR) was used as a postmitotic rod photoreceptor cell-specific 
marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) as a mature glia cell marker, and 
microtubule-associated protein (MAP) 2 as a mature neuronal cell marker.
RESULTS: Nestin was detected in what were possibly Müller cells, but not in the
tumour stroma. HES-1 was not detected in the retinoblastoma tissue. Chx10 was
detected in one of the five samples. In this one sample, Chx10 expression was
confined in a minor portion of the retinoblastoma cells. PNR was not detected in 
the retinoblastoma tissue. Expression of GFAP was detected only in the stromal
cells of the tumour, which presumably represents reactive stromal astrocytes. In 
contrast, in all the samples, MAP2 was expressed in most of the retinoblastoma
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the current study support that retinoblastomas are
derived from mature neural cells but do not originate from tumour stem cell(s).

PMID: 17277753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 12;103(50):18998-9003. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Notch activity permits retinal cells to progress through multiple progenitor
states and acquire a stem cell property.

Jadhav AP(1), Cho SH, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Department of Genetics,
Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue 
Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Signaling through the Notch pathway regulates multiple aspects of development.
The vertebrate retina allows an investigation of the basis for these various
effects, because the major cell types of the retina arise from a common
progenitor that expresses Notch1. The Notch pathway was constitutively activated 
in distinct populations of retinal cells during development. Prolonged Notch
activity in progenitor cells maintained cells in the progenitor state without
perturbing temporal identity, promoting early progenitor characteristics early in
development and late progenitor characteristics later in development. Eventually,
constitutive Notch activation led these cells to acquire characteristics of glial
and stem cells. In contrast, reactivating the Notch pathway in newly postmitotic 
retinal cells promoted mature glial cell formation in a subset of cells. These
data suggest that prolonged Notch activity does not disrupt the normal
progression of progenitor temporal states, and that down-regulating or overcoming
Notch activity is required for proper formation of both neuronal and glial cell
fates.

PMCID: PMC1682012
PMID: 17148603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Genes Evol. 2006 Dec;216(12):829-34. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Cloning and developmental expression of the Xenopus homeobox gene Xvsx1.

D'Autilia S(1), Decembrini S, Casarosa S, He RQ, Barsacchi G, Cremisi F,
Andreazzoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universitá degli Studi di Pisa, Via Carducci 13,
56010 Ghezzano, Pisa, Italy.

In contrast to the high degree of evolutionary conservation of the Vsx2/Chx10
gene family, vertebrate orthologues of Vsx1 display more divergent sequences and 
spatio-temporal expression patterns. Here, we report the cloning and expression
pattern of Xenopus laevis Vsx1. Differently from the mouse and zebrafish
orthologues, Xvsx1 transcription is activated at early neurula both in the
evaginating eye vesicles and in the presumptive spinal cord. Compared to other
retinal homeobox genes, such as Xrx1, Xsix3 and Xpax6, Xvsx1 is activated at a
later stage; in addition, its anterior expression appears to be more specifically
restricted to the retina. At tail bud stage, Xvsx1 expression in retinal
progenitors persists, and its neural tube expression, which in the spinal cord
corresponds to interneurons, progressively expands anteriorly reaching the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary. During retinal neurogenesis, Xvsx1 expression is
maintained in retinal progenitors and in a peripheral region of the ciliary
marginal zone, while in the central retina, it becomes restricted to
differentiated bipolar cells.

PMID: 17103185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 26;6:36.

Molecular characterization of retinal stem cells and their niches in adult
zebrafish.

Raymond PA(1), Barthel LK, Bernardos RL, Perkowski JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular & Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. praymond@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: The persistence in adult teleost fish of retinal stem cells that
exhibit all of the features of true 'adult stem cells'--self-renewal,
multipotency, and the capacity to respond to injury by mitotic activation with
the ability to regenerate differentiated tissues--has been known for several
decades. However, the specialized cellular and molecular characteristics of these
adult retinal stem cells and the microenvironmental niches that support their
maintenance in the differentiated retina and regulate their activity during
growth and regeneration have not yet been elucidated.
RESULTS: Our data show that the zebrafish retina has two kinds of specialized
niches that sustain retinal stem cells: 1) a neuroepithelial germinal zone at the
interface between neural retina and ciliary epithelium, called the ciliary
marginal zone (CMZ), a continuous annulus around the retinal circumference, and
2) the microenvironment around some Müller glia in the differentiated retina. In 
the uninjured retina, scattered Müller glia (more frequently those in peripheral 
retina) are associated with clusters of proliferating retinal progenitors that
are restricted to the rod photoreceptor lineage, but following injury, the
Müller-associated retinal progenitors can function as multipotent retinal stem
cells to regenerate other types of retinal neurons. The CMZ has several features 
in common with the neurogenic niches in the adult mammalian brain, including
access to the apical epithelial surface and a close association with blood
vessels. Müller glia in the teleost retina have a complex response to local
injury that includes some features of reactive gliosis (up-regulation of glial
fibrillary acidic protein, GFAP, and re-entry into the cell cycle) together with 
dedifferentiation and re-acquisition of phenotypic and molecular characteristics 
of multipotent retinal progenitors in the CMZ (diffuse distribution of
N-cadherin, activation of Notch-Delta signaling, and expression of rx1,
vsx2/Chx10, and pax6a) along with characteristics associated with radial glia
(expression of brain lipid binding protein, BLBP). We also describe a novel
specific marker for Müller glia, apoE.
CONCLUSION: The stem cell niches that support multi-lineage retinal progenitors
in the intact, growing and regenerating teleost retina have properties
characteristic of neuroepithelia and neurogenic radial glia. The regenerative
capacity of the adult zebrafish retina with its ability to replace lost retinal
neurons provides an opportunity to discover the molecular regulators that lead to
functional repair of damaged neural tissue.

PMCID: PMC1564002
PMID: 16872490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2006 Aug;133(16):3179-90. Epub 2006 Jul 19.

Proper patterning of the optic fissure requires the sequential activity of BMP7
and SHH.

Morcillo J(1), Martínez-Morales JR, Trousse F, Fermin Y, Sowden JC, Bovolenta P.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo, Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Dr Arce
37, Madrid 28002, Spain.

The optic disc develops at the interface between optic stalk and retina, and
enables both the exit of visual fibres and the entrance of mesenchymal cells that
will form the hyaloid artery. In spite of the importance of the optic disc for
eye function, little is known about the mechanisms that control its development. 
Here, we show that in mouse embryos, retinal fissure precursors can be recognised
by the expression of netrin 1 and the overlapping distribution of both optic
stalk (Pax2, Vax1) and ventral neural retina markers (Vax2, Raldh3). We also show
that in the absence of Bmp7, fissure formation is not initiated. This absence is 
associated with a reduced cell proliferation and apoptosis in the proximoventral 
quadrant of the optic cup, lack of the hyaloid artery, optic nerve aplasia, and
intra-retinal misrouting of RGC axons. BMP7 addition to organotypic cultures of
optic vesicles from Bmp7-/- embryos rescues Pax2 expression in the ventral
region, while follistatin, a BMP7 antagonist, prevents it in early, but not in
late, optic vesicle cultures from wild-type embryos. The presence of
Pax2-positive cells in late optic cup is instead abolished by interfering with
Shh signalling. Furthermore, SHH addition re-establishes Pax2 expression in late 
optic cups derived from ocular retardation (or) embryos, where optic disc
development is impaired owing to the near absence of SHH-producing RGC.
Collectively, these data indicate that BMP7 is required for retinal fissure
formation and that its activity is needed, before SHH signalling, for the
generation of PAX2-positive cells at the optic disc.

PMID: 16854970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mamm Genome. 2006 Jun;17(6):518-25. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Mapping of genetic modifiers affecting the eye phenotype of ocular retardation
(Chx10or-J) mice.

Wong G(1), Conger SB, Burmeister M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, 205
Zina Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Ocular retardation is a recessive murine mutation whose phenotypic expression is 
greatly affected by genetic background effects. Mice of the inbred 129/SvJ
background that are homozygous for the Chx10(or-J) mutation are blind and have a 
thin, poorly differentiated retina and no optic nerve. A backcross between
129/SvJ and Mus musculus castaneus (CASA/Rk) produced animals that were
homozygous for the Chx10(or-J) mutation, yet showed a much milder phenotype. Such
animals, when brother-sister mated and selected for mild phenotype for several
generations, resulted in partial recovery of visual function, including presence 
of an optic nerve and pupillary response. In this article we report a genome scan
of phenotypic extremes of the backcross to identify the genetic loci affecting
this phenotype modification. Our scan revealed significant loci on Chromosomes 6 
and 14 where the CASA/Rk alleles are maintained selectively. Markers were
developed near candidate genes, but no candidate gene could be identified
unequivocally.

PMID: 16783634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurosci. 2006 May 24;26(21):5684-97.

alx, a zebrafish homolog of Chx10, marks ipsilateral descending excitatory
interneurons that participate in the regulation of spinal locomotor circuits.

Kimura Y(1), Okamura Y, Higashijima S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki Institute for Integrative
Bioscience, Myodaiji Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

Recent molecular genetic studies suggest that the expression of transcription
factors in the developing spinal cord helps determine the morphological and
physiological properties of neurons. Using the zebrafish preparation, we have
examined the properties of neurons marked by alx, a zebrafish homolog of
mammalian Chx10. We performed morphological and physiological studies using
transgenic zebrafish expressing fluorescent reporter constructs in cells that had
at any time point expressed alx (alx neurons). Our data reveal that zebrafish alx
neurons are all ipsilateral descending neurons that are positive for vesicular
glutamate transporter 2, suggesting that they are glutamatergic excitatory
interneurons. Patch recordings show that earlier-born neurons are active during
stronger movements such as escapes and fast swimming (strong movement class),
whereas later-born ones are involved in sustained weak swimming (weak movement
class). Paired recordings between alx neurons and motoneurons show that neurons
of the strong movement class make frequent monosynaptic excitatory connections
onto motoneurons. Thus, neurons of this class are likely premotor interneurons
that regulate motoneuron activity during escapes and fast swimming. We also show 
the existence of a monosynaptic connection between an alx neuron of the weak
movement class and a motoneuron. Collectively, our data demonstrate that alx
marks ipsilateral descending neurons that are involved in the regulation of
motoneuron activity during forms of locomotion, such as escape and swimming.

PMID: 16723525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Eye Res. 2006 Jul;83(1):153-64. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

In vivo reactivation of a quiescent cell population located in the ocular ciliary
body of adult mammals.

Abdouh M(1), Bernier G.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, 5415 Boulevard de l'Assomption, Montreal, PQ,
Canada H1T 2M4.

Rare quiescent cells with stem cell characteristics have been isolated from the
ocular ciliary body (CB) of adult mammals. In vitro, adult retinal stem cells
were reported to generate sphere colonies containing multipotent retinal
progenitor cells. Whether proliferation of this stem cell population can be
stimulated in vivo in order to generate new retinal cells is an important issue. 
Herein we report on the in vivo reactivation of a quiescent cell population
present in the CB upon growth factors (GF) stimulation. GF stimulation resulted
in the re-acquisition of embryonic characteristics (Nestin) and expression of the
cell cycle entry markers CyclinD1 and Ki67 by a subset of CB epithelial cells.
This inductive effect was not observed in the neural retina. GF-activated CB
epithelial cells co-express the retinal progenitor homeodomain transcription
factors Pax6 and Chx10. Serial GF injections led to do novo proliferation of
clusters of cells in the CB, in a dose-dependent manner, as revealed by
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation. Analysis of cells' BrdU content within
individual clusters suggests a mode of cell division that is predominantly
asymmetric. Cell proliferation was not induced by CB or retinal damage, as
indicated by the absence of TUNEL-labeled cells. Newly produced cells did not
migrate into the retina nor did they differentiate into retinal neurons. This
study demonstrates that proliferation of a quiescent cell population with retinal
stem/progenitor cell characteristics can be reactivated in vivo upon GF
injections and suggests that, in adult mammals, the CB is a non-permissive
environment for cell migration and neurogenesis.

PMID: 16563378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 28;103(13):4988-93. Epub 2006 Mar 17.

Chx10 is required to block photoreceptor differentiation but is dispensable for
progenitor proliferation in the postnatal retina.

Livne-Bar I(1), Pacal M, Cheung MC, Hankin M, Trogadis J, Chen D, Dorval KM,
Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network.

In the Chx10-null ocular retardation (or(J)) mouse, retinal progenitor cell (RPC)
proliferation is impaired, and bipolar neurons, a late born cell type, fail to
differentiate. It is unclear whether Chx10 is required to maintain proliferation 
throughout retinogenesis or whether the bipolar cell defect is an indirect effect
of growth arrest. We show that Chx10 is dispensable for late-stage RPC
proliferation but is essential to promote bipolar cell genesis in place of rods. 
Ectopic Chx10 expression drove bipolar instead of rod cell differentiation
without affecting division. Converting Chx10 to an activator impaired bipolar
cell differentiation, implying that repression is important for Chx10 activity.
In the Chx10 null or(J) retina, only a small fraction of cells expressing mutated
Chx10 mRNA were rods, but this fraction increased after p27(Kip1) inactivation,
which partially rescues proliferation. Most significantly, acute Chx10 knockdown 
in the postnatal retina promoted rods in place of bipolar neurons without
affecting division. Thus, Chx10 directly controls bipolar cell genesis by
inhibiting rod differentiation independent of its temporally limited early effect
on RPC proliferation.

PMCID: PMC1458782
PMID: 16547132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Jan;23(1):75-82.

Loss of retinal progenitor cells leads to an increase in the retinal stem cell
population in vivo.

Coles BL(1), Horsford DJ, McInnes RR, van der Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto, 1
Kings College Circle, Toronto, M5S 1A8, Canada.

Retinal stem cells [with the potential to produce either neural retinal
progenitors or retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) progenitors] exist in the
mammalian eye throughout life, and indeed the greatest absolute increase in the
stem population occurs postnatally. The stem cells proliferate embryonically and 
thus may help to build the retina initially, but in postnatal mammals they
clearly do not proliferate to regenerate the retina in response to injury. Using 
Chx10(orJ/orJ) and Mitf(mi/mi) mice, with small eye phenotypes due to the
reduction of the neural retinal progenitor population and the retinal pigmented
epithelial progenitor population, respectively, we now report that the retinal
stem cell population, when assayed from the ciliary margin, increases 3-8-fold in
both mutants. These findings suggest that the mammalian retinal stem cell
population may be capable of responding to genetically induced signals from the
progenitor populations.

PMID: 16420417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jan;47(1):386-96.

Absence of chx10 causes neural progenitors to persist in the adult retina.

Dhomen NS(1), Balaggan KS, Pearson RA, Bainbridge JW, Levine EM, Ali RR, Sowden
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

PURPOSE: Mutation of the Chx10 homeobox gene in mice and humans causes congenital
blindness and microphthalmia (small eyes). This study used Chx10-/- (ocular
retardation) mice to investigate how lack of Chx10 affects progenitor/stem cell
behavior in the retina and ciliary epithelium (CE).
METHODS: The distribution of mitotic retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) during
embryonic development was analyzed using phosphohistone 3 (H3)-labeling. DNA flow
cytometry was used to measure DNA content. The distribution and phenotype of
dividing cells in the postnatal retina and CE was analyzed by incorporation of
the thymidine analogue BrdU and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The Chx10-/- embryonic retina maintained a constantly sized population
of mitotic RPCs during development, causing the mitotic index to increase
markedly over time compared with the wild type. Also, the proportion of cells in 
the G1 phase of the cell cycle was increased compared with the wild type. Of
interest, division of RPC-like cells with neurogenic properties persisted in the 
adult Chx10-/- retina. Colabeling for BrdU and the neural progenitor marker
nestin or the neuronal markers beta3-tubulin, syntaxin, and VC1.1 showed that new
amacrine-like neurons developed in the adult central retina. By contrast, cells
with these characteristics were not observed in the mature wild-type retina. In
the mature CE, BrdU-positive cells were observed in both wild-type and Chx10-/-
mice. However, neurogenesis from this cell population was not evident.
CONCLUSIONS: Without Chx10, proliferative expansion of the embryonic RPC pool is 
markedly reduced. In the adult retina, lack of Chx10 results in a population of
dividing neural progenitor cells that persist and produce new neurons in the
central retina.

PMCID: PMC2423807
PMID: 16384989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 13;281(2):744-51. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

CHX10 targets a subset of photoreceptor genes.

Dorval KM(1), Bobechko BP, Fujieda H, Chen S, Zack DJ, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Ontario,
Canada.

The homeobox gene CHX10 is required for retinal progenitor cell proliferation
early in retinogenesis and subsequently for bipolar neuron differentiation. To
clarify the molecular mechanisms employed by CHX10 we sought to identify its
target genes. In a yeast one-hybrid assay Chx10 interacted with the Ret1 site of 
the photoreceptor-specific gene Rhodopsin. Gel shift assays using in vitro
translated protein confirmed that CHX10 binds to Ret1, but not to the similar
Rhodopsin sites Ret4 and BAT-1. Using retinal nuclear lysates, we observed
interactions between Chx10 and additional photoreceptor-specific elements
including the PCE-1 (Rod arrestin/S-antigen) and the Cone opsin locus control
region (Red/green cone opsin). However, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that in vivo, Chx10 bound sites upstream of the Rod arrestin and
Interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein genes but not Rhodopsin or Cone
opsin. Thus, in a chromatin context, Chx10 associates with a specific subset of
elements that it binds with comparable apparent affinity in vitro. Our data
suggest that CHX10 may target these motifs to inhibit rod photoreceptor gene
expression in bipolar cells.

PMID: 16236706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2005 May;50(6 Suppl):692-8.

[A brief review on molecular mechanisms for vertebrate retinal development].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohuchi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)hohuchi@bio.tokushima-u.ac.jp

PMID: 15926501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2005;109(4):533.

Physical mapping of CHX10, ALDH6A1, and ABCD4 on bovine chromosome 10q34.

Kuiper H(1), Spötter A, Williams JL, Distl O, Drögemüller C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

PMID: 15909363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):636-43.

Transplantable cell lines generated with NUP98-Hox fusion genes undergo leukemic 
progression by Meis1 independent of its binding to DNA.

Pineault N(1), Abramovich C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Hox genes have been identified in chromosomal translocations involving the
nucleoporin gene NUP98. Though the resulting chimeric proteins directly
participate in the development of leukemia, the long latency and monoclonal
nature of the disease support the requirement for secondary mutation(s), such as 
those leading to overexpression of Meis1. Models to identify such events and to
study leukemic progression are rare and labor intensive. Herein, we took
advantage of the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 or NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines from bone marrow cells that faithfully
replicate the first step of Hox-induced leukemogenesis. These lines contain early
granulomonocytic progenitors with extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity,
short-term myeloid repopulating activity and low propensity for spontaneous
leukemic conversion. We exploit such lines to show that Meis1 efficiently induces
their leukemic progression and demonstrate a high frequency of preleukemic cells 
in the cultures. Furthermore, we document that the leukemogenic potential of
Meis1 is independent of its direct binding to DNA and likely reflects its ability
to increase the repopulating capacity of the preleukemic cells by increasing
their self-renewal/proliferative capacity. The availability of lines with
repopulating potential and capacity for leukemic conversion should open new
avenues for understanding progression of Hox-mediated acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 15744344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10100-8. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

Transcriptional activity of the paired-like homeodomain proteins CHX10 and VSX1.

Dorval KM(1), Bobechko BP, Ahmad KF, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network Program,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada.

CHX10 and VSX1 are homeodomain (HD) proteins essential for normal retinal
development. CHX10 is required first for retinal progenitor cell proliferation
and later for bipolar cell differentiation, whereas VSX1 is important in the
terminal differentiation of a subset of bipolar cells. Elucidating the
transcriptional activity of CHX10 and VSX1 is required to understand how these
factors control retinal development. We show that CHX10 and Vsx1 can function as 
transcriptional repressors. When tethered to a promoter by a heterologous LexA
DNA-binding domain or its HD, CHX10 repressed multiple classes of activators in
different immortalized cell lines. CHX10 blocked TATA-containing and TATA-less
promoters, repressed at a distance, and inhibited a complex enhancer positioned
upstream or downstream of the reporter gene, whereas retinoblastoma protein (RB) 
inhibited the downstream enhancer only. Interestingly, CHX10 mildly potentiated a
subset of activators in chick neuronal cultures. Thus, CHX10 is both a versatile 
repressor and a context-specific weak activator. The CHX10 HD and CVC domains
were sufficient for DNA binding and repression. VSX1 contains closely related
homeo and CVC domains and, like CHX10, also repressed transcription. A VSX1 HD
mutation, R166W, that impairs DNA binding and causes keratoconus in humans,
hindered repressor function. Therefore, CHX10 and VSX1 may control retinal
bipolar cell specification or differentiation by repressing genes required for
the development of other cell types.

PMID: 15647262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jan;28(1):30-41.

Homeodomain transcription factors in the development of subsets of hindbrain
reticulospinal neurons.

Cepeda-Nieto AC(1), Pfaff SL, Varela-Echavarría A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Querétaro
76230, México.

Hindbrain reticulospinal neurons are involved in complex neural functions that
are mediated by spinal elements, including posture control and modulation of
respiration and cardiovascular function. Recent descriptive studies with chick,
mouse, and rat embryos have provided anatomical insight into the development of
the different reticulospinal nuclei and the establishment of their axonal
projection pathways into the spinal cord. In this study, we have addressed the
molecular control of this process. Retrograde labeling of reticulospinal neurons 
in chick and mouse embryos combined with immunostaining for the homeodomain
factors Lhx1/Lhx5, Lhx3/Lhx4, and Chx10 have defined transcriptional codes that
label subsets of neurons with different axon projection patterns. Gain of
function and loss of function experiments using in ovo electroporation implicate 
these transcription factors in the determination of reticulospinal neuron
identity. Furthermore, our studies reveal novel gene interactions between the
transcription factors analyzed that may determine the final patterns of
reticulospinal axon projection.

PMID: 15607939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):177-87. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Chx10 repression of Mitf is required for the maintenance of mammalian
neuroretinal identity.

Horsford DJ(1), Nguyen MT, Sellar GC, Kothary R, Arnheiter H, McInnes RR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

During vertebrate eye development, the cells of the optic vesicle (OV) become
either neuroretinal progenitors expressing the transcription factor Chx10, or
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) progenitors expressing the transcription factor 
Mitf. Chx10 mutations lead to microphthalmia and impaired neuroretinal
proliferation. Mitf mutants have a dorsal RPE-to-neuroretinal phenotypic
transformation, indicating that Mitf is a determinant of RPE identity. We report 
here that Mitf is expressed ectopically in the Chx10(or-J/or-J) neuroretina (NR),
demonstrating that Chx10 normally represses the neuroretinal expression of Mitf. 
The ectopic expression of Mitf in the Chx10(or-J/or-J) NR deflects it towards an 
RPE-like identity; this phenotype results not from a failure of neuroretinal
specification, but from a partial loss of neuroretinal maintenance. Using Chx10
and Mitf transgenic and mutant mice, we have identified an antagonistic
interaction between Chx10 and Mitf in regulating retinal cell identity. FGF
(fibroblast growth factor) exposure in a developing OV has also been shown to
repress Mitf expression. We demonstrate that the repression of Mitf by FGF is
Chx10 dependent, indicating that FGF, Chx10 and Mitf are components of a pathway 
that determines and maintains the identity of the NR.

PMID: 15576400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5139-52.

Transdifferentiation of the retina into pigmented cells in ocular retardation
mice defines a new function of the homeodomain gene Chx10.

Rowan S(1), Chen CM, Young TL, Fisher DE, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Chx10 is one of the earliest markers of the 
developing retina. It is required for retinal progenitor cell proliferation as
well as formation of bipolar cells, a type of retinal interneuron. or(J) (ocular 
retardation) mice, which are Chx10 null mutants, are microphthalmic and show
expanded and abnormal peripheral structures, including the ciliary body. We show 
here, in a mixed genetic background, the progressive appearance of pigmented
cells in the neural retina, concomitant with loss of expression of retinal
markers. Fate mapping analysis using a multifunctional Chx10 BAC reporter mouse
revealed this process to be direct transdifferentiation of retinal cells into
pigmented cells. Microarray and in situ hybridization analyses revealed a complex
program underlying the transdifferentiation. This program involved the expansion 
of expression of genes normally found only in the periphery into central regions 
of the eye. These genes included a transcription factor controlling pigmentation,
Mitf, and the related factor Tfec (Tcfec -- Mouse Genome Informatics), which can 
activate a melanogenic gene expression program. Misexpression of Chx10 in the
developing retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) caused downregulation of Mitf,
Tfec, and associated pigment markers, leading to a nonpigmented RPE. These data
link Chx10 and Mitf to maintenance of the neural retina and RPE fates
respectively. Further, they suggest a new role for Chx10 in maintenance of
compartment boundaries in the peripheral retina.

PMID: 15459106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neuron. 2004 Sep 16;43(6):795-807.

Foxn4 controls the genesis of amacrine and horizontal cells by retinal
progenitors.

Li S(1), Mo Z, Yang X, Price SM, Shen MM, Xiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 679 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2004 Sep 16;43(6):759-60.

During vertebrate retinogenesis, seven classes of cells are specified from
multipotent progenitors. To date, the mechanisms underlying multipotent cell fate
determination by retinal progenitors remain poorly understood. Here, we show that
the Foxn4 winged helix/forkhead transcription factor is expressed in a subset of 
mitotic progenitors during mouse retinogenesis. Targeted disruption of Foxn4
largely eliminates amacrine neurons and completely abolishes horizontal cells,
while overexpression of Foxn4 strongly promotes an amacrine cell fate. These
results indicate that Foxn4 is both necessary and sufficient for commitment to
the amacrine cell fate and is nonredundantly required for the genesis of
horizontal cells. Furthermore, we provide evidence that Foxn4 controls the
formation of amacrine and horizontal cells by activating the expression of the
retinogenic factors Math3, NeuroD1, and Prox1. Our data suggest a model in which 
Foxn4 cooperates with other key retinogenic factors to mediate the multipotent
differentiation of retinal progenitors.

PMID: 15363391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hum Genet. 2004 Sep;115(4):302-9.

CHX10 mutations cause non-syndromic microphthalmia/ anophthalmia in Arab and
Jewish kindreds.

Bar-Yosef U(1), Abuelaish I, Harel T, Hendler N, Ofir R, Birk OS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Microphthalmia/anophthalmia is a clinically heterogeneous disorder of eye
formation, ranging from small size of a single eye to complete bilateral absence 
of ocular tissues. The genetic defect underlying isolated autosomal recessive
microphthalmia/anophthalmia is yet unclear. We studied four families (two of Arab
origin, one of Bedouin origin, and one of Persian-Jewish origin) with autosomal
recessive microphthalmia/anophthalmia and no associated eye anomalies, and one
Syrian-Jewish family with associated colobomas. Assuming a founder effect in each
of the families, we performed homozygosity mapping using polymorphic markers
adjacent to human homologues of genes known to be associated with eye absence in 
various species, namely EYA1, EYA2, EYA3, SIX4, SIX6, PAX6 and CHX10. No
association was found with EYA1, EYA2, EYA3, SIX6 or PAX6. In two families,
linkage analysis was consistent with possible association with SIX4, but no
mutations were found in the coding region of the gene or its flanking intron
sequences. In three of the five families, linkage analysis followed by sequencing
demonstrated that affected individuals in each family were homozygous for a
different CHX10 aberration: a mutation in the CVC domain and a deletion of the
homeobox domain were found in two Arab families, and a mutation in the
donor-acceptor site in the first intron in the Syrian-Jewish family. There was
phenotypic variation between families having different mutations, but no
significant phenotypic variation within each family. It has been previously shown
that mutations in a particular nucleotide in CHX10 are associated with an
autosomal recessive syndrome of microphthalmia/anophthalmia with iris colobomas
and cataracts in two families. We now show that different mutations in other
domains of the same gene underlie isolated microphthalmia/anophthalmia.

PMID: 15257456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):388-402.

Genetic analysis of the homeodomain transcription factor Chx10 in the retina
using a novel multifunctional BAC transgenic mouse reporter.

Rowan S(1), Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Chx10 is a homeobox-containing transcription factor critical for progenitor cell 
proliferation and bipolar cell determination in the developing retina. Its
expression in the retina has been reported to be restricted to these cell
populations. To further understand Chx10 regulation and function, a
multifunctional reporter construct consisting of GFP, alkaline phosphatase, and
Cre recombinase was integrated into a BAC encoding Chx10. Stable lines of
transgenic mice expressing this BAC were generated and analyzed. The reporter
expression was faithful to the endogenous retinal Chx10 expression pattern and
revealed a previously unappreciated locus of Chx10 expression in a subset of
Müller glial cells. In addition, Chx10 reporter activity was identified in mature
orJ-Chx10 mutant retinas, although these retinas lack Chx10-expressing bipolar
cells. Reporter and molecular analysis showed that the reporter-expressing cells 
in the mutant had hallmarks of progenitor cells or partially differentiated
Müller glial cells. These results strongly suggest that Chx10 promotes bipolar
fate by affecting differentiation of late progenitor cells. Crosses of the Chx10 
BAC reporter mice to R26R mice for fate-mapping experiments revealed that Chx10
reporter-expressing progenitor cells contribute to all mature cell types of the
retina. These results demonstrate the utility of these lines for generation of
mosaic or complete genetic manipulations of the retina.

PMID: 15223342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(10):4513-21.

Specification of the retinal fate of mouse embryonic stem cells by ectopic
expression of Rx/rax, a homeobox gene.

Tabata Y(1), Ouchi Y, Kamiya H, Manabe T, Arai K, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Department of Basic Medical
Sciences, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8639, Japan.

With the goal of generating retinal cells from mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells by
exogenous gene transfer, we introduced the Rx/rax transcription factor, which is 
expressed in immature retinal cells, into feeder-free mouse ES cells (CCE). CCE
cells expressing Rx/rax as well as enhanced green fluorescent protein (CCE-RX/E
cells) proliferated and remained in the undifferentiated state in the presence of
leukemia inhibitory factor, as did parental ES cells. We made use of mouse embryo
retinal explant cultures to address the differentiation ability of grafted ES
cells. Dissociated embryoid bodies were treated with retinoic acid for use as
donor cells and cocultured with retina explants for 2 weeks. In contrast to the
parental CCE cells, which could not migrate into host retinal cultures, CCE-RX/E 
cells migrated into the host retina and extended their process-like structures
between the host retinal cells. Most of the grafted CCE-RX/E cells became located
in the ganglion cell and inner plexiform layers and expressed ganglion and
horizontal cell markers. Furthermore, these grafted cells had the
electrophysiological properties expected of ganglion cells. Our data thus suggest
that subpopulations of retinal neurons can be generated in retinal explant
cultures from grafted mouse ES cells ectopically expressing the transcription
factor Rx/rax.

PMCID: PMC400481
PMID: 15121868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2004 Feb;15(1):83-9.

Retinal cell fate determination and bHLH factors.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin-Kawahara, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Retinal development is controlled antagonistically by multiple basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional activators and repressors. bHLH
repressors suppress bHLH activators and promote maintenance of progenitors and
generation of glial cells. In contrast, bHLH activators override activities of
bHLH repressors and promote neuronal differentiation. However, bHLH activators
alone are not sufficient but homeodomain factors are additionally required for
neuronal subtype specification. It is likely that homeodomain factors regulate
the layer specificity but not the neuronal fate while bHLH activators determine
the neuronal fate within the homedomain factor-specified layers. Thus,
combinations of proper bHLH and homeodomain factors are required for neuronal
subtype specification.

PMID: 15036211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neuron. 2004 Feb 5;41(3):337-50.

A postmitotic role for Isl-class LIM homeodomain proteins in the assignment of
visceral spinal motor neuron identity.

Thaler JP(1), Koo SJ, Kania A, Lettieri K, Andrews S, Cox C, Jessell TM, Pfaff
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

LIM homeobox genes have a prominent role in the regulation of neuronal subtype
identity and distinguish motor neuron subclasses in the embryonic spinal cord. We
have investigated the role of Isl-class LIM homeodomain proteins in motor neuron 
diversification using mouse genetic methods. All spinal motor neuron subtypes
initially express both Isl1 and Isl2, but Isl2 is rapidly downregulated by
visceral motor neurons. Mouse embryos lacking Isl2 function exhibit defects in
the migration and axonal projections of thoracic level motor neurons that appear 
to reflect a cell-autonomous switch from visceral to somatic motor neuron
character. Additional genetic mutations that reduce or eliminate both Isl1 and
Isl2 activity result in more pronounced defects in visceral motor neuron
generation and erode somatic motor neuron character. Thus, an early phase of high
Isl expression and activity in newly generated motor neurons permits the
diversification of visceral and somatic motor neuron subtypes in the developing
spinal cord.

PMID: 14766174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Feb;45(2):375-84.

Delayed expression of the Crx gene and photoreceptor development in the
Chx10-deficient retina.

Rutherford AD(1), Dhomen N, Smith HK, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, London, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: The Chx10 homeobox gene is expressed in neural progenitor cells during
retinal development. The absence of Chx10 causes microphthalmia in humans and in 
the mouse mutant ocular retardation. The purpose of this study was to examine how
neuronal development is affected by absence of the Chx10 transcription factor in 
the mouse retina.
METHODS: Expression of transcription factor genes, Crx, Pou4f2, and Pax6, that
mark specific cell types as they begin to differentiate was analyzed by RNA in
situ hybridization of retina from wild-type and Chx10-null ocular retardation
mice (Chx10(or-J/or-J)). RT-PCR analysis was used to compare expression of these 
genes and putative targets of Crx regulation. Photoreceptor development was
analyzed by using peanut agglutinin (PNA)-rhodamine and blue cone opsin antibody 
to label cones and rhodopsin antibody to label rods.
RESULTS: The photoreceptor gene Crx, normally expressed during embryonic retinal 
development, was not detected in the embryonic mutant retina, but was expressed
after birth. Expression of the targets of Crx regulation, rhodopsin, peripherin, 
rod phosphodiesterase beta (Pdeb), and arrestin, with the exception of
interphotoreceptor retinoid binding protein (Irbp), was delayed in the
Chx10(or-J/or-J) retina. Rhodopsin localization in rod outer segments was also
delayed. By contrast, temporal and spatial expression of Pou4f2 and Pax6 in
developing ganglion and amacrine cells and PNA and blue opsin in developing cone 
cells was relatively normal in the mutant.
CONCLUSIONS: Delay of the normal temporal expression of genes essential for
photoreceptor disc morphogenesis leads to failure of correct rod and cone outer
segment formation in the Chx10(or-J/or-J) mutant retina. In addition, the absence
of Chx10 appears to affect the development of late-born cells more than that of
early-born cells, in that a low number of rods develops, whereas formation of
ganglion, amacrine, and cone cells is relatively unaffected.

PMID: 14744875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Cycle. 2003 Jul-Aug;2(4):350-7.

Regulation of proliferation, cell fate specification and differentiation by the
homeodomain proteins Prox1, Six3, and Chx10 in the developing retina.

Dyer MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Mail Stop 323, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, 332 N Lauderdale, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.
michael.dyer@stjude.org

The coordination of proliferation and cell fate specification is of particular
importance in the developing central nervous system, because different classes of
neurons are generated at different stages of development. As a consequence, if
too many or too few multipotent progenitor cells exit the cell cycle during the
early stages of development, then a predictable shift in the ratio of neuronal
cell types would occur. Such a perturbation could prove devastating for normal
neural function. In the past several years, we have made numerous advances toward
understanding the roles of cell cycle proteins in the development of the retina, 
a specialized region of the central nervous system. More recently, researchers
have identified and characterized a number of homeodomain transcription factors
that regulate the proliferation of retinal progenitor cells and the specification
of cell fate. In this review, I will present recent findings about the
homeodomain protein Prox1 and compare them with studies of two other homeodomain 
proteins that are important regulators of retinal development, Chx10 and Six3.
Together, the research on the genes that encode these three proteins raises
several new questions about the mechanisms underlying the coordination of
proliferation and cell fate specification in the developing central nervous
system.

PMID: 12851489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Comp Neurol. 2003 Jun 23;461(2):187-204.

Dlx1, Dlx2, Pax6, Brn3b, and Chx10 homeobox gene expression defines the retinal
ganglion and inner nuclear layers of the developing and adult mouse retina.

de Melo J(1), Qiu X, Du G, Cristante L, Eisenstat DD.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba
R3E 0V9, Canada.

Distal-less homeobox genes are expressed in the developing forebrain. We assessed
Dlx gene expression in the developing and adult mouse retina. Dlx1 and Dlx2 are
detected in retinal neuroprogenitors by embryonic day (E) 12.5 (Eisenstat et al. 
[1999] J. Comp. Neurol. 217-237). At E13.5, the expression of four homeodomain
proteins, DLX2, BRN3b, PAX6, and CHX10, define distinct yet overlapping domains
in the retinal neuroepithelium. By postnatal day (P) 0, DLX2 is expressed in the 
neuroblastic layer and the ganglion cell layer (GCL) consisting of ganglion and
displaced amacrine cells. DLX1 expression resembles DLX2 to P0 but decreases
postnatally. In the adult, DLX2 is localized to ganglion, amacrine, and
horizontal cells as determined by coexpression with retinal cell-specific
markers. There is coincident expression of DLX2 with gamma-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)65, and GAD67 in the inner nuclear layer
(INL) and GCL. In the adult, DLX2 is coexpressed with BRN3b in ganglion cells;
PAX6 in amacrine, horizontal, and ganglion cells; and Chx10 in some bipolar
cells. We predict that a combinatorial code of these homeobox genes and others
specify retinal cell fate. Our results support a possible role for Dlx1 and Dlx2 
in inner retinal development and in the terminal differentiation and/or
maintenance of INL interneurons and ganglion cells in the adult. The correlation 
of DLX2 with GABA expression in the mouse retina closely mirrors the relationship
of DLX2 to GABAergic neuronal differentiation in the embryonic forebrain,
including neocortex, olfactory bulb and hippocampus, signifying a conservation of
function of Dlx genes in the developing central nervous system.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12724837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Methods. 2002 Dec;28(4):387-95.

Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to retinal explants.

Hatakeyama J(1), Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.

Neural retina can be isolated from mouse embryos and maintained in culture for
2-3 weeks. In such retinal explant cultures, precursor cells differentiate into
neurons and glial cells and form three cellular layers, mimicking well the normal
development. This explant culture system is suitable for genetic manipulation,
such as retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. Retroviral vectors can efficiently
transfer genes into retinal precursors, and the copy of the viral genome is
precisely transmitted to the progeny of infected cells. Thus, this is an
excellent method to change stably the phenotypes of dividing cells. It has been
shown that retroviruses carrying transcription factor genes efficiently change
the fates of infected cells. Bicistronic expression by retroviral vectors is
useful to test the effects of various combinations of many transcription factors.
With this method, the transcriptional codes for retinal cell type specification
are now being elucidated. Thus, retrovirus-mediated gene transfer to the retinal 
explant culture system offers a powerful and unique tool to analyze the molecular
mechanism of neural development.

PMID: 12507456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):539-52.

Genetic rescue of cell number in a mouse model of microphthalmia: interactions
between Chx10 and G1-phase cell cycle regulators.

Green ES(1), Stubbs JL, Levine EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, John A. Moran Eye Center,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Insufficient cell number is a primary cause of failed retinal development in the 
Chx10 mutant mouse. To determine if Chx10 regulates cell number by antagonizing
p27(Kip1) activity, we generated Chx10, p27(Kip1) double null mice. The severe
hypocellular defect in Chx10 single null mice is alleviated in the double null,
and while Chx10-null retinas lack lamination, double null retinas have near
normal lamination. Bipolar cells are absent in the double null retina, a defect
that is attributable to a requirement for Chx10 that is independent of p27(Kip1).
We find that p27(Kip1) is abnormally present in progenitors of Chx10-null
retinas, and that its ectopic localization is responsible for a significant
amount of the proliferation defect in this microphthalmia model system. mRNA and 
protein expression patterns in these mice and in cyclin D1-null mice suggest that
Chx10 influences p27(Kip1) at a post-transcriptional level, through a mechanism
that is largely dependent on cyclin D1. This is the first report of rescue of
retinal proliferation in a microphthalmia model by deletion of a cell cycle
regulatory gene.

PMID: 12490560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Fertil Steril. 2002 Nov;78(5):979-84.

Coordinated regulation of HOX gene expression in myometrium and uterine
leiomyoma.

Cermik D(1), Arici A, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To measure HOXA10 gene expression in uterine myometrium and leiomyoma 
throughout the menstrual cycle.
DESIGN: HOXA10 gene expression was measured in paired myometrium and leiomyoma
from the same uterus.
SETTING: University medical center.
PATIENT(S): Thirty-one patients with leiomyoma.
INTERVENTION(S): Collection of leiomyoma and myometrial tissue during
hysterectomy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): HOXA10 gene expression was analyzed by Northern analysis
and quantified by laser densitometry.
RESULT(S): Both myometrium and leiomyoma continued to express HOXA10 in the adult
and menstrual cycle stage-specific regulation was evident in both tissues. During
the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle, HOXA10 expression decreased in
both leiomyoma and myometrium. At all points in the menstrual cycle HOXA10
expression in leiomyoma was similar to expression in paired myometrium.
CONCLUSION(S): HOXA10 is expressed in both myometrium and leiomyoma. Coordinated 
regulation of this transcript factor suggests similar gene activation in both
leiomyoma and myometrium. Diminished expression of HOXA10, a gene that normally
causes differentiation, may allow increased growth resulting in the increased
mitosis seen in the secretory phase. The identification of this developmental
control gene in myometrium and leiomyoma may lead to a better understanding of
the molecular mechanisms responsible for growth and differentiation of these
tissues.

PMID: 12413981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 May;46(3):285-94.

Retinal homeobox genes and the role of cell proliferation in cavefish eye
degeneration.

Strickler AG(1), Famuditimi K, Jeffery WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park 20742-4415, USA.

The teleost Astyanax mexicanus exhibits eyed surface dwelling (surface fish) and 
blind cave dwelling (cavefish) forms. Despite lacking functional eyes as adults, 
cavefish embryos form eye primordia, which later arrest in development,
degenerate and sink into the orbit. We are comparing the expression patterns of
various eye regulatory genes during surfacefish and cavefish development to
determine the cause of eye degeneration. Here we examine Rx and Chx/Vsx family
homeobox genes, which have a major role in cell proliferation in the vertebrate
retina. We isolated and sequenced a full-length RxcDNA clone (As-Rx1) and part of
a Chx/Vsx(As-Vsx2) gene, which appear to be most closely related to the zebrafish
Rx1 and Alx/Vsx2 genes respectively. In situ hybridization shows that these genes
have similar but non-identical expression patterns during Astyanax eye
development. Expression is first detected in the optic vesicle, then throughout
the presumptive retina of the optic cup, and finally in the ciliary marginal zone
(CMZ), the region of the growing retina where most new retinoblasts are formed.
In addition, As-Rx1 is expressed in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) of the retina, 
which contains the photoreceptor cells, and As-Vsx2 is expressed in the inner
nuclear layer, probably in the bipolar cells. With the exception of reduced
As-Rx-1 expression in the ONL, the As-Rx1 and As-Vsx2 expression patterns were
unchanged in the developing retina of two different cavefish populations,
suggesting that cell proliferation is not inhibited. These results were confirmed
by using PCNA and BrdU markers for retinal cell division. We conclude that the
CMZ is active in cell proliferation long after eye growth is diminished and is
therefore not the major cause of eye degeneration.

PMID: 12068949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):315-22.

Vsx1, a rapidly evolving paired-like homeobox gene expressed in cone bipolar
cells.

Chow RL(1), Snow B, Novak J, Looser J, Freund C, Vidgen D, Ploder L, McInnes RR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Research Institute, Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

The paired-like homeodomain (HD) protein Chx10 is distinguished by the presence
of the CVC domain, a conserved 56 amino acid sequence C-terminal to the HD. In
mammals, Chx10 is essential both for the proliferation of retinal progenitor
cells and for the formation or survival of retinal bipolar interneurons. We
describe the cloning and characterization of a mouse Chx10 homologue, Vsx1;
phylogenetic analysis suggests that Vsx1 and its putative vertebrate orthologues 
have evolved rapidly. Vsx1 expression in the adult is predominantly retinal.
Whereas Chx10 is expressed both in retinal progenitors in the developing eye and 
apparently in all bipolar cells of the mature retina, Vsx1 expression is first
detected in the eye at postnatal day 5, where it is restricted to cone bipolar
cells.

PMID: 11731243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1313-22.

Roles of homeobox and bHLH genes in specification of a retinal cell type.

Hatakeyama J(1), Tomita K, Inoue T, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Previous analysis of mutant mice has revealed that the bHLH genes Mash1 and
Math3, and the homeobox gene Chx10 are essential for generation of bipolar cells,
the interneurons present in the inner nuclear layer of the retina. Thus, a
combination of the bHLH and homeobox genes should be important for bipolar cell
genesis, but the exact functions of each gene remain largely unknown. We have
found that in Mash1-Math3 double-mutant retina, which exhibits a complete loss of
bipolar cells, Chx10 expression did not disappear but remained in Müller glial
cells, suggesting that Chx10 expression per se is compatible with gliogenesis. In
agreement with this, misexpression of Chx10 alone with retrovirus in the retinal 
explant cultures induced generation of the inner nuclear layer cells, including
Müller glia, but few of them were mature bipolar cells. Misexpression of Mash1 or
Math3 alone did not promote bipolar cell genesis either, but inhibited Müller
gliogenesis. In contrast, misexpression of Mash1 or Math3 together with Chx10
increased the population of mature bipolar cells and decreased that of Müller
glia. Thus, the homeobox gene provides the inner nuclear layer-specific identity 
while the bHLH genes regulate the neuronal versus glial fate determination, and
these two classes of genes together specify the bipolar cell fate. Moreover,
Mash1 and Math3 promoted the bipolar cell fate, but not the other inner nuclear
layer-specific neuronal subtypes in the presence of Chx10, raising the
possibility that the bHLH genes may be involved in neuronal subtype
specification, in addition to simply making the neuronal versus glial fate
choice.

PMID: 11262232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 1;231(1):13-30.

Zebrafish genes rx1 and rx2 help define the region of forebrain that gives rise
to retina.

Chuang JC(1), Raymond PA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell, Developmental, and Neural Biology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0616, USA.

Zebrafish retinal homeobox genes rx1 and rx2 are expressed exclusively in the
optic primordia and then in cone photoreceptors of the differentiated neural
retina. In this study, we show that the rx expression domain is coextensive with 
the region identified as the retinal field in published fate maps of the neural
plate in zebrafish embryos. Analysis of the spatiotemporal relationships between 
retinal and forebrain precursors suggests that lateral movement of retinal
precursors is responsible for evagination of the optic primordia. Overexpression 
of either rx1 or rx2 results in the loss of forebrain tissue and the ectopic
formation of retinal tissue. We asked whether the deletion of forebrain and
expansion of retinal tissue could be explained by the death of telencephalic
precursors and enhanced proliferation of retinal precursors, and we found that it
could not. Instead, our data are consistent with a change in cell fate of
forebrain precursors associated with reduced expression of telencephalic markers 
(emx1 and BF-1) and ectopic expression of retinal markers (rx1/2/3, pax6, six6,
and vsx2) at the neural keel stage. The rx homeodomain alone is sufficient to
induce ectopic retinal tissue, although weakly so, and this observation, together
with results from deletion constructs, suggests that interactions with
unidentified transcriptional regulators are important for rx1 and rx2 function
during early eye development. We conclude that regulated expression of zebrafish 
rx1 and rx2 helps to define the region of the forebrain fated to give rise to
retinal tissue and may be involved in the cellular migrations that lead to
splitting of the retinal field and formation of the optic primordia.

PMID: 11180949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):197-210.

Identification of a proliferating marginal zone of retinal progenitors in
postnatal chickens.

Fischer AJ(1), Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98195, USA.

In warm-blooded vertebrates it is generally accepted that after early stages of
development new neurons are not added to the retina. Contrary to this belief, we 
show here that hatched chickens have a zone of proliferating cells at the
peripheral margin of the retina, similar to that of fish and amphibians. We found
that cells at the peripheral edge of the retina incorporated the thymidine analog
BrdU and expressed the cell cycle regulator proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA). Furthermore, cells in the ciliary epithelium and retinal margin
coexpressed the homeodomain transcription factors Pax6 and Chx-10, similar to
multipotent progenitors of embryonic retina. Expression of PCNA, Pax6, and Chx-10
in cells at the retinal margin was maintained in adult birds. Double-labeling
studies showed that BrdU-labeled cells that were integrated into the retina
expressed proteins found only in differentiated neurons. Increased rates of
ocular growth, induced by visual deprivation, resulted in increased numbers of
BrdU-labeled cells at the retinal margin. Unlike the progenitors in the retinal
marginal zone of fish and amphibians, the progenitors of the chick retina do not 
increase their rate of proliferation in response to acute damage. Furthermore,
insulin, insulin-like growth factor-I, and epidermal growth factor increased
proliferation of progenitors at the retinal margin, while basic fibroblast growth
factor had no effect. These results indicate that the avian retina has a marginal
growth zone containing proliferating cells that share similarities with
multipotent embryonic retinal progenitors and the retinal stem cells of
cold-blooded vertebrates.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10753510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Development. 2000 Nov;127(21):4599-609.

Extraocular mesenchyme patterns the optic vesicle during early eye development in
the embryonic chick.

Fuhrmann S(1), Levine EM, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, Box 357420, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The vertebrate eye develops from the neuroepithelium of the ventral forebrain by 
the evagination and formation of the optic vesicle. Classical embryological
studies have shown that the surrounding extraocular tissues - the surface
ectoderm and extraocular mesenchyme - are necessary for normal eye growth and
differentiation. We have used explant cultures of chick optic vesicles to study
the regulation of retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) patterning and
differentiation during early eye development. Our results show that extraocular
mesenchyme is required for the induction and maintenance of expression of the
RPE-specific genes Mitf and Wnt13 and the melanosomal matrix protein MMP115. In
the absence of extraocular tissues, RPE development did not occur. Replacement of
the extraocular mesenchyme with cranial mesenchyme, but not lateral plate
mesoderm, could rescue expression of the RPE-marker Mitf. In addition to
activating expression of RPE-specific genes, the extraocular mesenchyme inhibits 
the expression of the neural retina-specific transcription factor Chx10 and
downregulates the eye-specific transcription factors Pax6 and Optx2. The
TGF(&bgr;) family member activin can substitute for the extraocular mesenchyme by
promoting expression of the RPE-specific genes and downregulating expression of
the neural retina-specific markers. These data indicate that extraocular
mesenchyme, and possibly an activin-like signal, pattern the domains of the optic
vesicle into RPE and neural retina.

PMID: 11023863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genes Dev. 2000 Sep 1;14(17):2134-9.

Ventral neural patterning by Nkx homeobox genes: Nkx6.1 controls somatic motor
neuron and ventral interneuron fates.

Sander M(1), Paydar S, Ericson J, Briscoe J, Berber E, German M, Jessell TM,
Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Medicine, University of
California-San Francisco, San Franscisco, California 94143, USA.

There is growing evidence that sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling regulates ventral
neuronal fate in the vertebrate central nervous system through Nkx-class
homeodomain proteins. We have examined the patterns of neurogenesis in mice
carrying a targeted mutation in Nkx6.1. These mutants show a dorsal-to-ventral
switch in the identity of progenitors and in the fate of postmitotic neurons. At 
many axial levels there is a complete block in the generation of V2 interneurons 
and motor neurons and a compensatory ventral expansion in the domain of
generation of V1 neurons, demonstrating the essential functions of Nkx6.1 in
regional patterning and neuronal fate determination.

PMCID: PMC316892
PMID: 10970877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Nat Genet. 2000 Aug;25(4):397-401.

Human microphthalmia associated with mutations in the retinal homeobox gene
CHX10.

Ferda Percin E(1), Ploder LA, Yu JJ, Arici K, Horsford DJ, Rutherford A, Bapat B,
Cox DW, Duncan AM, Kalnins VI, Kocak-Altintas A, Sowden JC, Traboulsi E,
Sarfarazi M, McInnes RR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Ophthalmic Genetics Laboratory, Surgical Research Center, Department
of Surgery, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut,
USA.

Isolated human microphthalmia/anophthalmia, a cause of congenital blindness, is a
clinically and genetically heterogeneous developmental disorder characterized by 
a small eye and other ocular abnormalities. Three microphthalmia/anophthalmia
loci have been identified, and two others have been inferred by the
co-segregation of translocations with the phenotype. We previously found that
mice with ocular retardation (the or-J allele), a microphthalmia phenotype, have 
a null mutation in the retinal homeobox gene Chx10 (refs 7,8). We report here the
mapping of a human microphthalmia locus on chromosome 14q24.3, the cloning of
CHX10 at this locus and the identification of recessive CHX10 mutations in two
families with non-syndromic microphthalmia (MIM 251600), cataracts and severe
abnormalities of the iris. In affected individuals, a highly conserved arginine
residue in the DNA-recognition helix of the homeodomain is replaced by glutamine 
or proline (R200Q and R200P, respectively). Identification of the CHX10 consensus
DNA-binding sequence (TAATTAGC) allowed us to demonstrate that both mutations
severely disrupt CHX10 function. Human CHX10 is expressed in progenitor cells of 
the developing neuroretina and in the inner nuclear layer of the mature retina.
The strong conservation in vertebrates of the CHX10 sequence, pattern of
expression and loss-of-function phenotypes demonstrates the evolutionary
importance of the genetic network through which this gene regulates eye
development.

PMID: 10932181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Science. 2000 Mar 17;287(5460):2032-6.

Retinal stem cells in the adult mammalian eye.

Tropepe V(1), Coles BL, Chiasson BJ, Horsford DJ, Elia AJ, McInnes RR, van der
Kooy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Medical
Sciences Building 1105, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada.

The mature mammalian retina is thought to lack regenerative capacity. Here, we
report the identification of a stem cell in the adult mouse eye, which represents
a possible substrate for retinal regeneration. Single pigmented ciliary margin
cells clonally proliferate in vitro to form sphere colonies of cells that can
differentiate into retinal-specific cell types, including rod photoreceptors,
bipolar neurons, and Müller glia. Adult retinal stem cells are localized to the
pigmented ciliary margin and not to the central and peripheral retinal pigmented 
epithelium, indicating that these cells may be homologous to those found in the
eye germinal zone of other nonmammalian vertebrates.

PMID: 10720333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Genomics. 2000 Jan 15;63(2):289-93.

Isolation and characterization of a novel human paired-like
homeodomain-containing transcription factor gene, VSX1, expressed in ocular
tissues.

Semina EV(1), Mintz-Hittner HA, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.
esemina@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu

Homeodomain transcription factors control cell fates during the development of
all animals. The paired-like subfamily of homeodomain proteins has been
particularly implicated in ocular development in different species. In this paper
we report the cDNA sequence, genomic structure, localization, and expression data
of a novel paired-like homeobox-containing gene, VSX1, isolated from a human
embryonic craniofacial cDNA library using the degenerate-PCR approach. The
composed VSX1 cDNA sequence of 1433 bp was predicted to encode a protein of 365
amino acid residues. Maximal homology at the protein level was identified with
the paired-like homeoproteins of the CVC-domain family: 92-97% identity was seen 
in the homeodomain region with 55% overall identity to zebrafish and goldfish
Vsx1 and 35% overall identity to goldfish Vsx2 and murine Chx10. The gene was
found to consist of five exons that are distributed over 6.2 kb of genomic
sequence. VSX1 was localized to the 20p11-q11 region, which is homologous with
the distal part of mouse chromosome 2. Expression of VSX1 was detected in
embryonic craniofacial and adult ocular tissues. Several ocular phenotypes have
been mapped to the VSX1 region in both human and mouse genomes, and its candidacy
for these disorders is discussed.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10673340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Neurobiol. 2000 Feb 5;42(2):232-47.

Partial rescue of the ocular retardation phenotype by genetic modifiers.

Bone-Larson C(1), Basu S, Radel JD, Liang M, Perozek T, Kapousta-Bruneau N, Green
DG, Burmeister M, Hankin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Medical College of Ohio, 3035
Arlington Avenue, Toledo, Ohio 43614-5804, USA.

The or(J) allele of the murine ocular retardation mutation is caused by a
premature stop codon in the homeodomain of the Chx10 gene. When expressed on an
inbred 129/Sv strain, the or(J) phenotype is characterized by microphthalmia and 
a thin, poorly differentiated retina in which the peripheral portion is affected 
to a greater extent than the central portion. Such mutant retinae lack
differentiated bipolar cells and the optic nerve typically fails to form, leading
to blindness. Here, we show that progeny from an outcrossed backcross between
129/Sv-or(J) /or(J) and Mus musculus castaneus produce animals that are
homozygous for the or(J) mutation and exhibit a much ameliorated eye phenotype.
Although not of normal size, such modified or(J) eyes are significantly larger
than those in 129/Sv-or(J) /or(J) mice, and contain a better organized retina
which includes bipolar cells. Furthermore, optic nerves are frequently present,
and the eyes show a degree of function as reflected by electroretinogram and
pupillary response. As in 129/Sv-or(J) /or(J) mice, however, modified or(J) eyes 
show incomplete growth and a lack of cell differentiation in the periphery of the
retina. The selective, and apparently nonmodifiable, effect of the ocular
retardation phenotype on the periphery of the retina indicates that Chx10 plays
an important role in the central-to-peripheral gradient of retinal development.
These findings demonstrate that the ocular retardation phenotype can be greatly
modified by the genetic background, and help to define a role for Chx10 in ocular
development.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10640330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Neuron. 1999 Aug;23(4):675-87.

Active suppression of interneuron programs within developing motor neurons
revealed by analysis of homeodomain factor HB9.

Thaler J(1), Harrison K, Sharma K, Lettieri K, Kehrl J, Pfaff SL.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 1999 Aug;23(4):626-7.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) specifies the identity of both motor neurons (MNs) and
interneurons with morphogen-like activity. Here, we present evidence that the
homeodomain factor HB9 is critical for distinguishing MN and interneuron identity
in the mouse. Presumptive MN progenitors and postmitotic MNs express HB9, whereas
interneurons never express this factor. This pattern resembles a composite of the
avian homologs MNR2 and HB9. In mice lacking Hb9, the genetic profile of MNs is
significantly altered, particularly by upregulation of Chx10, a gene normally
restricted to a class of ventral interneurons. This aberrant gene expression is
accompanied by topological disorganization of motor columns, loss of the phrenic 
and abducens nerves, and intercostal nerve pathfinding defects. Thus, MNs
actively suppress interneuron genetic programs to establish their identity.

PMID: 10482235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mech Dev. 1998 Oct;77(2):149-64.

The nuclear receptor transcription factor, retinoid-related orphan receptor beta,
regulates retinal progenitor proliferation.

Chow L(1), Levine EM, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurobiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

We examined the role of retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR)beta, a member of
the nuclear receptor family of transcription factors, in retinal neurogenesis. In
situ hybridization studies showed that RORbeta is expressed in retinal progenitor
cells in the embryonic rat retina. Further studies demonstrated that RORbeta
colocalizes with Chx10, a transcription factor thought to influence retinal
progenitor proliferation (Burmeister, M., Novak, J., Liang, M-Y., Basu, S.,
Ploder, L., Hawes, N.L. Vidgen, D., Hoover, F., Goldman, D. , Kalnins, V.I.,
Roderick, T.H., Taylor, B.A., Hankin, M.H. and McInnes, R.R., 1996. Ocular
retardation mouse caused by Chx10 homeobox null allele: impaired retinal
progenitor proliferation and bipolar cell differentiation. Nature Genetics 12,
376-383). Northern analysis reveals that RORbeta expression is dramatically
decreased in the ocular retardationJ mutant, which possesses a defect in the
Chx10 gene. Overexpression of RORbeta in retinal progenitors by biolistic
transfection results in an increase in the number of large cell clones. These
data support a role for RORbeta in regulating retinal progenitor proliferation,
possibly via the Chx10 gene.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved

PMID: 9831642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Genet. 1998;23(2):128-41.

Cloning of zebrafish vsx1: expression of a paired-like homeobox gene during CNS
development.

Passini MA(1), Kurtzman AL, Canger AK, Asch WS, Wray GA, Raymond PA, Schechter N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York at
Stony Brook 11794, USA.nschecher@mail.psychiatry.sunysb.edu.

vsx1 is a homeobox gene encoding a paired-type homeodomain and a CVC domain that 
was originally cloned from an adult goldfish retinal library. We previously
reported the spatiotemporal expression pattern of vsx1 in the adult and
developing retina of zebrafish and goldfish, and we suggested that vsx1 plays a
role in determining the cell fate and maintenance of retinal interneurons. Other 
related genes encoding a CVC domain, such as vsx2 (alx) and chx10, are expressed 
both within and outside the retina during development. In this study, we report
the cloning of zebrafish vsx1 and its developmental expression in both retinal
and nonretinal regions of the CNS in zebrafish embryos. vsx1 expression was
detected in a subset of hindbrain and spinal cord neurons before it was expressed
in the retina. At about the same time that retinal expression began, the level of
vsx1 was decreased in the spinal cord. The expression of vsx1 was progressively
restricted, and eventually it was detected only in the inner nuclear layer (INL) 
of the developing retina. The combined expression patterns of teleost vsx1 and
vsx2 (alx) during early zebrafish development encompasses the expression pattern 
observed for murine Chx10, and indicates a partitioning of function for CVC genes
in lower vertebrates.

PMID: 9770270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3999-4008.

Polydactyly and ectopic ZPA formation in Alx-4 mutant mice.

Qu S(1), Niswender KD, Ji Q, van der Meer R, Keeney D, Magnuson MA, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Correct development of the limb is dependent on coordination between three
distinct signaling centers. Recently, fibroblast growth factor-4 has been
identified as a crucial determinant of AER function, which directs limb bud
outgrowth, and Sonic hedgehog has been identified as a signaling molecule that
mediates ZPA function, which specifies anterior-posterior patterning in the
developing limb bud. In addition, Shh and FGF-4 reciprocally reinforce each
other's expression via a positive feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for 
the coordination of limb bud outgrowth and anterior-posterior patterning. The
mechanisms by which these signaling centers come to occupy their normal positions
in the posterior limb bud during development are not understood. Here we identify
and characterize Alx-4, a gene that encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein.
Alx-4 is expressed in several populations of mesenchymal cells, including
mesenchymal cells in the anterior limb bud, and mice homozygous for targeted
disruption of the Alx-4 gene have multiple abnormalities, including preaxial
polydactyly. The polydactyly is associated with the formation of an ectopic
anterior ZPA, as indicated by anterior expression of Sonic hedgehog, HoxD13 and
fibroblast growth factor-4. The expression of other candidate regulators of
anterior-posterior positional information in the limb bud, including HoxB8 and
Gli3, is not altered in Alx-4 mutant embryos. By chromosomal mapping experiments,
Alx-4 is tightly linked to Strong's luxoid, a polydactylous mouse mutant. The
results identify Alx-4 as a determinant of anterior-posterior positional identity
in the limb and a component of a regulatory program that restricts ZPA formation 
to the posterior limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 9374397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1997 Jun;38(7):1293-303.

Pax-6, Prox 1, and Chx10 homeobox gene expression correlates with phenotypic fate
of retinal precursor cells.

Belecky-Adams T(1), Tomarev S, Li HS, Ploder L, McInnes RR, Sundin O, Adler R.

Author information: 
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21287-9257, USA.

PURPOSE: To study the expression patterns of the homeobox genes Pax-6, Prox 1,
and Chx10 during chick retinal development in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: Sections of paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded eyes were obtained
at a range of developmental stages. In situ hybridization was carried out on
tissue sections using digoxigenin-labeled sense and antisense RNA probes that
recognize chicken Pax-6 and Prox 1 (whose sequences were already available), and 
chicken Chx10 (which was cloned and sequenced as part of this study). Selected
developmental stages were also studied by immunocytochemistry with antibodies
against Pax-6 and Prox 1, and by Northern blot analysis using 32P-labeled probes.
RESULTS: Until embryonic day (ED) 5, in situ hybridization shows widespread,
diffuse distribution of all three genes. Between ED 6 and ED 8, however, they
acquire distinct, topographically specific patterns of expression. The Prox 1
signal is predominantly expressed in the prospective horizontal cell layer of the
neuroepithelium, decreases vitreally, and is absent from ganglion cells and the
prospective photoreceptor layer. Pax-6 is strongly expressed only in the
prospective ganglion-cell and amacrine-cell regions at the same stages, and is
not detected in prospective photoreceptors. Chx10 expression becomes concentrated
in the future bipolar-cell region of the inner nuclear layer. Similar patterns
are maintained by ED 15 through ED 18, after cell differentiation has taken
place. Pax-6 and Prox 1 immunoreactive materials showed nuclear localization and 
a pattern of laminar distribution equivalent to that seen by in situ
hybridization.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the differentiated fate of retinal
precursor cells may be influenced by Pax-6, Prox 1, or Chx10, this hypothesis is 
now being tested using dissociated chick embryo retinal cell cultures.

PMID: 9191592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mech Dev. 1997 May;63(2):133-43.

Inactivation of the zebrafish homologue of Chx10 by antisense oligonucleotides
causes eye malformations similar to the ocular retardation phenotype.

Barabino SM(1), Spada F, Cotelli F, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, H S Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
Barabino@ubaclu.unibas.ch

We report the cloning of a zebrafish paired-type homeobox gene, Alx, closely
related to the murine Chx10 and the gold fish Vsx-I homeodomain proteins. Alx is 
first expressed at about 12 h post-fertilization (hpf) when optic vesicles
appear. Its expression is restricted to the early retinal neuroepithelium,
whereas no signal can be detected in the optic placode. Later, Alx expression
follows the differentiation of the neural retina. Inhibition experiments with
antisense oligonucleotides resulted in specific eye malformations which are
reminiscent of the phenotype of ocular retardation (or) mice, caused by a
spontaneous Chx10 mutation. The expression of other developmentally relevant
genes such as pax(zf-a), pax(zf-b) and krx-20 was not affected in the antisense
treated embryos.

PMID: 9203137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Neuron. 1994 Aug;13(2):377-93.

Developmental expression of a novel murine homeobox gene (Chx10): evidence for
roles in determination of the neuroretina and inner nuclear layer.

Liu IS(1), Chen JD, Ploder L, Vidgen D, van der Kooy D, Kalnins VI, McInnes RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Few potential regulatory proteins of vertebrate retinal development have been
identified. We describe a 39 kDa murine polypeptide (Chx10) with a homeodomain
82% identical to that of the nematode protein ceh-10. In the developing mouse,
the Chx10 transcript is expressed throughout the anterior optic vesicle and all
neuroblasts of the optic cup. In the mature retina, the Chx10 protein is
restricted to the inner nuclear layer, in which its expression decreases from the
outer to the inner margin. Chx10 transcripts are also detected in regions of the 
developing thalamus, hindbrain, and ventral spinal cord. The data suggest that
Chx10 plays critical roles in the formation of the neuroretina and in the
development and maintenance of the inner nuclear layer.

PMID: 7914735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


