
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8419. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXM1 promotes invasion and migration of colorectal cancer cells partially
dependent on HSPA5 transactivation.

Luo X(1), Yao J(2), Nie P(3), Yang Z(4), Feng H(4), Chen P(1), Shi X(1), Zou
Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Luoyang Central Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Luoyang, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Boji-Affiliated
Hospital (Zengcheng People's Hospital), Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)KingMed Diagnostics and KingMed School of Laboratory Medicine, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Medcine, The Affiliated
Luoyang Central Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Luoyang, China. (5)MOE Key
Laboratory of Laser Life Science and Institute of Laser Life Science, Joint
Laboratory of Laser Oncology with Cancer Center of Sun Yat-sen University,
College of Biophotonics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.

In this study, to investigate whether endoplastic reticulum (ER) stress
correlated with FOXM1 in colorectal cancer, we analysed the mRNA levels of FOXM1 
and ER stress markers HSPA5 and spliced XBP1 by qRT-PCR. FOXM1 mRNA levels were
found to positively correlate with HSPA5 in colorectal cancer. However, no
significant correlation between FOXM1 and spliced XBP1 mRNA levels was found.
Theses results suggested the positive correlation between FOXM1 and HSPA5 in
colorectal cancer was not associated with ER stress. Next, we provided evidences 
that FOXM1 promoted HSPA5 transcription by directly binding to and stimulating
HSPA5 promoter. Moreover, a FOXM1-binding site mapped between -1019 and -1012 bp 
of the proximal HSPA5 promoter was identified. In addition, we found that
enhancement of cell migration and invasion by FOXM1 was significantly attenuated 
by depletion of HSPA5 in colorectal cancer cell. Furthermore, FOXM1 triggered
colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion was involved in activities of
cell-surface HSPA5. Lastly, our results suggested FOXM1 facilitated the
activities and expressions of MMP2 and 9 associated with cell-surface HSPA5 in
colorectal cancer cells. Moreover, statistically significant positive
correlations between FOXM1 and MMP2 mRNA expression, between HSPA5 and MMP2 were 
found in colorectal cancer tissue specimens. Together, our results suggested that
FOXM1-HSPA5 signaling might be considered as a novel molecular target for
designing novel therapeutic regimen to control colorectal cancer metastasis and
progression.

PMID: 27034162  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 28. pii: S0303-7207(16)30089-2. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.03.032. [Epub ahead of print]

A potential role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in development of ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome.

Takahashi N(1), Harada M(2), Hirota Y(1), Zhao L(3), Yoshino O(4), Urata Y(1),
Izumi G(1), Takamura M(1), Hirata T(1), Koga K(1), Wada-Hiraike O(1), Fujii T(1),
Osuga Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. (2)Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo,
Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. Electronic address: haradam-tky@umin.ac.jp. (3)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, Liaoning, 116044, PR China. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama,
930-0194, Japan.

Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) is crucial for ovarian angiogenesis,
but its excess production induces ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). The
aim of this study was to determine whether endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
regulates VEGFA expression in granulosa cells, and whether its activation is
involved in OHSS development. The expression of the spliced form of X-box-binding
protein 1 [XBP1(S)], induced by ER stress, in cumulus cells from OHSS patients
was higher than that in cumulus cells from non-OHSS patients. The ER stress
inducer tunicamycin increased human chorionic gonadotropin-induced VEGFA
production in human granulosa cells through the induction of XBP1(S), and
pretreatment with the ER stress inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA)
abrogated the effect of tunicamycin. In OHSS model rats, TUDCA administration
prevented the OHSS development, reducing ovarian VEGFA production. Our findings
suggest ER stress upregulates hCG-induced VEGFA production in granulosa cells,
indicating that ER stress might be involved in OHSS development.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27032713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Hum Hypertens. 2016 Mar 31. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2016.17. [Epub ahead of print]

eNOS/iNOS and endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis in the placentas of 
patients with preeclampsia.

Du L(1,)(2,)(3), He F(1,)(2,)(3), Kuang L(1,)(2,)(3), Tang W(1,)(2,)(3), Li
Y(1,)(2,)(3), Chen D(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China. (2)Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of
Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Reproduction and Genetics of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China.

Disruption of nitric oxide pathway and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress had been
observed in preeclampsia (PE). However, the correlation and overall detailed
expression profiles of ER stress-related markers and endothelial nitric oxide
synthase/inducible nitric oxide synthase (eNOS/iNOS) in patients with PE were
poorly understood. In this study, placental protein expression of ER
stress-related markers as well as eNOS/iNOS in normotensive control (n=32) and PE
pregnancies (n=32) was examined by western blot. In addition, apoptosis was
detected by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labelling
(TUNEL) staining in placentas. Compared with control, we found elevated ER stress
response was agreeable with iNOS upregulation in placenta tissue of PE patients. 
Placental protein expression of ER stress-related markers, including GRP78,
GRP94, p-PERK, eIF2a, p-eIF2a, XBP1, CHOP, Ire1, p-Ire1 and iNOS, was higher, and
eNOS expression was lower in PE (P<0.05 for all); however, the expression of ATF6
and PERK was similar in the PE and control groups. Upregulation of CHOP and iNOS 
was consistent of apoptosis increasing indicated by TUNEL staining and caspase 4 
expression upregulation in PE placenta. Our datas suggest that the exaggerated ER
stress response and upregulated iNOS are probably associated with increased
apoptosis in placenta of PE patients and may contribute to the pathophysiology of
PE.Journal of Human Hypertension advance online publication, 31 March 2016;
doi:10.1038/jhh.2016.17.

PMID: 27030287  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2016 Mar 20. [Epub ahead of print]

ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM STRESS AND BIPOLAR DISORDER-Almost Forgotten Therapeutic
Drug Targets in the Unfolded Protein Response Pathway Revisited.

Astrid BS, Robert F, Nina L, Armin B, Bernd R, Nathalie MA, Anika S, Hans-Peter
K, Reininghaus Eva Z(1), Sandra WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Medical University of Graz, Auenbruggerplatz 31,
A-8036 Graz. eva.reininghaus@medunigraz.at.

Bipolar Disorder (BD) is characterized by recurring mood swings, which are not
completely understood yet. So far, it is an accepted theory that multiple factors
contribute to pathogenesis of BD according to the vulnerability-stress-model.
This model combines on the one hand biological predisposing vulnerability, and on
the other hand several chronic and acute stressful negative events as underlying 
mechanisms of BD. Recently, ER (Endoplasmic Reticulum) stress reached the
spotlight of BD research again. The expression of the chaperone BiP (syn. GRP78/ 
glucose-regulated protein, 78kDa), which is highly expressed in the Endoplasmic
Reticulum (ER), is upregulated by different kinds of mood stabilizers. These
results implied that the ER, an organelle which is prone towards different kinds 
of cellular stress, might be involved in the pathophysiology of BD. This
hypothesis was further strengthened by hypothesis driven genetic association
studies, which showed significant association of BiP promotor polymorphisms with 
BD. Also other ER-stress associated genes like XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1) or 
GRP94 (heat shock protein 90kDa beta) were recently linked to BD in hypothesis
driven gene association studies. In addition to the proteins mentioned before,
our review focuses on further UPR (Unfolded Protein Response) related proteins
associated with BD and raises the hypothesis that ER-stress may represent a
common interface between BD and obesity which is overrepresented in BD patients. 
Finally, members of the UPR pathway are discussed as putative targets for mood
stabilizers.

PMID: 26996177  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 18. pii: 201600557. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of normal B-cell differentiation and malignant B-cell survival by
OCT2.

Hodson DJ(1), Shaffer AL(2), Xiao W(2), Wright GW(2), Schmitz R(2), Phelan JD(2),
Yang Y(2), Webster DE(2), Rui L(2), Kohlhammer H(2), Nakagawa M(2), Waldmann
TA(2), Staudt LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; Department of Haematology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0AH, United Kingdom. (2)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892;
(3)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; lstaudt@mail.nih.gov.

The requirement for the B-cell transcription factor OCT2 (octamer-binding protein
2, encoded by Pou2f2) in germinal center B cells has proved controversial. Here, 
we report that germinal center B cells are formed normally after depletion of
OCT2 in a conditional knockout mouse, but their proliferation is reduced and in
vivo differentiation to antibody-secreting plasma cells is blocked. This finding 
led us to examine the role of OCT2 in germinal center-derived lymphomas. shRNA
knockdown showed that almost all diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines
are addicted to the expression of OCT2 and its coactivator OCA-B. Genome-wide
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis and gene-expression profiling
revealed the broad transcriptional program regulated by OCT2 that includes the
expression of STAT3, IL-10, ELL2, XBP1, MYC, TERT, and ADA. Importantly, genetic 
alteration of OCT2 is not a requirement for cellular addiction in DLBCL. However,
we detected amplifications of the POU2F2 locus in DLBCL tumor biopsies and a
recurrent mutation of threonine 223 in the DNA-binding domain of OCT2. This
neomorphic mutation subtly alters the DNA-binding preference of OCT2, leading to 
the transactivation of noncanonical target genes including HIF1a and FCRL3.
Finally, by introducing mutations designed to disrupt the OCT2-OCA-B interface,
we reveal a requirement for this protein-protein interface that ultimately might 
be exploited therapeutically. Our findings, combined with the predominantly
B-cell-restricted expression of OCT2 and the absence of a systemic phenotype in
our knockout mice, suggest that an OCT2-targeted therapeutic strategy would be
efficacious in both major subtypes of DLBCL while avoiding systemic toxicity.

PMID: 26993806  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BMOV) Attenuates Apoptosis in High Glucose-Treated
Cardiac Cells and Diabetic Rat Hearts by Regulating the Unfolded Protein
Responses (UPRs).

Cong XQ(1), Piao MH(2), Li Y(3), Xie L(4), Liu Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Bethune First Hospital of Jilin University, 71
Xinmin St., Chaoyang District, ChangChun, 130021, China.
congxiaoqiang@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Bethune First
Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin St., Chaoyang District, Changchun, Jilin,
130021, China. (3)The People's Hospital of Jilin Province, Changchun, 130021,
China. (4)School of Public Health, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)-induced unfolded protein response (UPR) and
the subsequent cell deaths are essential steps in the pathogenesis of diabetic
cardiomyopathy (DCM), a main cause of diabetics' morbidity and mortalities. The
bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(IV) (BMOV), a potent oral vanadium complex with
anti-diabetic properties and insulin-mimicking effects, was shown to improve
cardiac dysfunctions in diabetic models. Here, we examined the effects of BMOV on
UPR pathway protein expression and apoptotic cell deaths in both high
glucose-treated cardiac H9C2 cells and in the hearts of diabetic rats. We show
that in both the high glucose-treated cardiac cells and in the hearts of
streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats, there was an overall activation of the UPR
signaling, including both apoptotic (e.g., the cascades of PERK/EIf2a/ATF4/CHOP
and of IRE1/caspase 12/caspase 3) and pro-survival (GRP78 and XBP1) signaling. A 
high amount of apoptotic cell deaths was also detected in both diabetic
conditions. The administration of BMOV suppressed both the apoptotic and
pro-survival UPR signaling and significantly attenuated apoptotic cell deaths in 
both conditions. The overall suppression of UPR signaling by BMOV suggests that
the drug protects diabetic cardiomyopathy by counteracting reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Our findings lend support to
promote the use of BMOV in the treatment of diabetic heart diseases.

PMID: 26983714  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Nat Prod. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthesis and Structure-Activity Relationships of N-Dihydrocoptisine-8-ylidene
Aromatic Amines and N-Dihydrocoptisine-8-ylidene Aliphatic Amides as
Antiulcerative Colitis Agents Targeting XBP1.

Xie M(1), Zhang HJ(1), Deng AJ(1), Wu LQ(1), Zhang ZH(1), Li ZH(1), Wang WJ(1),
Qin HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines,
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College , Beijing 100050, People's Republic of China.

In this study, natural quaternary coptisine was used as a lead compound to design
and synthesize structurally stable and actively potent coptisine analogues. Of
the synthesized library, 13 N-dihydrocoptisine-8-ylidene amines/amides were found
not only to be noncytotoxic toward intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), but they
were also able to activate the transcription of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1)
targets to varying extents in vitro. Antiulcerative colitis (UC) activity levels 
were assessed at the in vitro molecular level as well as in vivo in animals using
multiple biomarkers as indices. In an in vitro XBP1 transcriptional activity
assay, four compounds demonstrated good dose-effect relationships with EC50
values of 0.0708-0.0132 µM. Moreover, two compounds were confirmed to be more
potent in vivo than a positive control, demonstrating a curative effect for UC in
experimental animals. Thus, the findings of this study suggest that these
coptisine analogues are promising candidates for the development of anti-UC
drugs.

PMID: 26981782  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. J Physiol Biochem. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Maternal obesity alters endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis in offspring pancreas.

Soeda J(1), Mouralidarane A(1), Cordero P(1), Li J(1), Nguyen V(1), Carter R(1), 
Kapur SR(1), Pombo J(2), Poston L(2), Taylor PD(2), Vinciguerra M(3,)(4,)(5),
Oben JA(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University College London, London,
UK. (2)Division of Women's Health, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University College London, London,
UK. m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (4)International Clinical Research Center (ICRC),
Center for Translational Medicine (CTM), St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno,
Czech Republic. m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (5)Centro Studi Fegato (CSF)-Liver
Research Center, Fondazione Italiana Fegato, Trieste, Italy.
m.vinciguerra@ucl.ac.uk. (6)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, University 
College London, London, UK. j.oben@ucl.ac.uk. (7)Department of Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 
j.oben@ucl.ac.uk.

The prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty pancreas disease (NAFPD) is increasing in
parallel with obesity rates. Stress-related alterations in endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER), such as the unfolded protein response (UPR), are associated with obesity.
The aim of this study was to investigate ER imbalance in the pancreas of a mice
model of adult and perinatal diet-induced obesity. Twenty female C57BL/6J mice
were assigned to control (Con) or obesogenic (Ob) diets prior to and during
pregnancy and lactation. Their offspring were weaned onto Con or Ob diets up to
6 months post-partum. Then, after sacrifice, plasma biochemical analyses, gene
expression, and protein concentrations were measured in pancreata. Offspring of
Ob-fed mice had significantly increased body weight (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and plasma leptin
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and decreased insulin (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) levels. Maternal obesogenic diet
decreased the total and phosphorylated Eif2a and increased spliced X-box binding 
protein 1 (XBP1). Pancreatic gene expression of downstream regulators of UPR
(EDEM, homocysteine-responsive endoplasmic reticulum-resident (HERP), activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP)) and
autophagy-related proteins (LC3BI/LC3BII) were differently disrupted by
obesogenic feeding in both mothers and offspring (from p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.1 to p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
Maternal obesity and Ob feeding in their offspring alter UPR in NAFPD, with
involvement of proapoptotic and autophagy-related markers. Upstream and
downstream regulators of PERK, IRE1a, and ATF6 pathways were affected differently
following the obesogenic insults.

PMID: 26979740  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: clincanres.1570.2016. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular Pathways: Immunosuppressive Roles of IRE1a-XBP1 Signaling in Dendritic 
Cells of the Tumor Microenvironment.

Cubillos-Ruiz JR(1), Bettigole SE(2), Glimcher LH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University. 
(2)Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University. (3)Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University lglimche@med.cornell.edu.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a massive cytoplasmic membrane network that
functions primarily to ensure proper folding and post-translational modification 
of newly synthesized secretory and transmembrane proteins. Abnormal accumulation 
of unfolded proteins in this organelle causes a state of "ER stress", which is a 
hallmark feature of various diseases including cancer, neurodegeneration and
metabolic dysfunction. Cancer cells exploit the IRE1a-XBP1 arm of the ER stress
response to efficiently adjust their protein-folding capacity and ensure survival
under hostile tumor microenvironmental conditions. However, we recently found
that dendritic cells (DCs) residing in the ovarian cancer microenvironment also
experience sustained ER stress and demonstrate persistent activation of the
IRE1a-XBP1 pathway. This previously unrecognized process disrupts metabolic
homeostasis and antigen-presenting capacity in DCs, thereby crippling their
natural ability to support the protective function of infiltrating anti-tumor T
cells. In this review, we briefly discuss some of the mechanisms that fuel ER
stress in tumor-associated DCs, the biological processes altered by aberrant
IRE1a-XBP1 signaling in these innate immune cells, and the unique
immunotherapeutic potential of targeting this pathway in cancer hosts.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26979393  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 14;11(3):e0151550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151550.
eCollection 2016.

Exploring the Conserved Role of MANF in the Unfolded Protein Response in
Drosophila melanogaster.

Lindström R(1), Lindholm P(2), Kallijärvi J(3), Palgi M(4), Saarma M(2), Heino
TI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Folkhälsan Research Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Gene Technology, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn,
Estonia.

Disturbances in the homeostasis of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) referred to as ER
stress is involved in a variety of human diseases. ER stress activates unfolded
protein response (UPR), a cellular mechanism the purpose of which is to restore
ER homeostasis. Previous studies show that Mesencephalic Astrocyte-derived
Neurotrophic Factor (MANF) is an important novel component in the regulation of
UPR. In vertebrates, MANF is upregulated by ER stress and protects cells against 
ER stress-induced cell death. Biochemical studies have revealed an interaction
between mammalian MANF and GRP78, the major ER chaperone promoting protein
folding. In this study we discovered that the upregulation of MANF expression in 
response to drug-induced ER stress is conserved between Drosophila and mammals.
Additionally, by using a genetic in vivo approach we found genetic interactions
between Drosophila Manf and genes encoding for Drosophila homologues of GRP78,
PERK and XBP1, the key components of UPR. Our data suggest a role for Manf in the
regulation of Drosophila UPR.

PMCID: PMC4790953
PMID: 26975047  [PubMed - in process]


11. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2016 Mar 11;13:21. doi: 10.1186/s12986-016-0082-1. eCollection
2016.

The effect of cholesteryl ester transfer protein on pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction in mice.

Guo W(1), Gong Y(1), Fu Z(1), Fu J(1), Sun Y(1), Ju X(1), Chang Y(1), Wang W(1), 
Zhu X(1), Gao B(1), Liu X(1), Yang T(1), Zhou H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029 China.

BACKGROUND: Cholesterol accumulation causes pancreatic beta cell lipotoxicity and
dysfunction. Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) plays an important role in
blood lipid homeostasis. However, its role in tissue lipid metabolism remains
unclear. We hypothesized that plasma CETP impact cholesterol homeostasis in the
beta cells, thus damaging their functions.
METHODS: The adipose tissue-specific CETP expression transgenic (aP2-CETPTg)
mice, characterized by high CETP levels in the circulation, were used in this
study. Pancreatic islet cholesterol and beta cell function were assessed in mice.
We further measured mRNA levels of the genes involved in beta cell proliferation 
and differentiation, inflammation and cholesterol metabolism. TUNEL assay was
applied to investigate beta cell apoptosis in islets.
RESULTS: The aP2-CETPTg mice exhibited glucose intolerance, lower plasma insulin 
concentrations but increased insulin sensitivity compared with wild type mice. In
addition, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from isolated pancreatic islets
significantly decreased, and free cholesterol significantly increased. Moreover, 
the number and size of islets from aP2-CETPTg mice were significantly decreased. 
Genes involved in beta cell proliferation, such as Pdx1 and BETA2, were
down-regulated; genes involved in inflammation and ER stress, such as IL-1ß,
CHOP, and Xbp1 were up-regulated, in line with an increase of beta cell
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma CETP causes free cholesterol accumulation in islets which
could contribute to beta cell dysfunction. Thus, CETP inhibition could be a novel
protective strategy for dyslipidemia related to diabetes and obese.

PMCID: PMC4788865
PMID: 26973702  [PubMed]


12. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 7. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7950. [Epub ahead of print]

Exogenous hepatitis B virus envelope proteins induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress: involvement of cannabinoid axis in liver cancer cells.

Montalbano R(1), Honrath B(1), Wissniowski TT(2), Elxnat M(1), Roth S(1), Ocker
M(3,)(4), Quint K(3), Churin Y(5), Roederfeld M(5), Schroeder D(5), Glebe D(6),
Roeb E(5), Di Fazio P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Philipps University of 
Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Philipps University
of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (3)Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps
University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (4)Present address: Department of
Gastroenterology CBF, Charité University Medicine Berlin and Bayer Pharma AG,
Experimental Medicine Oncology, Berlin, Germany. (5)Department of
Gastroenterology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany. (6)Institute of
Medical Virology, National Reference Centre for Hepatitis B and D Viruses, Justus
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.

HBV represents the most common chronic viral infection and major cause of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), although its exact role in liver tumorigenesis is
unclear. Massive storage of the small (SHBs), middle (MHBs) and large surface
(LHBs) HBV envelope proteins leads to cell stress and sustained inflammatory
responses. Cannabinoid (CB) system is involved in the pathogenesis of liver
diseases, stimulating acute and chronic inflammation, liver damage and
fibrogenesis; it triggers endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. The aim of 
our work was to investigate the activation of ER stress pathway after ectopic HBV
envelope proteins expression, in liver cancer cells, and the role exerted by CB
receptors. PCR, immunofluorescence and western blotting showed that exogenous
LHBs and MHBs induce a clear ER stress response in Huh-7 cells expressing CB1
receptor. Up-regulation of the chaperone BiP/GRP78 (Binding Immunoglobulin
Protein/Glucose-Regulated Protein 78) and of the transcription factor
CHOP/GADD153 (C/EBP Homologous Protein/Growth Arrest and DNA Damage inducible
gene 153), phosphorylation of PERK (PKR-like ER Kinase) and eIF2a (Eukaryotic
Initiation Factor 2a) and splicing of XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1) was
observed. CB1-/- HepG2 cells did not show any ER stress activation. Inhibition of
CB1 receptor counteracted BiP expression in transfected Huh-7 and in HBV+
PLC/PRF/5 cells; whereas no effect was observed in HBV- HLF cells. These results 
suggest that HBV envelope proteins are able to induce the ER stress pathway. CB1 
expression is directly correlated with ER stress function. Further investigations
are needed to clarify the involvement of cannabinoid in HCC progression after HBV
infection.

PMID: 26967385  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7904. [Epub ahead of print]

Chemical chaperon 4-phenylbutyrate protects against the endoplasmic reticulum
stress-mediated renal fibrosis in vivo and in vitro.

Liu SH(1,)(2,)(3), Yang CC(1), Chan DC(4,)(5,)(6), Wu CT(1), Chen LP(7), Huang
JW(4), Hung KY(4), Chiang CK(1,)(4,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department of Medical Research, China
Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Superintendent's Office, National 
Taiwan University Hospital, Chu-Tung Branch, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of
Dentistry, Taipei Chang Gang Memorial Hospital, Chang Gang University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (8)Department of Integrated Diagnostics & Therapeutics, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis is the common and final pathologic change of
kidney in end-stage renal disease. Interesting, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
is known to contribute to the pathophysiological mechanisms during the
development of renal fibrosis. Here, we investigated the effects of chemical
chaperon sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) on renal fibrosis in vivo and in vitro. 
In a rat unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model, 4-PBA mimicked endogenous
ER chaperon in the kidneys and significantly reduced glucose regulated protein 78
(GRP78), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP),
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and phosphorylated JNK protein
expressions as well as restored spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1)
expressions in the kidneys of UUO rats. 4-PBA also attenuated the increases of
a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) protein
expressions, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, and apoptosis in the kidneys of UUO
rats. Moreover, transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß markedly increased ER
stress-associated molecules, profibrotic factors, and apoptotic markers in the
renal tubular cells (NRK-52E), all of which could be significantly counteracted
by 4-PBA treatment. 4-PBA also diminished TGF-ß-increased CTGF promoter activity 
and CTGF mRNA expression in NRK-52E cells. Taken together, our results indicated 
that 4-PBA acts as an ER chaperone to ameliorate ER stress-induced renal tubular 
cell apoptosis and renal fibrosis.

PMID: 26959118  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 4. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7919. [Epub ahead of print]

Nickel chloride (NiCl2) induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by activating
UPR pathways in the kidney of broiler chickens.

Guo H(1), Cui H(1,)(2), Peng X(1,)(2), Fang J(1,)(2), Zuo Z(1,)(2), Deng
J(1,)(2), Wang X(1,)(2), Wu B(1), Chen K(1), Deng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Diseases and Environmental Hazards of Sichuan
Province, Yaan, Sichuan, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Yaan, Sichuan, China.

It has been known that overexposure to Ni can induce nephrotoxicity. However, the
mechanisms of underlying Ni nephrotoxicity are still elusive, and also Ni- and Ni
compound-induced ER stress has been not reported in vivo at present. Our aim was 
to use broiler chickens as animal model to test whether the ER stress was induced
and UPR was activated by NiCl2 in the kidney using histopathology,
immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR. Two hundred and eighty one-day-old broiler
chickens were divided into 4 groups and fed on a control diet and the same basal 
diet supplemented with 300 mg/kg, 600mg/kg and 900mg/kg of NiCl2 for 42 days. We 
found that dietary NiCl2 in excess of 300 mg/kg induced ER stress, which was
characterized by increasing protein and mRNA expression of ER stress markers,
e.g., GRP78 and GRP94. Concurrently, all the three UPR pathways were activated by
dietary NiCl2. Firstly, the PERK pathway was activated by increasing eIF2a and
ATF4 mRNA expression. Secondly, the IRE1 pathway was activated duo to increase in
IRE1 and XBP1 mRNA expression. And thirdly, the increase of ATF6 mRNA expression 
suggested that ATF6 pathway was activated. The findings clearly demonstrate that 
NiCl2 induces the ER stress through activating PERK, IRE1 and ATF6 UPR pathways, 
which is proved to be a kind of molecular mechanism of Ni- or/and Ni
compound-induced nephrotoxicity.

PMID: 26956054  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7702. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of IRE1a-driven pro-survival pathways is a promising therapeutic
application in acute myeloid leukemia.

Sun H(1,)(2), Lin DC(1), Guo X(1), Masouleh BK(3), Gery S(1), Cao Q(1), Alkan
S(1), Ikezoe T(4), Akiba C(1), Paquette R(5), Chien W(6), Müller-Tidow C(7), Jing
Y(4), Agelopoulos K(8), Müschen M(9), Koeffler HP(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Oncology, Hematology and Stem
Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University Medical School, Aachen, Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi University, Nankoku, 
Kochi, Japan. (5)Department of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. (6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
University Hospital Halle, Halle, Germany. (8)Department of Medicine, Hematology 
and Oncology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (9)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco CA,
USA.

Survival of cancer cells relies on the unfolded protein response (UPR) to resist 
stress triggered by the accumulation of misfolded proteins within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). The IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, a key branch of the UPR, is activated in 
many cancers. Here, we show that the expression of both mature and spliced forms 
of XBP1 (XBP1s) is up-regulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines and
AML patient samples. IRE1a RNase inhibitors [MKC-3946, 2-hydroxy-1-naphthaldehyde
(HNA), STF-083010 and toyocamycin] blocked XBP1 mRNA splicing and exhibited
cytotoxicity against AML cells. IRE1a inhibition induced caspase-dependent
apoptosis and G1 cell cycle arrest at least partially by regulation of Bcl-2
family proteins, G1 phase controlling proteins (p21cip1, p27kip1 and cyclin D1), 
as well as chaperone proteins. Xbp1 deleted murine bone marrow cells were
resistant to growth inhibition by IRE1a inhibitors. Combination of HNA with
either bortezomib or AS2O3 was synergistic in AML cytotoxicity associated with
induction of p-JNK and reduction of p-PI3K and p-MAPK. Inhibition of IRE1a RNase 
activity increased expression of many miRs in AML cells including miR-34a.
Inhibition of miR-34a conferred cellular resistance to HNA. Our results strongly 
suggest that targeting IRE1a driven pro-survival pathways represent an exciting
therapeutic approach for the treatment of AML.

PMID: 26934650  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7601. [Epub ahead of print]

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated induction of SESTRIN 2 potentiates cell
survival.

Saveljeva S(1,)(2), Cleary P(1,)(2), Mnich K(1,)(2), Ayo A(1,)(2), Pakos-Zebrucka
K(1,)(2), Patterson JB(3), Logue SE(1,)(2), Samali A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, NUI Galway, Ireland. (2)School of Natural Sciences,
NUI Galway, Ireland. (3)MannKind Corporation, Valencia, California, USA.

Upregulation of SESTRIN 2 (SESN2) has been reported in response to diverse
cellular stresses. In this study we demonstrate SESTRIN 2 induction following
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress-induced increases in SESTRIN 2
expression were dependent on both PERK and IRE1/XBP1 arms of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). SESTRIN 2 induction, post ER stress, was responsible for mTORC1
inactivation and contributed to autophagy induction. Conversely, knockdown of
SESTRIN 2 prolonged mTORC1 signaling, repressed autophagy and increased ER
stress-induced cell death. Unexpectedly, the increase in ER stress-induced cell
death was not linked to autophagy inhibition. Analysis of UPR pathways identified
prolonged eIF2a, ATF4 and CHOP signaling in SESTRIN 2 knockdown cells following
ER stress. SESTRIN 2 regulation enables UPR derived signals to indirectly control
mTORC1 activity shutting down protein translation thus preventing further
exacerbation of ER stress.

PMID: 26930721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Phytomedicine. 2016 Feb 15;23(2):174-80. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2015.12.011. Epub 
2016 Jan 4.

Cryptotanshinone deregulates unfolded protein response and eukaryotic initiation 
factor signaling in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells.

Wu CF(1), Seo EJ(1), Klauck SM(2), Efferth T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, 
Johannes Gutenberg University, Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (2)Working
Group Cancer Genome Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Biology, Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University,
Staudinger Weg 5, 55128 Mainz, Germany. Electronic address: efferth@uni-mainz.de.

BACKGROUND: Unfolded protein responses (UPR) determine cell fate and are
recognized as anticancer targets. In a previous research, we reported that
cryptotanshinone (CPT) exerted cytotoxic effects toward acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells through mitochondria-mediated apoptosis.
PURPOSE: In the present study, we further investigated the role of UPR in
CPT-induced cytotoxicity on acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells by applying tools 
of pharmacogenomics and bioinformatics.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed by mRNA microarray
hybridization. Potential transcription factor binding motifs were identified in
the promoter regions of the deregulated genes by Cistrome software. Molecular
docking on eIF-4A and PI3K was performed to investigate the inhibitory activity
of CPT on translation initiation.
RESULTS: CPT regulated genes related to UPR and eIF2 signaling pathways. The
DNA-Damage-Inducible Transcript 3 (DDIT3) gene, which is activated as consequence
of UPR malfunction during apoptosis, was induced and validated by in vitro
experiments. Transcription factor binding motif analysis of the
microarrary-retrieved deregulated genes in the promoter region emphasized the
relevance of transcription factors, such as ATF2, ATF4 and XBP1, regulating UPR
and cell apoptosis. Molecular docking suggested inhibitory effects of CPT by
binding to eIF-4A and PI3K providing evidence for a role of CPT's in the
disruption of protein synthesis.
CONCLUSION: CPT triggered UPR and inhibited protein synthesis via eIF-mediated
translation initiation, potentially supporting CPT-induced cytotoxic effects
toward acute leukemia cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26926179  [PubMed - in process]


18. Am J Chin Med. 2016 Feb;44(1):87-101. doi: 10.1142/S0192415X16500063.

Attenuation of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Mediated Liver Damage by Mulberry
Leaf Diet in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Rats.

Afrin R(1), Arumugam S(1), Wahed MI(1,)(2), Pitchaimani V(1), Karuppagounder
V(1), Sreedhar R(1), Harima M(1), Suzuki H(1,)(3), Miyashita S(1), Nakamura T(1),
Suzuki K(4), Nakamura M(5), Ueno K(6), Watanabe K(1).

Author information: 
(1)* Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Niigata University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Niigata 956-8603,
Japan. (2) Department of Pharmacy, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi-6205,
Bangladesh. (3)§ Department of Hematology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Niigata 
University of Graduate School of Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata City
951-8510, Japan. (4)¶ Department of Gastroenterology, Niigata University of
Graduate School of Medicine and Dental Sciences, Niigata City 951-8510, Japan.
(5)<U+2225> Department of Cardiology, Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital, Kofu
Yamanashi 400-8506, Japan. (6) Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Niigata
University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Niigata 956-8603, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) plays a crucial role in the development of
insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. Although antidiabetic use of mulberry
leaves (MLs) has been popular due to their many anti-oxidative flavonoid
compounds and free radical scavenging effects, ML's effects on ERS in
experimental diabetic hepatocyte injury remain unknown. To investigate how ML
affect ERS in diabetic liver, Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were assigned to induce
diabetes by a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozocin (STZ; 55 mg/kg)
and fed with either normal chow or a diet containing 25% mulberry leaf powder
diet (MLD) and examined for 56 days. We observed that MLD improved the rats'
morphological and histopathological changes. Levels of ERS markers such as
phosphorylated double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK) and X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and the protein
expression of glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78) were significantly higher in
the diabetic liver compared to normal liver. MLD for 8 weeks significantly
reduced all of these markers. MLD also significantly decreased hepatocyte
apoptosis, hepatic macrophage recruitment, cellular infiltration, and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), tumor necrosis factor
receptor associated factor 2 (TRAF2), interleukin 1[Formula: see text]
(IL-1[Formula: see text]) and sterol regulatory element binding protein isoform
1c (SREBP 1c) levels in diabetic liver. These results may suggest that MLs can
preserve hepatic function in experimental diabetes by modulating ERS mediated
apoptosis and liver damage.

PMID: 26916916  [PubMed - in process]


19. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016;38(3):847-58. doi: 10.1159/000443039. Epub 2016 Feb
25.

IRE1a Signaling Pathways Involved in Mammalian Cell Fate Determination.

Wu J(1), He GT, Zhang WJ, Xu J, Huang QB.

Author information: 
(1)First Clinical College of Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.

A diverse array of cellular stresses can lead to accumulation of misfolded or
unfolded proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which subsequently elicits ER
stress. Inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) is the most sensitive of the three
unfolded protein response (UPR) branches which are triggered to cope with ER
stress in mammalian cells. IRE1a signaling is quite context-specific on account
of many adaptor and modulator proteins that directly interact with it, including 
heat shock proteins (HSPs), RING finger protein 13 (RNF13), poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase 16 (PARP16), Bax/Bak, and Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1). The activated IRE1a 
triggers different downstream pathways depending on the UPRosome formed by
distinct modulator proteins. At the initial phase of ER stress, IRE1a-XBP1 axis
functions as an adaptive response. While ER stress sustains or intensifies,
signals shift to apoptotic responses. Furthermore, IRE1a signaling can be
exploited to the development of a wide range of prevalent human diseases, with
cancer the most characterized. Here we provide an overview of recent insights
into the complex IRE1a signaling network which makes IRE1a an intriguing cell
fate switch. Besides, the functional relevance is presented since IRE1a
activation also participates in some other physiological processes beyond
protein-folding status.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26910807  [PubMed - in process]


20. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 24;6:21709. doi: 10.1038/srep21709.

Activation of the unfolded protein response promotes axonal regeneration after
peripheral nerve injury.

Oñate M(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Catenaccio A(1,)(2), Martínez G(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Armentano
D(5), Parsons G(5), Kerr B(6), Hetz C(1,)(3,)(4,)(7), Court FA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Geroscience Center for Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Millenium Nucleus for Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Biology, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (4)Program 
of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Center for
Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Genzyme Corporation, 49 New York Avenue,
Framingham, MA 01701, USA. (6)Centro de Estudios Científicos, Valdivia, Chile.
(7)Department of Immunology and Infectious diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston MA, USA.

Although protein-folding stress at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is emerging as 
a driver of neuronal dysfunction in models of spinal cord injury and
neurodegeneration, the contribution of this pathway to peripheral nerve damage
remains poorly explored. Here we targeted the unfolded protein response (UPR), an
adaptive reaction against ER stress, in mouse models of sciatic nerve injury and 
found that ablation of the transcription factor XBP1, but not ATF4, significantly
delay locomotor recovery. XBP1 deficiency led to decreased macrophage
recruitment, a reduction in myelin removal and axonal regeneration. Conversely,
overexpression of XBP1s in the nervous system in transgenic mice enhanced
locomotor recovery after sciatic nerve crush, associated to an improvement in key
pro-regenerative events. To assess the therapeutic potential of UPR manipulation 
to axonal regeneration, we locally delivered XBP1s or an shRNA targeting this
transcription factor to sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia using a gene
therapy approach and found an enhancement or reduction of axonal regeneration in 
vivo, respectively. Our results demonstrate a functional role of specific
components of the ER proteostasis network in the cellular changes associated to
regeneration and functional recovery after peripheral nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC4764858
PMID: 26906090  [PubMed - in process]


21. J Nutr Biochem. 2016 Mar;29:41-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.10.017. Epub 2015 
Nov 10.

Early postnatal feed restriction reduces liver connective tissue levels and
affects H3K9 acetylation state of regulated genes associated with protein
metabolism in low birth weight pigs.

Nebendahl C(1), Görs S(1), Albrecht E(2), Krüger R(1), Martens K(1), Giller K(3),
Hammon HM(1), Rimbach G(3), Metges CC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutritional Physiology 'Oskar Kellner', Leibniz Institute for
Farm Animal Biology (FBN), 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany. (2)Institute for Muscle
Biology and Growth, Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), 18196
Dummerstorf, Germany. (3)Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Institute of
Human Nutrition and Food Science, Department of Food Science, 24098 Kiel,
Germany. (4)Institute of Nutritional Physiology 'Oskar Kellner', Leibniz
Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), 18196 Dummerstorf, Germany. Electronic
address: metges@fbn-dummerstorf.de.

Intrauterine growth retardation is associated with metabolic consequences in
adulthood. Since our previous data indicate birth weight-dependent effects of
feed restriction (R) on protein degradation processes in the liver, it should be 
investigated whether effects on connective tissue turnover are obvious and could 
be explained by global changes of histone H3K9me3 and H3K9ac states in regulated 
genes. For this purpose, female littermate pigs with low (U) or normal (N) birth 
weight were subjected to 3-week R (60% of ad libitum fed controls) with
subsequent refeeding (REF) for further 5weeks. The 3-week R-period induced a
significant reduction of connective tissue area by 43% in the liver of U animals 
at 98 d of age, which was not found in age-matched N animals. Of note, after REF 
at 131 d of age, in previously feed-restricted U animals (UR), the percentage of 
mean connective tissue was only 53% of ad libitum fed controls (UK), indicating a
persistent effect. In U animals, R induced H3K9 acetylation of regulated genes
(e.g. XBP1, ERLEC1, GALNT2, PTRH2), which were inter alia associated with protein
metabolism. In contrast, REF was mostly accompanied by deacetylation in U and N
animals. Thus, our epigenetic data may give a first explanation for the observed 
birth weight-dependent differences in this connective tissue phenotype.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26895664  [PubMed - in process]


22. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201500750. [Epub ahead of
print]

Dietary compound a-asarone alleviates ER stress-mediated apoptosis in
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-challenged macrophages.

Park SH(1), Kang MK(1), Choi YJ(1), Kim YH(1), Antika LD(1), Lim SS(1), Kang
YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food science and Nutrition, Hallym University, Chuncheon,
200-702, Korea.

SCOPE: Prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has lost the function of
protein folding capacity and the ER accumulation of unfolded proteins that
eventually triggers apoptosis. Oxysterols are emerging as contributing factors in
atherogenesis known to involve macrophage apoptosis. This study determined the
inhibitory effect of a-asarone present in purple perilla, on
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced macrophage apoptosis, targeting against ER stress
signaling pathway.
METHODS AND RESULTS: J774A1 murine macrophages were exposed to 28 µM
7ß-hydroxycholesterol and treated with 1-10 µM a-asarone. Macrophage apoptosis
and ER stress were examined by and a-Asarone blocked
7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced DNA fragmentation and apoptosome formation.
Immunoblotting showed that the oxysterol activated the ER transmembrane resident 
kinases of IRE1a, PERK and ATF4 and triggered caspase-12 signaling cascades,
which was reversed by a-asarone. Additionally, 7ß-hydroxycholesterol activated
TRAF2-ASK1-JNK1/2 complex following the IRE1a activation, and a-asarone blunted
such IRE1a-mediated pathway. Real-time PCR and dual-luciferase reporter analyses 
revealed that a-asarone reduced transcriptional activation of ER
stress-responsive genes including XBP1 and CHOP by 7ß-hydroxycholesterol.
Finally, a-asarone disturbed oxysterol-elicited signaling of PERK and ATF4
responsible for CHOP induction.
CONCLUSION: a-Asarone blocked 7ß-hydroxycholesterol-induced macrophage apoptosis 
through allaying ER stress-specific signaling involving caspase activation and
CHOP induction. a-Asarone was an anti-atherosclerotic agent antagonizing ER
stress-mediated macrophage apoptosis by 7ß-hydroxycholesterol. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26893256  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 17;11(2):e0149183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149183.
eCollection 2016.

Single Gene Prognostic Biomarkers in Ovarian Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.

Willis S(1), Villalobos VM(2), Gevaert O(3), Abramovitz M(1), Williams C(1),
Sikic BI(3), Leyland-Jones B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Avera Cancer Institute, Sioux
Falls, SD, United States of America. (2)Division of Medical Oncology, UC Denver, 
Denver, CO, United States of America. (3)Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
United States of America.

PURPOSE: To discover novel prognostic biomarkers in ovarian serous carcinomas.
METHODS: A meta-analysis of all single genes probes in the TCGA and HAS ovarian
cohorts was performed to identify possible biomarkers using Cox regression as a
continuous variable for overall survival. Genes were ranked by p-value using
Stouffer's method and selected for statistical significance with a false
discovery rate (FDR) <.05 using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.
RESULTS: Twelve genes with high mRNA expression were prognostic of poor outcome
with an FDR <.05 (AXL, APC, RAB11FIP5, C19orf2, CYBRD1, PINK1, LRRN3, AQP1, DES, 
XRCC4, BCHE, and ASAP3). Twenty genes with low mRNA expression were prognostic of
poor outcome with an FDR <.05 (LRIG1, SLC33A1, NUCB2, POLD3, ESR2, GOLPH3, XBP1, 
PAXIP1, CYB561, POLA2, CDH1, GMNN, SLC37A4, FAM174B, AGR2, SDR39U1, MAGT1, GJB1, 
SDF2L1, and C9orf82).
CONCLUSION: A meta-analysis of all single genes identified thirty-two candidate
biomarkers for their possible role in ovarian serous carcinoma. These genes can
provide insight into the drivers or regulators of ovarian cancer and should be
evaluated in future studies. Genes with high expression indicating poor outcome
are possible therapeutic targets with known antagonists or inhibitors.
Additionally, the genes could be combined into a prognostic multi-gene signature 
and tested in future ovarian cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4757072
PMID: 26886260  [PubMed - in process]


24. Biosens Bioelectron. 2016 Jun 15;80:418-25. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2016.02.003. Epub
2016 Feb 3.

Aptamer selection by direct microfluidic recovery and surface plasmon resonance
evaluation.

Dausse E(1), Barré A(2), Aimé A(1), Groppi A(2), Rico A(3), Ainali C(3), Salgado 
G(1), Palau W(1), Daguerre E(4), Nikolski M(2), Toulmé JJ(1), Di Primo C(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bordeaux, Laboratoire ARNA, Bordeaux F-33000, France; INSERM
U1212-CNRS UMR 5320, IECB, Pessac F-33600, France. (2)University of Bordeaux,
CBiB-LaBRI, Bordeaux F-33000, France. (3)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Saint Aubin
F-91190, France. (4)Novaptech, Bordeaux F-33000, France. (5)University of
Bordeaux, Laboratoire ARNA, Bordeaux F-33000, France; INSERM U1212-CNRS UMR 5320,
IECB, Pessac F-33600, France. Electronic address: carmelo.diprimo@inserm.fr.

A surface plasmon resonance (SPR)-based SELEX approach has been used to raise RNA
aptamers against a structured RNA, derived from XBP1 pre-mRNA, that folds as two 
contiguous hairpins. Thanks to the design of the internal microfluidic cartridge 
of the instrument, the selection was performed during the dissociation phase of
the SPR analysis by recovering the aptamer candidates directly from the target
immobilized onto the sensor chip surface. The evaluation of the pools was
performed by SPR, simultaneously, during the association phase, each time the
amplified and transcribed candidates were injected over the immobilized target.
SPR coupled with SELEX from the first to the last round allowed identifying RNA
aptamers that formed highly stable loop-loop complexes (KD equal to 8nM) with the
hairpin located on the 5' side of the target. High throughput sequencing of two
key rounds confirmed the evolution observed by SPR and also revealed the
selection of hairpins displaying a loop not fully complementary to the loop of
its target. These candidates were selected mainly because they bound 79 times
faster to the target than those having a complementary loop. SELEX coupled with
SPR is expected to speed up the selection process because selection and
evaluation are performed simultaneously.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26874109  [PubMed - in process]


25. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2016 Feb 9;5:5. doi: 10.1186/s40164-016-0034-5. eCollection
2015.

Deregulated expression of the HSP40 family members Auxilin-1 and -2 is indicative
of proteostasis imbalance and predicts patient outcome in Ph(+) leukemia.

Vieri M(1), Geng H(2), Patterson JB(3), Panse J(1), Wilop S(1), Samali A(4),
Chevet E(5), Kharabi Masouleh B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143 USA. (3)MannKind Corporation, Valencia, CA USA. (4)Apoptosis 
Research Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland ; Department of 
Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. (5)INSERM ERL440, 
Oncogenesis, Stress and Signaling, Université Rennes 1, Rennes, France ; Centre
de Lutte Contre Le Cancer Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Proteostasis is defined by the orchestrated control of anabolic and
catabolic protein pathways. Disruption of proteostasis results in cell stress and
adaptation to proteostasis imbalance is mediated by adaptive pathways such as the
Heat Shock Response (including heat-shock proteins) or the unfolded protein
response (UPR). The BCR-ABL1 kinase (Philadelphia chromosome) is the hallmark of 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and defines a historically poor subset in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph(+) ALL). We previously demonstrated the importance of 
the UPR and particularly of the IRE1/XBP1 signaling axis in Ph(+) ALL, while
others demonstrated the therapeutic relevance of HSP70 in ALL. In this regard,
HSP70 is regulated by smaller HSP40 s, whose function is so far poorly
characterized.
RESULTS: Herein, we characterize the expression of HSP40 s in Ph(+) ALL and CML. 
We show that these genes are not regulated in a pan-class manner and identify a
homologous gene pair, namely Auxilin-1 (DNAJC6) and Auxilin-2 (GAK) with a unique
expression profile. Overexpression of Auxilin-2, the ubiquitously expressed
homologue of Auxilin-1 correlated with superior clinical outcome in ALL and was
tightly linked to both IRE1 RNase and BCR-ABL1 kinase activities.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that HSP40 gens are uniquely regulated and
provide a rationale for further studies between BCR-ABL1/IRE1-based therapies in 
combination with HSP40 inhibitors, thus opening potentially novel therapeutic
avenues.

PMCID: PMC4746784
PMID: 26862466  [PubMed]


26. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 16;14(6):1382-94. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.028. Epub 2016
Feb 4.

Regulation of Memory Formation by the Transcription Factor XBP1.

Martínez G(1), Vidal RL(2), Mardones P(1), Serrano FG(3), Ardiles AO(4), Wirth
C(5), Valdés P(1), Thielen P(5), Schneider BL(6), Kerr B(7), Valdés JL(8),
Palacios AG(4), Inestrosa NC(3), Glimcher LH(9), Hetz C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile; Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Center for Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of
Chile, Santiago, Chile; Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism,
Santiago, Chile. (2)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile; Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and
Metabolism, Santiago, Chile; Neurounion Biomedical Foundation, CENPAR, Santiago, 
Chile. (3)Center of Aging and Regeneration (CARE), Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University
of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (4)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de
Valparaíso, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Valparaíso, Valparaiso, Chile.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (7)Centro de Estudios
Científicos, Valdivia, Chile. (8)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile; Programa Disciplinario de
Fisiología y Biofísica, I.C.B.M., Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile. (9)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: lglimche@med.cornell.edu. (10)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile; Program of 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Center for
Molecular Studies of the Cell, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile; Center for
Geroscience, Brain Health and Metabolism, Santiago, Chile; Department of
Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: chetz@med.uchile.cl.

Contextual memory formation relies on the induction of new genes in the
hippocampus. A polymorphism in the promoter of the transcription factor XBP1 was 
identified as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease and bipolar disorders. XBP1
is a major regulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), mediating adaptation
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Using a phenotypic screen, we uncovered an 
unexpected function of XBP1 in cognition and behavior. Mice lacking XBP1 in the
nervous system showed specific impairment of contextual memory formation and
long-term potentiation (LTP), whereas neuronal XBP1s overexpression improved
performance in memory tasks. Gene expression analysis revealed that XBP1
regulates a group of memory-related genes, highlighting brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a key component in memory consolidation.
Overexpression of BDNF in the hippocampus reversed the XBP1-deficient phenotype. 
Our study revealed an unanticipated function of XBP1 in cognitive processes that 
is apparently unrelated to its role in ER stress.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26854229  [PubMed - in process]


27. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Apr;36(4):655-62. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.307087. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Aminoacyl-Transfer RNA Synthetase Deficiency Promotes Angiogenesis via the
Unfolded Protein Response Pathway.

Castranova D(1), Davis AE(1), Lo BD(1), Miller MF(1), Paukstelis PJ(1), Swift
MR(1), Pham VN(1), Torres-Vázquez J(1), Bell K(1), Shaw KM(1), Kamei M(1),
Weinstein BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Program in Genomics of Differentiation, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (D.C., 
A.E.D., B.D.L., M.F.M., M.R.S., V.N.P., J.T.-V., K.B., K.M.S., M.K., B.M.W.); and
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Computer, Mathematical, and 
Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park (P.J.P.). (2)From the
Program in Genomics of Differentiation, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD (D.C., A.E.D.,
B.D.L., M.F.M., M.R.S., V.N.P., J.T.-V., K.B., K.M.S., M.K., B.M.W.); and
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Computer, Mathematical, and 
Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park (P.J.P.). bw96w@nih.gov.

OBJECTIVE: Understanding the mechanisms regulating normal and pathological
angiogenesis is of great scientific and clinical interest. In this report, we
show that mutations in 2 different aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases, threonyl
tRNA synthetase (tars(y58)) or isoleucyl tRNA synthetase (iars(y68)), lead to
similar increased branching angiogenesis in developing zebrafish.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: The unfolded protein response pathway is activated by
aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetase deficiencies, and we show that unfolded protein
response genes atf4, atf6, and xbp1, as well as the key proangiogenic ligand
vascular endothelial growth factor (vegfaa), are all upregulated in tars(y58) and
iars(y68) mutants. Finally, we show that the protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic 
reticulum kinase-activating transcription factor 4 arm of the unfolded protein
response pathway is necessary for both the elevated vegfaa levels and increased
angiogenesis observed in tars(y58) mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that endoplasmic reticulum stress acts as a
proangiogenic signal via unfolded protein response pathway-dependent upregulation
of vegfaa.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4808418 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26821951  [PubMed - in process]


28. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;27(3):119-22. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2016.01.001.
Epub 2016 Jan 20.

XBP1: A Pivotal Transcriptional Regulator of Glucose and Lipid Metabolism.

Piperi C(1), Adamopoulos C(1), Papavassiliou AG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece. (2)Department of Biological
Chemistry, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11527 
Athens, Greece. Electronic address: papavas@med.uoa.gr.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a major, well-conserved component of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) that is crucial for glucose homeostasis and lipid
metabolism. Metabolic dysfunction has been associated with XBP1 transcriptional
activity. Recently, compounds selectively targeting the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway have
emerged as a potential approach for treatment of metabolic diseases.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26803729  [PubMed - in process]


29. Reprod Sci. 2016 Jan 21. pii: 1933719115625846. [Epub ahead of print]

The Nrf2 Activator Vinylsulfone Reduces High Glucose-Induced Neural Tube Defects 
by Suppressing Cellular Stress and Apoptosis.

Dong D(1), Reece EA(2), Yang P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Nashville, TN,
USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Nashville, 
TN, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Sciences, Nashville, TN, USA Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA 
pyang@upi.umaryland.edu.

The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling pathway is one
of the primary pathways responsible for the cellular defense system against
oxidative stress. Oxidative stress-induced apoptosis is a causal event in
diabetic embryopathy. Thus, the Nrf2 pathway may play an important role in the
induction of diabetic embryopathy. In the present study, we investigated the
potentially protective effect of the Nrf2 activator, vinylsulfone, on high
glucose-induced cellular stress, apoptosis, and neural tube defects (NTDs).
Embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5) whole mouse embryos were cultured in normal (5 mmol/L)
or high (16.7 mmol/L) glucose conditions, with or without vinylsulfone. At a
concentration of 10 µmol/L, vinylsulfone had an inhibitory effect on high
glucose-induced NTD formation, but it was not significant. At a concentration of 
20 µmol/L, vinylsulfone significantly reduced high glucose-induced NTDs. In
addition, 20 µmol/L vinylsulfone abrogated the high glucose-induced oxidative
stress markers lipid hydroperoxide (LPO), 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), and
nitrotyrosine-modified proteins. The high glucose-induced endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress biomarkers were also suppressed by 20 µmol/L vinylsulfone through the
inhibition of phosphorylated protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK), inositol
requiring protein 1a (IRE1a), eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a),
upregulated C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), binding immunoglobulin protein
(BiP), and x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) messenger RNA splicing. Furthermore, 20
µmol/L vinylsulfone abolished caspase 3 and caspase 8 cleavage, markers of
apoptosis, in embryos cultured under high glucose conditions. The Nrf2 activator,
vinylsulfone, is protective against high glucose-induced cellular stress, caspase
activation, and subsequent NTD formation. Our data suggest that vinylsulfone
supplementation is a potential therapy for diabetes-associated neurodevelopmental
defects.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26802109  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Biomed Pharmacother. 2016 Feb;77:108-13. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.12.010. Epub 
2015 Dec 29.

The molecular mechanisms of XBP-1 gene silencing on IRE1a-TRAF2-ASK1-JNK pathways
in oral squamous cell carcinoma under endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Chen H(1), Yang H(2), Pan L(2), Wang W(2), Liu X(3), Ren X(2), Liu Y(2), Liu
W(2), Zhang Y(2), Jiang L(3), Li K(3), Zhang B(4), Wang LX(5).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Maxillofacial Head-Neck Key Laboratory of Medical Biology, and Central
Laboratory of Liaocheng People's Hospital, Shandong 252000, China; Department of 
Pharmacy, Liaocheng University, Shandong 252000, China. (2)Oral Maxillofacial
Head-Neck Key Laboratory of Medical Biology, and Central Laboratory of Liaocheng 
People's Hospital, Shandong 252000, China. (3)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Liaocheng People's Hospital, Shandong 252000, China.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Liaocheng People's Hospital,
Shandong 252000, China. Electronic address: Bin_zhanglc@yahoo.com.cn. (5)School
of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW 2650,
Australia. Electronic address: lwang@csu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Proteasome inhibitor Carbobenzoxy-Leu-Leu-leucinal (MG132) induces
the unfolded protein response (UPR) in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a key UPR component that regulates endoplasmic
reticulum stress (ER) homeostasis. This study was aimed to investigate the
activation of IRE1a-TRAF2-ASK1-JNK pathway by silencing the XBP1 expression in an
OSCC cell line.
METHODS: The XBP1 specific short hairpin RNA (shRNA) plasmid vector was
constructed and then transfected into the Tca-8113 cells. The effect of XBP-1
gene silencing on IRE1a-TRAF2-ASK1-JNK pathway under MG132 induced endoplasmic
reticulum stress in Tca-8113 were investigated by real-time RT-PCR or western
blot. Cell apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: XBP1 expression was reduced in transfected groups and MG132 groups.
shRNA-XBP1 induces IRE1a-TRAF2-ASK1 signaling activation to activate
pro-apoptotic ASK1-JNK signaling. Moreover, combined shRNA-XBP1 with MG132
further enhanced downregulated XBP1 expression and upregulated activation of
ASK1-JNK signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Silencing XBP1 expression under MG132 induced ER stress block the
XBP1 survival pathway and synergism with MG132 to promote Tca8113 cell apoptosis.
These findings provide a therapeutic option in oral squamous cell carcinoma by
inhibition of proteasome and XBP1 splicing.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26796273  [PubMed - in process]


31. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 18;291(12):6146-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.685750. Epub 2016
Jan 20.

Transcriptional Regulation of X-Box-binding Protein One (XBP1) by Hepatocyte
Nuclear Factor 4a (HNF4<U+0391>) Is Vital to Beta-cell Function.

Moore BD(1), Jin RU(1), Lo H(1), Jung M(1), Wang H(2), Battle MA(3), Wollheim
CB(4), Urano F(5), Mills JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine, Pathology &
Immunology, and Developmental Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
63110. (2)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Center
Basel, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Grenzacherstrasse 124, CH-4070 Basel,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226. (4)Lund University Diabetes
Center, Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes & Endocrinology, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö 20502, Sweden, Department of Cell
Physiology and Metabolism, Université de Genève, University Medical Centre, 1 rue
Michel-Servet, Geneva 4 1211, Switzerland, and. (5)Division of Endocrinology,
Departments of Medicine, Metabolism, and Lipid Research, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110. (6)From the Division of
Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine, Pathology & Immunology, and
Developmental Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
jmills@wustl.edu.

The transcription factor, X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1), controls the
development and maintenance of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in multiple
secretory cell lineages. We show here that Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4a (HNF4a)
directly induces XBP1 expression. Mutations in HNF4a cause Mature-Onset Diabetes 
of the Young I (MODYI), a subset of diabetes characterized by diminished GSIS. In
mouse models, cell lines, and ex vivo islets, using dominant negative and human- 
disease-allele point mutants or knock-out and knockdown models, we show that
disruption of HNF4a caused decreased expression of XBP1 and reduced cellular ER
networks. GSIS depends on ER Ca(2+) signaling; we show that diminished XBP1
and/or HNF4a in ß-cells led to impaired ER Ca(2+) homeostasis. Restoring XBP1
expression was sufficient to completely rescue GSIS in HNF4a- deficient ß-cells. 
Our findings uncover a transcriptional relationship between HNF4a and Xbp1 with
potentially broader implications about MODYI and the importance of transcription 
factor signaling in the regulation of secretion.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26792861  [PubMed - in process]


32. Life Sci. 2016 Feb 1;146:148-53. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 Jan
12.

Natural osmolytes alleviate GRP78 and ATF-4 levels: Corroboration for potential
modulators of unfolded protein response.

Hazari YM(1), Habib M(1), Bashir S(1), Bashir A(1), Hilal N(1), Irfan S(1), Haq
EU(1), Fazili KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar 190006, Jammu and
Kashmir, India. (2)Department of Biotechnology, University of Kashmir, Srinagar
190006, Jammu and Kashmir, India. Electronic address:
fazili@kashmiruniversity.ac.in.

AIMS: Osmolytes are small organic molecules which play a significant role in
maintaining functional homeostasis of proteins under extreme hostile stresses.
Any imbalance to cell homeostasis leads to Endoplasmic Reticulum stress
(ER-stress) to which a set of cellular responses both at transcriptional and
translational level are initialed for restoration of cellular homeostasis called 
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). In the present study we evaluated the role of
Sarcosine, Betaine, Hydroxyectoine and Ectoine as potential modulators of UPR.
ER-stress was induced by Tunicamycin, a prototypic experimental ER-stress
inducer.
MAIN METHODS: The endogenous cellular levels of UPR markers Glucose-Regulated
Protein 78 (GRP78) and Activating Transcription Factor-4 (ATF-4) were evaluated
in presence and absence of these osmolytes after inducing UPR with tunicamycin.
As a prelude to this, IC50 values of these osmolytes were determined by using
cell viability assays like MTT and Trypan Blue exclusion assay.
KEY FINDINGS: We found that these osmolytes in a dose-dependent manner increased 
the rate of restoration of homeostasis as was evident by the decreased endogenous
levels of GRP78 and ATF-4.
SIGNIFICANCE: These natural osmolytes can thus be useful in therapeutic
intervention to mitigate the pathophysiological state resulting from ER-stress.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26792058  [PubMed - in process]


33. Chembiochem. 2016 Jan 21. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201500485. [Epub ahead of print]

A covalent cysteine-targeting kinase inhibitor of Ire1 permits allosteric control
of endoribonuclease activity.

Jansen G(1), Golizeh M(2), Martel-Lorion C(3), Dejgaard K(4), Shiao TC(5),
Mancuso J(6), Tsantrizos YS(7), Roy R(8), Sebag M(9), Sleno L(10), Thomas DY(11),
Waller DD(12).

Author information: 
(1)gregor.jansen@mcgill.ca. (2)makan.golizeh@yahoo.ca.
(3)chloe.martellorion@gmail.com. (4)kurt.dejgaard@mcgill.ca.
(5)chichi_shiao@hotmail.com. (6)john.mancuso@nuchemtherapeutics.com.
(7)youla.tsantrizos@mcgill.ca. (8)roy.rene@uqam.ca. (9)michael.sebag@mcgill.ca.
(10)sleno.lekha@uqam.ca. (11)david.thomas@mcgill.ca. (12)Department of Medicine, 
McGill Univeristy, Montreal, QC, CANADA. daniel.waller@mail.mcgill.ca.

The unfolded protein response initiated by the Ire1 transmembrane
kinase/ribonuclease has been implicated in a variety of diseases. Ire1 with its
unique position in the UPR is an ideal candidate for the development of
therapies, however, the isolation of specific kinase inhibitors is challenging.
Recently, the development of covalent inhibitors has gained great momentum due to
the irreversible deactivation of the target. We identify and determine the
mechanism of action of the Ire1-inhibitory compound UPRM8. Mass spectrometry
reveals that UPRM8 inhibition occurs via covalent adduct formation at a conserved
cysteine at the regulatory DFG+2 position in the Ire1 kinase activation loop.
Mutational analysis of the target cysteine residue identified both
UPRM8-resistant and catalytically-inactive Ire1 mutants. We describe a novel
covalent inhibition mechanism of UPRM8 that can serve as an entry point for the
rational design and optimization of inhibitors of human Ire1.

© 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26792008  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 29;470(1):75-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.119. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Activation of IRE1a-XBP1 pathway induces cell proliferation and invasion in
colorectal carcinoma.

Jin C(1), Jin Z(2), Chen NZ(3), Lu M(1), Liu CB(1), Hu WL(1), Zheng CG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Coloproctology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China. (2)Department of Coloproctology,
Wenzhou Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Wenzhou 
325000, PR China. (3)Department of Medicine, The Chinese Medicine Hospital of
Wenzhou, Wenzhou 325000, PR China. (4)Department of Coloproctology, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325000, PR China.
Electronic address: zhengchenguo80@163.com.

Cell proliferation and tumor metastasis are considered as the main reasons for
death in colorectal carcinoma (CRC). IRE1a-XBP1 pathway is the most conserved UPR
pathways, which are activated during ER stress caused by the accumulation of
unfolded or misfolded protein in the lumen of ER. Here, we demonstrated the
critical role of IRE1a-XBP1 pathway and underlying molecular mechanism in cell
proliferation and tumor metastasis in CRC. By the use of tissue microarray
analysis of samples from 119 patients with CRC, IRE1a was determined to be an
independent predictor of overall survival as higher expression of IRE1a in CRC
patients showed lower survival rates (p = 0.0041). RNA interference and ectopic
expression of IRE1a were applied to determine the molecular effects of IRE1a in
CRC cells. The silencing of IRE1a inhibited the proliferation and blocked the
invasion of CRC cells in vitro, while ectopic expression of IRE1a in turn
promoted cell proliferation and invasion. IRE1a-XBP1 pathway regulated the
mitosis of CRC cells through the directly binding of XBP1s to Cyclin D1 promoter 
to activate Cyclin D1 expression. Our results reveal that IRE1a-XBP1 pathway
plays an important role in tumor progression and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and IRE1a could be employed as a novel prognostic marker and a 
promising therapeutic target for CRC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26742428  [PubMed - in process]


35. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2016 Jan 7. pii:
/j/hmbci.ahead-of-print/hmbci-2015-0033/hmbci-2015-0033.xml. doi:
10.1515/hmbci-2015-0033. [Epub ahead of print]

Ingestion of a natural mineral-rich water in an animal model of metabolic
syndrome: effects in insulin signalling and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Pereira CD, Passos E, Severo M, Vitó I, Wen X, Carneiro F, Gomes P, Monteiro R,
Martins MJ.

BACKGROUND: High-fructose and/or low-mineral diets are relevant in metabolic
syndrome (MS) development. Insulin resistance (IR) represents a central mechanism
in MS development. Glucocorticoid signalling dysfunction and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and oxidative stresses strongly contribute to IR and associate
with MS. We have described that natural mineral-rich water ingestion delays
fructose-induced MS development, modulates fructose effects on the redox state
and glucocorticoid signalling and increases sirtuin 1 expression. Here, we
investigated mineral-rich water ingestion effects on insulin signalling and ER
homeostasis of fructose-fed rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats had free access to
standard-chow diet and different drinking solutions (8 weeks): tap water (CONT), 
10%-fructose/tap water (FRUCT) or 10%-fructose/mineral-rich water (FRUCTMIN).
Hepatic and adipose (visceral, VAT) insulin signalling and hepatic ER homeostasis
(Western blot or PCR) as well as hepatic lipid accumulation were evaluated.
RESULTS: Hepatic p-IRS1Ser307/IRS1 (tendency), p-IRS1Ser307, total JNK and
(activated IRE1a)/(activated JNK) decreased with fructose ingestion, while p-JNK 
tended to increase; mineral-rich water ingestion, totally or partially, reverted 
all these effects. Total PERK, p-eIF2a (tendency) and total IRS1 (tendency)
decreased in both fructose-fed groups. p-ERK/ERK and total IRE1a increasing
tendencies in FRUCT became significant in FRUCTMIN (similar pattern for lipid
area). Additionally, unspliced-XBP1 increased with mineral-rich water. In VAT,
total ERK fructose-induced increase was partially prevented in FRUCTMIN.
CONCLUSIONS: Mineral-rich water modulation of fructose-induced effects on insulin
signalling and ER homeostasis matches the better metabolic profile previously
reported. Increased p-ERK/ERK, adding to decreased IRE1a activation, and
increased unspliced-XBP1 and lipid area may protect against oxidative stress and 
IR development in FRUCTMIN.

PMID: 26741353  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. J Neurosci. 2016 Jan 6;36(1):65-79. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2126-15.2016.

Smoking-Relevant Nicotine Concentration Attenuates the Unfolded Protein Response 
in Dopaminergic Neurons.

Srinivasan R(1), Henley BM(1), Henderson BJ(1), Indersmitten T(1), Cohen BN(1),
Kim CH(1), McKinney S(1), Deshpande P(1), Xiao C(1), Lester HA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125. (2)Division of Biology and Biological
Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125
lester@caltech.edu.

Retrospective epidemiological studies show an inverse correlation between
susceptibility to Parkinson's disease and a person's history of tobacco use.
Animal model studies suggest nicotine as a neuroprotective agent and nicotinic
acetylcholine (ACh) receptors (nAChRs) as targets for neuroprotection, but the
underlying neuroprotective mechanism(s) are unknown. We cultured mouse ventral
midbrain neurons for 3 weeks. Ten to 20% of neurons were dopaminergic (DA),
revealed by tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity. We evoked mild
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress with tunicamycin (Tu), producing modest
increases in the level of nuclear ATF6, phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation
factor 2a, nuclear XBP1, and the downstream proapoptotic effector nuclear C/EBP
homologous protein. We incubated cultures for 2 weeks with 200 nm nicotine, the
approximate steady-state concentration between cigarette smoking or vaping, or
during nicotine patch use. Nicotine incubation suppressed Tu-induced ER stress
and the unfolded protein response (UPR). Study of mice with fluorescent nAChR
subunits showed that the cultured TH+ neurons displayed a4, a6, and ß3 nAChR
subunit expression and ACh-evoked currents. Gene expression profile in cultures
from TH-eGFP mice showed that the TH+ neurons also express several other genes
associated with DA release. Nicotine also upregulated ACh-induced currents in DA 
neurons by ~2.5-fold. Thus, nicotine, at a concentration too low to activate an
appreciable fraction of plasma membrane nAChRs, induces two sequelae of
pharmacological chaperoning in the ER: UPR suppression and nAChR upregulation.
Therefore, one mechanism of neuroprotection by nicotine is pharmacological
chaperoning, leading to UPR suppression. Measuring this pathway may help in
assessing neuroprotection.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Parkinson's disease (PD) cannot
yet be cured or prevented. However, many retrospective epidemiological studies
reveal that PD is diagnosed less frequently in tobacco users. Existing programs
attempting to develop nicotinic drugs that might exert this apparent
neuroprotective effect are asking whether agonists, antagonists, partial
agonists, or channel blockers show the most promise. The underlying logic
resembles the previous development of varenicline for smoking cessation. We
studied whether, and how, nicotine produces neuroprotective effects in cultured
dopaminergic neurons, an experimentally tractable, mechanistically revealing
neuronal system. We show that nicotine, operating via nicotinic receptors, does
protect these neurons against endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, the
mechanism is probably "inside-out": pharmacological chaperoning in the
endoplasmic reticulum. This cellular-level insight could help to guide
neuroprotective strategies.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/360065-15$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4701966 [Available on 2016-07-06]
PMID: 26740650  [PubMed - in process]


37. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2016 Jan 4. pii: nlv011. [Epub ahead of print]

Limited Unfolded Protein Response and Inflammation in Neuroserpinopathy.

López-González I(1), Pérez-Mediavilla A(1), Zamarbide M(1), Carmona M(1),
Torrejón Escribano B(1), Glatzel M(1), Galliciotti G(1), Ferrer I(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institut de Neuropatologia, IDIBELL-Hospital Universitari de
Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat (ILG, MC, IF), Barcelona, Spain; Cell and
Molecular Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Neurosciences Division, Center for
Applied Medical Research (CIMA), Department of Biochemistry and Genetics (APM,
MZ), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; IdiSNA, Navarre Institute for Health
Research (APM, MZ), Pamplona, Spain; Unitat de Biologia, Centres Cientifics i
Tecnològics, Universitat de Barcelona (BTE), Spain; Institute of Neuropathology, 
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (MG, GG), Hamburg, Germany;
Universitat de Barcelona, Hospitalet de Llobregat (IF), Barcelona, Spain;
CIBERNED (Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas) (IF), Spain. (2)From the Institut de Neuropatologia,
IDIBELL-Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat (ILG, MC,
IF), Barcelona, Spain; Cell and Molecular Neuropharmacology Laboratory,
Neurosciences Division, Center for Applied Medical Research (CIMA), Department of
Biochemistry and Genetics (APM, MZ), University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain;
IdiSNA, Navarre Institute for Health Research (APM, MZ), Pamplona, Spain; Unitat 
de Biologia, Centres Cientifics i Tecnològics, Universitat de Barcelona (BTE),
Spain; Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
(MG, GG), Hamburg, Germany; Universitat de Barcelona, Hospitalet de Llobregat
(IF), Barcelona, Spain; CIBERNED (Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas) (IF), Spain. 8082ifa@gmail.com.

Familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies (FENIB) is a rare
disease characterized by the deposition of multiple intracytoplasmic neuronal
inclusions that contain mutated neuroserpin. Tg-Syracuse (Tg-Syr) mice express
Ser49Pro mutated neuroserpin and develop clinical and neuropathological features 
of human FENIB. We used 8-, 34-, 45- and 80-week-old Tg-Syr mice to characterize 
neuroinflammation and the unfolded protein response (UPR) in a neurodegenerative 
disease in which abnormal protein aggregates accumulate within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). There were scattered neuroserpin inclusions in Tg-Syr mice at 8
weeks of age; the numbers of neurons involved and the amount of neuroserpin per
neuron increased with age throughout the CNS to 80 weeks of age; no similar
inclusions were found in wild type (Tg-WT) mice at any age. Increases in numbers 
of astrocytes and microglia occurred at advanced disease stages. Among 22 markers
in 80-week-old Tg-Syr mice, only II1b and II10rb mRNAs in the somatosensory
cortex and CxCl10 and Il10rb mRNAs in the olfactory bulb were upregulated when
compared with Tg-WT mice indicating a limited relationship between neuroserpin
inclusions and inflammatory responses. The changes were accompanied by a
transient increase in expression of Xbp1 spliced at 45 weeks and increased ERdJ4 
mRNAs at 80 weeks. The sequestration of UPR activators GRP78 and GRP94 in
neuroserpin inclusions might explain the limited UPR responses despite the
accumulation of neuroserpin in the ER in this FENIB mouse model.

© 2016 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26733586  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphatase 2A Inhibition Affects Endoplasmic Reticulum and Mitochondria
Homeostasis Via Cytoskeletal Alterations in Brain Endothelial Cells.

Plácido AI(1,)(2), Pereira CM(3,)(4), Correira SC(1,)(5), Carvalho C(1,)(5),
Oliveira CR(1,)(2), Moreira PI(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
3004-504, Portugal. (2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
3000-548, Portugal. (3)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University
of Coimbra, Coimbra, 3004-504, Portugal. cpereira@cnc.cj.uc.pt. (4)Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 3000-548, Portugal.
cpereira@cnc.cj.uc.pt. (5)Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (6)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology,
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 3004-504, Portugal. venta@ci.uc.pt. (7)Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 3000-548, Portugal. venta@ci.uc.pt.

The loss of endothelial cells (ECs) homeostasis is a trigger for cerebrovascular 
dysfunction that is a common event in several neurodegenerative disorders such as
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The present work addressed the role of phosphatase 2A
(PP2A) in cytoskeleton rearrangement, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis,
ER-mitochondria communication and mitochondrial dynamics in brain ECs. For this
purpose, rat brain endothelial (RBE4) cells were exposed to okadaic acid, a
well-known inhibitor of PP2A activity. An increase in the levels of tau
phosphorylated on Ser396 and Thr181 residues was observed upon PP2A inhibition,
concomitantly with the rearrangement of microtubules and actin cytoskeleton.
Under these conditions, an increase in the levels of ER stress markers, namely
GRP78, XBP1, p-eIF2a(Ser51), and ERO1a, was observed. Moreover, PP2A inhibition
upregulated the Sigma-1 receptor, an ER chaperone located at the ER-mitochondria 
interface, and enhanced inter-organelle Ca(2+) transfer, culminating in
mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload and activation of mitochondria-dependent apoptosis.
The inhibition of PP2A activity also promoted an alteration of the structural and
spatial mitochondria network due to upregulation of mitochondrial fission (Drp1
and Fis1) and fusion (Mfn1, Mfn2 and OPA1) proteins, suggesting detrimental
changes in mitochondrial dynamics. In accordance with our in vitro observations, 
brain vessels from 3xTg-AD mice showed a significant decrease in PP2A protein
levels accompanied by an increase in tau phosphorylated on Ser396 and GRP78
protein levels. Collectively, these results suggest that the loss of
cerebrovascular homeostasis that occurs in AD might be a downstream event of the 
compromised activity and/or expression of PP2A, which is observed in the brain of
individuals affected with this devastating neurodegenerative disorder.

PMID: 26732598  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2015;38(5):398-402. doi: 10.2177/jsci.38.398.

The importance of B cell-T cell interaction in autoimmune diseases.

Iwata S(1), Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health.

  B cells play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. In
addition, B cells require interaction with helper CD4+ T cells to become
activated. We assessed change of gene regulatory network that controls B cell
differentiation after stimulation with BCR cross-linking, sCD40L, Toll-like
Receptor (TLR) and cytokines such as IL-4/IL-21 in vitro. We found that
combination with BCR, CD40 and TLR9 or IL-4/IL-21 signal via tyrosine kinases
such as Syk/Btk/JAK caused robust gene expression of AICDA, BCL6, XBP1 and IgG
production. We found that levels of Syk/Btk phosphorylation in B cells were
preferentially higher in RA and SLE patients compared to healthy subjects. RA
patients with higher p-Syk levels were significantly correlated to strongly
positive for anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs). Treatment with
abatacept significantly reduced the levels of p-Syk in RA peripheral blood B
cells, and also reduced the proportion of follicular helper T (Tfh) cells. We
highlight tyrosine kinase such as Syk/Btk/JAK as potential targets for inhibiting
B cell-T cell interactions in autoimmune diseases such as RA and SLE. We also
state recent evidence of these drugs.

PMID: 26725861  [PubMed - in process]


40. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Dec 21;21(47):13225-39. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i47.13225.

Hepatitis B and C virus-induced hepatitis: Apoptosis, autophagy, and unfolded
protein response.

Yeganeh B(1), Rezaei Moghadam A(1), Alizadeh J(1), Wiechec E(1), Alavian SM(1),
Hashemi M(1), Geramizadeh B(1), Samali A(1), Bagheri Lankarani K(1), Post M(1),
Peymani P(1), Coombs KM(1), Ghavami S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Behzad Yeganeh, Martin Post, Department of Physiology and Experimental
Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, University of Toronto,
Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada.

AIM: To investigate the co-incidence of apoptosis, autophagy, and unfolded
protein response (UPR) in hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) infected hepatocytes.
METHODS: We performed immunofluorescence confocal microscopy on 10 liver biopsies
from HBV and HCV patients and tissue microarrays of HBV positive liver samples.
We used specific antibodies for LC3ß, cleaved caspase-3, BIP (GRP78), and XBP1 to
detect autophagy, apoptosis and UPR, respectively. Anti-HCV NS3 and anti-HBs
antibodies were also used to confirm infection. We performed triple blind
counting of events to determine the co-incidence of autophagy (LC3ß punctuate),
apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3), and unfolded protein response (GRP78) with HBV and
HCV infection in hepatocytes. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 
software for Windows (Version 16 SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, United States). P-values 
< 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were
performed with Mann-Whitney test to compare incidence rates for autophagy,
apoptosis, and UPR in HBV- and HCV-infected cells and adjacent non-infected
cells.
RESULTS: Our results showed that infection of hepatocytes with either HBV and HCV
induces significant increase (P < 0.001) in apoptosis (cleavage of caspase-3),
autophagy (LC3ß punctate), and UPR (increase in GRP78 expression) in the HCV- and
HBV-infected cells, as compared to non-infected cells of the same biopsy
sections. Our tissue microarray immunohistochemical expression analysis of LC3ß
in HBV(Neg) and HBV(Pos) revealed that majority of HBV-infected hepatocytes
display strong positive staining for LC3ß. Interestingly, although XBP splicing
in HBV-infected cells was significantly higher (P < 0.05), our analyses show a
slight increase of XBP splicing was in HCV-infected cells (P > 0.05).
Furthermore, our evaluation of patients with HBV and HCV infection based on stage
and grade of the liver diseases revealed no correlation between these
pathological findings and induction of apoptosis, autophagy, and UPR.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that HCV and HBV infection
activates apoptosis, autophagy and UPR, but slightly differently by each virus.
Further studies are warranted to elucidate the interconnections between these
pathways in relation to pathology of HCV and HBV in the liver tissue.

PMCID: PMC4679754
PMID: 26715805  [PubMed - in process]


41. Neurosci Lett. 2016 Jan 26;612:199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.12.031. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

Unfolded protein response in hypothalamic cultures of wild-type and
ATF6a-knockout mice.

Lu W(1), Hagiwara D(2), Morishita Y(3), Tochiya M(1), Azuma Y(1), Suga H(1), Goto
M(1), Banno R(1), Sugimura Y(1), Oyadomari S(4), Mori K(5), Arima H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. (2)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes,
Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. Electronic
address: d-hagiwara@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. 
Electronic address: yoshi214@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (4)Institute for Genome
Research, University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. (5)Department of
Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan. 
(6)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. Electronic address:
arima105@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Recent studies suggest that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the hypothalamus
could affect systemic homeostatic regulation in areas such as energy and water
balance. Activating transcription factor 6a (ATF6a) is an ER stress transducer
which increases the expression of ER chaperones and ER-associated degradation
(ERAD) components under ER stress. In the present study, we examined the
regulation of the unfolding protein response (UPR) in mouse hypothalamic cultures
of wild-type (WT) and ATF6a(-/-) mice. Thapsigargin (TG), an ER stressor,
significantly increased the mRNA expression of immunoglobulin heavy chain binding
protein (BiP), spliced X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and ERAD components, in
hypothalamic cultures of WT mice with the same threshold (0.1µM) and similar time
courses. On the other hand, TG-induced upregulation of BiP and CHOP as well as
most ERAD-related genes, but not spliced XBP1 or ATF4, was attenuated in
ATF6a(-/-) mice compared with WT mice. Our data suggest that all the UPR arms are
activated similarly in the mouse hypothalamus under ER stress conditions, where
ATF6a regulates the expression of ER chaperones, CHOP, and ERAD components.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26708632  [PubMed - in process]


42. Amino Acids. 2016 Apr;48(4):1013-21. doi: 10.1007/s00726-015-2149-0. Epub 2015
Dec 26.

Leucine restores murine hepatic triglyceride accumulation induced by a
low-protein diet by suppressing autophagy and excessive endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Yokota S(1,)(2), Ando M(1), Aoyama S(1), Nakamura K(1), Shibata S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, 162-8480, Japan. (2)Consolidated Research 
Institute for Advanced Science and Medical Care, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Physiology and Pharmacology, School of Advanced Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, 162-8480, Japan. shibatas@waseda.jp.

Although it is known that a low-protein diet induces hepatic triglyceride (TG)
accumulation in both rodents and humans, little is known about the underlying
mechanism. In the present study, we modeled hepatic TG accumulation by inducing
dietary protein deficiency in mice and aimed to determine whether certain amino
acids could prevent low-protein diet-induced TG accumulation in the mouse liver. 
Mice fed a diet consisting of 3 % casein (3C diet) for 7 days showed hepatic TG
accumulation with up-regulation of TG synthesis for the Acc gene and
down-regulation of TG-rich lipoprotein secretion from hepatocytes for Mttp genes.
Supplementing the 3 % casein diet with essential amino acids, branched-chain
amino acids, or the single amino acid leucine rescued hepatic TG accumulation. In
the livers of mice fed the 3 % casein diet, we observed a decrease in the levels 
of the autophagy substrate p62, an increase in the expression levels of the
autophagy marker LC3-II, and an increase in the splicing of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress-dependent Xbp1 gene. Leucine supplementation to the 3 %
casein diet did not affect genes related to lipid metabolism, but inhibited the
decrease in p62, the increase in LC3-II, and the increase in Xbp1 splicing levels
in the liver. Our results suggest that ER stress responses and activated
autophagy play critical roles in low-protein diet-induced hepatic TG accumulation
in mice, and that leucine suppresses these two major protein degradation systems.
This study contributes to understanding the mechanisms of hepatic disorders of
lipid metabolism.

PMID: 26707165  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Insect Physiol. 2016 Mar;86:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2015.12.004. Epub
2015 Dec 14.

Divergent forms of endoplasmic reticulum stress trigger a robust unfolded protein
response in honey bees.

Johnston BA(1), Hooks KB(2), McKinstry M(3), Snow JW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Barnard College, New York, NY 10027, USA; Biology
Department, The City College of New York - CUNY, New York, NY 10031, USA.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; U1053
INSERM, Université de Bordeaux, France. (3)Biology Department, Barnard College,
New York, NY 10027, USA. (4)Biology Department, Barnard College, New York, NY
10027, USA. Electronic address: jsnow@barnard.edu.

Honey bee colonies in the United States have suffered from an increased rate of
die-off in recent years, stemming from a complex set of interacting stresses that
remain poorly described. While we have some understanding of the physiological
stress responses in the honey bee, our molecular understanding of honey bee
cellular stress responses is incomplete. Thus, we sought to identify and began
functional characterization of the components of the UPR in honey bees. The
IRE1-dependent splicing of the mRNA for the transcription factor Xbp1, leading to
translation of an isoform with more transactivation potential, represents the
most conserved of the UPR pathways. Honey bees and other Apoidea possess unique
features in the Xbp1 mRNA splice site, which we reasoned could have functional
consequences for the IRE1 pathway. However, we find robust induction of target
genes upon UPR stimulation. In addition, the IRE1 pathway activation, as assessed
by splicing of Xbp1 mRNA upon UPR, is conserved. By providing foundational
knowledge about the UPR in the honey bee and the relative sensitivity of this
species to divergent stresses, this work stands to improve our understanding of
the mechanistic underpinnings of honey bee health and disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26699660  [PubMed - in process]


44. Front Immunol. 2015 Dec 14;6:627. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00627. eCollection
2015.

Genome-Wide Analysis Reveals Selective Modulation of microRNAs and mRNAs by
Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor in B Cells Induced to Undergo Class-Switch DNA
Recombination and Plasma Cell Differentiation.

Shen T(1), Sanchez HN(1), Zan H(1), Casali P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas School of
Medicine, UT Health Science Center , San Antonio, TX , USA.

As we have suggested, epigenetic factors, such as microRNAs (miRNAs), can
interact with genetic programs to regulate B cell functions, thereby informing
antibody and autoantibody responses. We have shown that histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors (HDI) inhibit the differentiation events critical to the
maturation of the antibody response: class-switch DNA recombination (CSR),
somatic hypermutation (SHM), and plasma cell differentiation, by modulating
intrinsic B cell mechanisms. HDI repress the expression of AID and Blimp-1, which
are critical for CSR/SHM and plasma cell differentiation, respectively, in mouse 
and human B cells by upregulating selected miRNAs that silenced AICDA/Aicda and
PRDM1/Prdm1 mRNAs, as demonstrated by multiple qRT-PCRs (J Immunol 193:5933-5950,
2014). To further define the selectivity of HDI-mediated modulation of miRNA and 
gene expression, we performed genome-wide miRNA-Seq and mRNA-Seq analysis in B
cells stimulated by LPS plus IL-4 and treated with HDI or nil. Consistent with
what we have shown using qRT-PCR, these HDI-treated B cells displayed reduced
expression of Aicda and Prdm1, and increased expression of miR-155, miR-181b, and
miR-361, which target Aicda, and miR-23b, miR-30a, and miR-125b, which target
Prdm1. In B cells induced to undergo CSR and plasma cell differentiation, about
23% of over 22,000 mRNAs analyzed were expressed at a significantly high copy
number (more than 20 copies/cell). Only 18 (0.36%) of these highly expressed
mRNAs, including Aicda, Prdm1, and Xbp1, were downregulated by HDI by 50% or
more. Further, only 16 (0.30%) of the highly expressed mRNAs were upregulated
(more than twofold) by HDI. The selectivity of HDI-mediated modulation of gene
expression was emphasized by unchanged expression of the genes that are involved 
in regulation, targeting, or DNA repair processes of CSR, as well as unchanged
expression of the genes encoding epigenetic regulators and factors that are
important for cell signaling or apoptosis. Our findings indicate that, in B cells
induced to undergo CSR and plasma cell differentiation, HDI modulate selected
miRNAs and mRNAs, possibly as a result of HDACs existing in unique contexts of
HDAC/cofactor complexes, as occurring in B lymphocytes, particularly when in an
activated state.

PMCID: PMC4677488
PMID: 26697020  [PubMed]


45. J Periodontol. 2015 Dec 22:1-14. [Epub ahead of print]

Lipopolysaccharide Activates the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) in Human
Periodontal Ligament Fibroblasts.

Wang Y(1,)(2), Gong J(2,)(3), Zeng H(2), Liu R(2), Jin B(2), Chen L(2), Wang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of
Stomatology, Department of Periodontology, School of Stomatology, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Immunology, School of
Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Hospital of 
Hubei Armed Police Corps, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR)
has been demonstrated in periodontal diseases. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms by which the UPR is induced in periodontitis remain unclear.
In this study, we investigated the effects of Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the
induction of the UPR in human periodontal ligament fibroblasts (HPDLFs) in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HPDLFs isolated from human periodontal ligaments were
stimulated with various concentrations of Escherichia coli LPS (0.1 µg/mL, 1
µg/mL, 10 µg/mL) for the indicated time points (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 h). The mRNA
and protein levels of molecular markers associated with UPR activation, such as
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), and C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), were measured at different time points of LPS
treatment. Apoptosis of HPDLFs was assessed by Annexin V-FITC and propidium
iodide staining followed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: LPS treatment of HPDLFs increased GRP78 mRNA and protein levels in a
concentration-dependent manner. Additionally, LPS also induced the expression,
splicing, and activation of XBP1 mRNA. Moreover, LPS-induced CHOP expression was 
concentration -dependent; a lower concentration of LPS (0.1 µg/mL) had no effect 
on CHOP mRNA levels, but higher concentrations of LPS (1 µg/ml and 10 µg/mL)
markedly increased CHOP mRNA and protein expression without inducing apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that activating the toll-like receptor
(TLR)-4 signaling pathway in HPDLFs using LPS triggers the UPR in vitro,
warranting further investigation into the precise mechanisms by which pathways
promote this response under inflammatory conditions.

PMID: 26693693  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. Metabolism. 2016 Jan;65(1):7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2015.09.011. Epub 2015
Sep 18.

Reduced expression of ERp46 under diabetic conditions in ß-cells and the effect
of liraglutide.

Lampropoulou E(1), Lymperopoulou A(2), Charonis A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research,
Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Soranou Efessiou 4,
Athens 115 27, Greece. Electronic address: eugenialamprop@gmail.com. (2)Center
for Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical
Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Soranou Efessiou 4, Athens 115 27, 
Greece. Electronic address: anna_lybero@hotmail.com. (3)Center for Clinical,
Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation
of the Academy of Athens, Soranou Efessiou 4, Athens 115 27, Greece. Electronic
address: acharonis@bioacademy.gr.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is characterized by peripheral insulin resistance, 
hyperglycemia and defective insulin secretion. Insulin producing pancreatic
ß-cells are equipped with a highly developed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and thus 
are affected by ER stress under hyperglycemic conditions. We have previously
studied the influence of high glucose on cultured ß-cells in vitro. Proteomic
analysis revealed a number of proteins involved in glucose toxicity, while
further biochemical analysis identified the endoplasmic reticulum protein ERp46
as a molecule with a possible role in insulin production at the
post-translational level. In addition, the involvement of incretin hormone
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) in diabetes proposes that incretin-mimetic
compounds may be among the optimal choices in future therapeutic interventions;
therefore their effects on various aspects of the pathogenesis of diabetes
mellitus should be explored in detail. Based on the above, we examined the
possible involvement of ERp46 in insulin production and the effect of the GLP-1
analogue liraglutide on the expression of ERp46 in vitro, in ß-cells cultured
under high glucose conditions and in vivo, in the mouse db/db diabetic model,
where pronounced hyperglycemia is a key characteristic.
RESULTS: Confocal microscopy revealed areas of co-localization of ERp46 and
pro-insulin in pancreatic islets. In order to explore the possible interaction
between ERp46 and insulin immunoprecipitation was used. In extracts from cultured
ß-cells, antibodies against pro-insulin co-precipitated ERp46 and antibodies
against ERp46 co-precipitated pro-insulin, as shown by Western blotting.
Furthermore, data from a proximity ligation assay positioned these two molecules 
closer than 30nm in distance. When pancreatic ß-cells were cultured in high
glucose conditions they exhibited a decrease in ERp46 expression, while treatment
with the GLP-1 analogue liraglutide restored ERp46 levels, leading to a
significant increase of ERp46 in comparison to hyperglycemic conditions. In the
diabetic mouse model db(-)/db, ERp46 expression was reduced in pancreatic islets,
as documented by morphological and biochemical techniques. This decrease was
abolished after treatment with the GLP-1 analogue in a dose-dependent manner. In 
an attempt to understand the underlying mechanism, we examined the sequence of
the promoter of ERp46 and found consensus motifs that can be recognized by
transcription factors ATF6 and XBP1. Subsequently, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay and demonstrated that treatment of ß-TC-6 cells with
25mmol/L glucose decreases gradually the binding enrichment of ATF6 and XBP1 in
ERp46 gene promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that since ERp46 is a member of the disulfide isomerases 
family, it is likely to play a key role in insulin biosynthesis and its reduction
under high glucose conditions may be a novel contributor to the glucotoxicity of 
ß-cells. In addition, the GLP-1 analogue liraglutide seems to interfere in this
process and may exert its beneficial effects in diabetes by affecting insulin
production via restoration of ERp46 expression.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26683792  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Neurooncol. 2016 Feb;126(3):455-62. doi: 10.1007/s11060-015-2003-y. Epub 2015
Dec 17.

XBP1 silencing decreases glioma cell viability and glycolysis possibly by
inhibiting HK2 expression.

Liu Y(1), Hou X(1), Liu M(2), Yang Z(3), Bi Y(1), Zou H(4), Wu J(1), Che H(5), Li
C(1), Wang X(1), Wang K(1), Zhong C(1), Zhang J(1), Yu T(1), Bian Q(1), Chai
S(1), Liu H(1), Ai J(5), Zhao S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, People's Republic of China. (2)College
of Basic Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, People's Republic of
China. (4)Department of Pain Medicine, Cancer Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Pharmacology (State-Province Key Laboratories of
Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China), Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang Province, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of Neurosurgery,
First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang
Province, People's Republic of China. guangsz@hotmail.com.

Glioma cells rely on glycolysis to obtain energy and sustain their survival under
microenvironmental stress in vivo. The mechanisms of regulation of glycolysis in 
glioma cells are unclear. Signaling pathway mediated by the transcription factor 
X box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) is one of the most important pathways of unfolded 
protein response which is comprehensively activated in cancer cells upon the
microenvironmental stress. Here we showed that XBP1 was significantly activated
in glioma tissues in vivo. XBP1 silencing resulted in decreasing of glioma cell
viability and ATP/lactate production under hypoxia, which is possibly mediated by
inhibition of Hexokinase II (HK2)'s expression. More importantly, XBP1 silenced
glioma cells showed the decrease of tumor formation capacity. Our results
revealed that XBP1s activation was involved in glioma glycolysis regulation and
might be a potential molecular target for glioma treatment.

PMID: 26680227  [PubMed - in process]


48. FASEB J. 2016 Apr;30(4):1557-65. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-281550. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

The integrated endoplasmic reticulum stress response in Leishmania amazonensis
macrophage infection: the role of X-box binding protein 1 transcription factor.

Dias-Teixeira KL(1), Calegari-Silva TC(1), Dos Santos GR(1), Vitorino Dos Santos 
J(1), Lima C(1), Medina JM(1), Aktas BH(1), Lopes UG(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratório de Parasitologia Molecular, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas 
Filho, and Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; and Hematology
Laboratory for Translation, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)*Laboratório de
Parasitologia Molecular, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, and
Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal
do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; and Hematology Laboratory for
Translation, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA lopesu@biof.ufrj.br.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers the integrated ER-stress response
(IERSR) that ensures cellular survival of ER stress and represents a primordial
form of innate immunity. We investigated the role of IERSR duringLeishmania
amazonensisinfection. Treatment of RAW 264.7 infected macrophages with the ER
stress-inducing agent thapsigargin (TG; 1 µM) increasedL. amazonensisinfectivity 
in an IFN1-a receptor (IFNAR)-dependent manner. In Western blot assays, we showed
thatL. amazonensisactivates the inositol-requiring enzyme (IRE1)/ X-box binding
protein (XBP)-1-splicing arms of the IERSR in host cells. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we showed an increased occupancy of enhancer
and promoter sequences for theIfnbgene by XBP1 in infected RAW 264.7 cells.
Knocking down XBP1 expression by transducing RAW 264.7 cells with the short
hairpin XBP1 lentiviral vector significantly reduced the parasite proliferation
associated with impaired translocation of phosphorylated IFN regulatory
transcription factor (IRF)-3 to the nucleus and a decrease in IFN1-ß expression. 
Knocking down XBP1 expression also increased NO concentration, as determined by
Griess reaction and reduced the expression of antioxidant genes, such as heme
oxygenase (HO)-1, that protect parasites from oxidative stress. We conclude
thatL. amazonensisactivation of XBP1 plays a critical role in infection by
protecting the parasites from oxidative stress and increasing IFN1-ß
expression.-Dias-Teixeira, K. L., Calegari-Silva, T. C., Dos Santos, G. R. R. M.,
Vitorino dos Santos, J., Lima, C., Medina, J. M., Aktas, B. H., Lopes, U. G. The 
integrated endoplasmic reticulum stress response inLeishmania
amazonensismacrophage infection: the role of X-box binding protein 1
transcription factor.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26678450  [PubMed - in process]


49. Biosci Rep. 2015 Dec 16;36(1). pii: e00287. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150215.

Tubby-like protein superfamily member PLSCR3 functions as a negative regulator of
adipogenesis in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes by suppressing induction of late
differentiation stage transcription factors.

Inokawa A(1), Inuzuka T(1), Takahara T(1), Shibata H(1), Maki M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan. (2)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School 
of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan mmaki@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

PLSCR3 (phospholipid scramblase 3, Scr3) belongs to the superfamily of
membrane-associated transcription regulators named Tubby-like proteins (TULPs).
Physiological phospholipid scrambling activities of PLSCRs in vivo have been
skeptically argued, and knowledge of the biological functions of Scr3 is limited.
We investigated the expression of Scr3 during differentiation of mouse 3T3-L1
preadipocytes by Western blotting (WB) and by reverse-transcription and real-time
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). The Scr3 protein decreased during 3T3-L1
differentiation accompanied by a reduction in the mRNA level, and there was a
significant increase in the amount of Scr3 protein secreted into the culture
medium in the form of extracellular microvesicles (exosomes). On the other hand, 
Scr3 expression did not significantly decrease, and the secretion of Scr3 in 3T3 
Swiss-albino fibroblasts (a parental cell-line of 3T3-L1) was not increased by
differentiation treatment. Overexpression of human Scr3 during 3T3-L1
differentiation suppressed triacylglycerol accumulation and inhibited induction
of the mRNAs of late stage pro-adipogenic transcription factors
[CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) and peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>)] and X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). Expression of early stage
pro-adipogenic transcription factors (C/EBPß and C/EBPd) was not significantly
affected. These results suggest that Scr3 functions as a negative regulator of
adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells at a specific differentiation stage and that
decrease in the intracellular amount of Scr3 protein caused by reduction in Scr3 
mRNA expression and enhanced secretion of Scr3 protein appears to be important
for appropriate adipocyte differentiation.

© 2016 Authors.

PMCID: PMC4725246
PMID: 26677203  [PubMed - in process]


50. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 17;5:18304. doi: 10.1038/srep18304.

PERK regulated miR-424(322)-503 cluster fine-tunes activation of IRE1 and ATF6
during Unfolded Protein Response.

Gupta A(1,)(2), Hossain MM(1,)(2), Read DE(1,)(2), Hetz C(3,)(4,)(5), Samali
A(6), Gupta S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pathology, School of medicine, Clinical Science Institute,
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland. (2)Lambe Institute for
Translational Research, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland.
(3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile. (4)Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Molecular Studies of the Cell, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Chile, Santiago, Chile. (5)FONDAP Center for Geroscience, Brain Health and
Metabolism, Santiago, Chile. (6)Apoptosis Research Centre, School of Natural
Sciences, National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) responds to changes in intracellular homeostasis
through activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR can facilitate the
restoration of cellular homeostasis, via the concerted activation of three ER
stress sensors, namely IRE1, PERK and ATF6. Global approaches in several cellular
contexts have revealed that UPR regulates the expression of many miRNAs that play
an important role in the regulation of life and death decisions during UPR. Here 
we show that expression of miR-424(322)-503 cluster is downregulated during UPR. 
IRE1 inhibitor (4<U+2009>µ8C) and deficiency of XBP1 had no effect on downregulation of 
miR-424(322)-503 during UPR. Treatment of cells with CCT030312, a selective
activator of EIF2AK3/PERK signalling, leads to the downregulation of
miR-424(322)-503 expression. The repression of miR-424(322)-503 cluster during
conditions of ER stress is compromised in PERK-deficient MEFs. miR-424 regulates 
the expression of ATF6 via a miR-424 binding site in its 3' UTR and attenuates
the ATF6 transcriptional activity during UPR. Further miR-424 had no effect on
IRE1-XBP1 axis but enhanced the regulated IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD). Our
results suggest that miR-424 constitutes an obligatory fine-tuning mechanism
where PERK-mediated downregulation of miR-424(322)-503 cluster regulates optimal 
activation of IRE1 and ATF6 during conditions of ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4682135
PMID: 26674075  [PubMed - in process]


51. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2015 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovering condition specific topological pattern changes in coexpression
network: an application to HIV1 progression.

Ray S, Bandyopadhyay S.

The natural progression of HIV-1 begins with a short acute retroviral syndrome
which typically transit to chronic and clinical latency stages and subsequently
progresses to a symptomatic, life-threatening immunodeficiency disease known as
AIDS. Microarray analysis based on gene coexpression is widely used to
investigate the coregulation pattern of a group (or cluster) of genes in a
specific phenotype. Moreover, an investigation on the topological patterns across
multiple phenotypes can facilitate the understanding of stage specific infection 
pattern of HIV-1 virus. Here, we develop a novel framework to identify
topological patterns of gene coexpression network and detect changes of modular
structure across different stages of HIV progression. This is achieved by
comparing the topological and intramodular properties of HIV infection modules.
To capture the diversity in modular structure, some topological, correlation
based and eigengene based measures are utilized here. We have applied a rank
aggregation scheme to rank all the modules to provide a good agreement between
these measures. Some novel transcription factors like 'FOXO1','GATA3',
'GFI1','IRF1', 'IRF7', 'MAX', 'STAT1', 'STAT3', 'XBP1' and 'YY1' that emerge from
the modules show significant change in expression pattern over HIV progression
stages. Moreover, we have performed an eigengene based analysis to reveal the
perturbation in modular structure across three stages of HIV-1 progression.

PMID: 26661789  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Arch Virol. 2016 Mar;161(3):699-703. doi: 10.1007/s00705-015-2715-5. Epub 2015
Dec 12.

Japanese encephalitis virus induces apoptosis by the IRE1/JNK pathway of ER
stress response in BHK-21 cells.

Huang M(1), Xu A(1), Wu X(1), Zhang Y(2), Guo Y(1), Guo F(1), Pan Z(3), Kong
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioscience and Engineering, Jiangxi Agricultural University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (2)Jiangxi Province Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Virology,
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, Hubei, China.
(4)College of Bioscience and Engineering, Jiangxi Agricultural University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. lingbaok@hotmail.com.

The role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in Japanese encephalitis is largely
unknown. In this study, we found that Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) strain
SA14-14-2 regulates the expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78),
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and splicing
of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA in BHK-21 cells. SA14-14-2-induced
cytopathic effect and decrease in viability were also observed. Moreover, the
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) inhibitor 3,5-dibromosalicylaldehyde and JNK
inhibitor SP600125 increased cell viability and reduced cell apoptosis but did
not alter virus replication in SA14-14-2-infected BHK-21 cells. These results,
for the first time, demonstrate that JEV induces apoptosis by the IRE1/JNK
pathway of ER stress response.

PMID: 26660165  [PubMed - in process]


53. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 4. [Epub ahead of print]

FAM172A is a tumor suppressor in colorectal carcinoma.

Cui C(1), Ye L(1), Huang Z(1), Huang S(2), Liu H(3), Yu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510282, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology,
Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 510282, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, People's Republic of China.
haoflliu@sina.com. (4)Department of General Surgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510282, People's Republic of China.
jinlonggyu@163.com.

The present study was designed to elucidate the regulatory role of a novel
protein FAM172A in carcinogenesis of colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Investigation of
clinical samples using Western blotting showed that expression of FAM172A is
significantly lower in cancerous tissues than in adjacent tissues. Furthermore,
we constructed in vitro model for continuous overexpression and silencing of
FAM172A with a retroviral vector system. FAM172A suppressed the proliferative and
invasive potentials of LOVO cells as shown in MTT test, transwell migration
assay, wound healing assay, 3D-culture morphologic study, and xenograft
experiment. RT-PCR and Western blotting showed that FAM172A overexpression
inhibited expressions of Cyclin D1, CDK2, MMP-2, MMP-9, PERK, elF2a, ATF6, XBP1, 
and GRP78, while FAM172A silencing induced their expressions. FAM172A might
regulate ERS through PERK-elF2a, ATF6-XBP1-GRP78 signal pathway. The results
implicated that FAM172A functioned as a tumor suppressor in colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 26637224  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


54. Front Immunol. 2015 Nov 19;6:555. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00555. eCollection
2015.

Mechanisms of Microbe-Host Interaction in Crohn's Disease: Dysbiosis vs.
Pathobiont Selection.

Buttó LF(1), Schaubeck M(1), Haller D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Nutrition and Immunology, Technische Universität München ,
Freising-Weihenstephan , Germany.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a systemic chronic inflammatory condition mainly
characterized by discontinuous transmural pathology of the gastrointestinal tract
and frequent extraintestinal manifestations with intermittent episodes of
remission and relapse. Genome-wide association studies identified a number of
risk loci that, catalyzed by environmental triggers, result in the loss of
tolerance toward commensal bacteria based on dysregulated innate effector
functions and antimicrobial defense, leading to exacerbated adaptive immune
responses responsible for chronic immune-mediated tissue damage. In this review, 
we discuss the inter-related role of changes in the intestinal microbiota,
epithelial barrier integrity, and immune cell functions on the pathogenesis of
CD, describing the current approaches available to investigate the molecular
mechanisms underlying the disease. Substantial effort has been dedicated to
define disease-associated changes in the intestinal microbiota (dysbiosis) and to
link pathobionts to the etiology of inflammatory bowel diseases. A cogent
definition of dysbiosis is lacking, as well as an agreement of whether
pathobionts or complex shifts in the microbiota trigger inflammation in the host.
Among the rarely available animal models, SAMP/Yit and TNF(deltaARE) mice are the
best known displaying a transmural CD-like phenotype. New hypothesis-driven mouse
models, e.g., epithelial-specific Caspase8(-/-), ATG16L1(-/-), and XBP1(-/-)
mice, validate pathway-focused function of specific CD-associated risk genes
highlighting the role of Paneth cells in antimicrobial defense. To study the
causal role of bacteria in initiating inflammation in the host, the use of
germ-free mouse models is indispensable. Unraveling the interactions of genes,
immune cells and microbes constitute a criterion for the development of safe,
reliable, and effective treatment options for CD.

PMCID: PMC4652232
PMID: 26635787  [PubMed]


55. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 2;16(12):28635-46. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226123.

Overexpression of X-Box Binding Protein 1 (XBP1) Correlates to Poor Prognosis and
Up-Regulation of PI3K/mTOR in Human Osteosarcoma.

Yang J(1), Cheng D(2), Zhou S(3), Zhu B(4), Hu T(5), Yang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China.
jielai1990@163.com. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China.
18817314717@163.com. (3)Institute of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China.
zhoushumin168@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road, Shanghai
200233, China. zhubin.0526@163.com. (5)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road,
Shanghai 200233, China. zzuhutu@163.com. (6)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600, Yishan Road,
Shanghai 200233, China. tjyqc@163.com.

Increasing evidence demonstrates that dysregulation of XBP1 function contributes 
to tumorigenesis in some cancers. However, little is known about the role of XBP1
in the progression of osteosarcoma (OS). The expression of XBP1 in OS samples was
measured by quantitative RT-PCR and Western blotting assays. Cell cycle analysis 
and cell counting kit 8 (CCK8) assays were performed to determine the effects of 
XBP1 expression on cells growth capacity. Cell apoptosis coassay was applied to
determine cell survival. The expression of genes affected by XBP1 was examined by
quantitative RT-RCR and validated by Western blotting assays. XBP1 was
overexpressed in OS clinical samples compared with corresponding non-cancerous
tissues. Overexpression of XBP1 was significantly associated with advanced
clinical stages, high degree of malignancy and low tumor necrosis rate.
Furthermore, hypoxia activated XBP1, and silencing XBP1 significantly enhanced OS
cell apoptosis. Knock-down of XBP1 resulted in inhibition of OS growth. Most
importantly, knockdown of XBP1 led to down-regulation of PIK3R3 and mTOR. Taken
together, XBP1 is up-regulated and has a pro-tumor effect in OS with activation
of PI3K/mTOR signaling. Thus, targeting XBP1 may provide a new potential
therapeutic method for OS.

PMCID: PMC4691070
PMID: 26633383  [PubMed - in process]


56. Cell Metab. 2016 Jan 12;23(1):179-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.10.016. Epub 2015 
Nov 25.

Reduced Insulin Production Relieves Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Induces ß
Cell Proliferation.

Szabat M(1), Page MM(1), Panzhinskiy E(1), Skovsø S(1), Mojibian M(1),
Fernandez-Tajes J(2), Bruin JE(1), Bround MJ(1), Lee JT(1), Xu EE(3), Taghizadeh 
F(1), O'Dwyer S(1), van de Bunt M(2), Moon KM(4), Sinha S(5), Han J(6), Fan Y(7),
Lynn FC(3), Trucco M(7), Borchers CH(6), Foster LJ(4), Nislow C(5), Kieffer
TJ(1), Johnson JD(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Diabetes Research Group,
Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, BC V6T1Z3, Canada.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
7BN, UK. (3)Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
BC V5Z 4H4, Canada. (4)Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of British 
Columbia, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. (5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
of British Columbia, BC V6T 1Z3, Canada. (6)UVic-Genome BC Proteomics Centre,
University of Victoria, BC V8Z 7X8, Canada. (7)Institute of Cellular
Therapeutics, Allegheny Health Network, Pittsburgh, PA 15212-4772, USA.
(8)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, Diabetes Research Group,
Life Sciences Institute, University of British Columbia, BC V6T1Z3, Canada.
Electronic address: James.D.Johnson@ubc.ca.

Pancreatic ß cells are mostly post-mitotic, but it is unclear what locks them in 
this state. Perturbations including uncontrolled hyperglycemia can drive ß cells 
into more pliable states with reduced cellular insulin levels, increased ß cell
proliferation, and hormone mis-expression, but it is unknown whether reduced
insulin production itself plays a role. Here, we define the effects of ~50%
reduced insulin production in Ins1(-/-):Ins2(f/f):Pdx1Cre(ERT):mTmG mice prior to
robust hyperglycemia. Transcriptome, proteome, and network analysis revealed
alleviation of chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, indicated by reduced
Ddit3, Trib3, and Atf4 expression; reduced Xbp1 splicing; and reduced
phospho-eIF2a. This state was associated with hyper-phosphorylation of Akt, which
is negatively regulated by Trib3, and with cyclinD1 upregulation. Remarkably, ß
cell proliferation was increased 2-fold after reduced insulin production
independently of hyperglycemia. Eventually, recombined cells mis-expressed
glucagon in the hyperglycemic state. We conclude that the normally high rate of
insulin production suppresses ß cell proliferation in a cell-autonomous manner.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26626461  [PubMed - in process]


57. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Sep 8;6(11):1122-7. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00133. 
eCollection 2015.

Borrelidin Induces the Unfolded Protein Response in Oral Cancer Cells and
Chop-Dependent Apoptosis.

Sidhu A(1), Miller JR(1), Tripathi A(2), Garshott DM(1), Brownell AL(1), Chiego
DJ(3), Arevang C(2), Zeng Q(1), Jackson LC(1), Bechler SA(1), Callaghan MU(1),
Yoo GH(4), Sethi S(5), Lin HS(4), Callaghan JH(6), Tamayo-Castillo G(7), Sherman 
DH(2), Kaufman RJ(8), Fribley AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Wayne State University School
of Medicine , Detroit, Michigan 48201, United States. (2)Life Sciences Institute 
and Departments of Medicinal Chemistry, Chemistry, Microbiology & Immunology,
University of Michigan , Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States. (3)Cariology, 
Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, University of Michigan School of Dentistry 
, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States. (4)Department of Otolaryngology,
Wayne State University and Karmanos Cancer Institute , Detroit, Michigan 48201,
United States. (5)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University and Karmanos
Cancer Institute , Detroit, Michigan 48201, United States. (6)School of Business 
Administration, Oakland University , Rochester, Michigan 48309, United States.
(7)Instituto Nacional de Biodiversidad, CIPRONA-Escuela de Química, Universidad
de Costa Rica , 3100 Heredia, Costa Rica. (8)Degenerative Disease Research
Program, Center for Cancer Research, Sanford|Burnham Medical Research Institute ,
La Jolla, California 92037, United States. (9)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of 
Pediatrics, Wayne State University School of Medicine , Detroit, Michigan 48201, 
United States ; Department of Otolaryngology, Wayne State University and Karmanos
Cancer Institute , Detroit, Michigan 48201, United States ; Developmental
Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute , Detroit, Michigan
48201, United States.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most common cancer affecting the oral 
cavity, and US clinics will register about 30,000 new patients in 2015. Current
treatment modalities include chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy, which often
result in astonishing disfigurement. Cancers of the head and neck display
enhanced levels of glucose-regulated proteins and translation initiation factors 
associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein
response (UPR). Previous work demonstrated that chemically enforced UPR could
overwhelm these adaptive features and selectively kill malignant cells. The
threonyl-tRNA synthetase (ThRS) inhibitor borrelidin and two congeners were
discovered in a cell-based chemical genomic screen. Borrelidin increased XBP1
splicing and led to accumulation of phosphorylated eIF2a and UPR-associated
genes, prior to death in panel of OSCC cells. Murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
null for GCN2 and PERK were less able to accumulate UPR markers and were
resistant to borrelidin. This study demonstrates that UPR induction is a feature 
of ThRS inhibition and adds to a growing body of literature suggesting ThRS
inhibitors might selectively target cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4645248 [Available on 2016-11-12]
PMID: 26617965  [PubMed]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 8;112(49):E6790-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1508716112. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Inhibition of host cell translation elongation by Legionella pneumophila blocks
the host cell unfolded protein response.

Hempstead AD(1), Isberg RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111; Graduate Program in Molecular Microbiology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111; (2)Graduate Program in Molecular
Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111
ralph.isberg@tufts.edu.

Cells of the innate immune system recognize bacterial pathogens by detecting
common microbial patterns as well as pathogen-specific activities. One system
that responds to these stimuli is the IRE1 branch of the unfolded protein
response (UPR), a sensor of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Activation of
IRE1, in the context of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling, induces strong
proinflammatory cytokine induction. We show here that Legionella pneumophila, an 
intravacuolar pathogen that replicates in an ER-associated compartment, blocks
activation of the IRE1 pathway despite presenting pathogen products that
stimulate this response. L. pneumophila TLR ligands induced the splicing of mRNA 
encoding XBP1s, the main target of IRE1 activity. L. pneumophila was able to
inhibit both chemical and bacterial induction of XBP1 splicing via bacterial
translocated proteins that interfere with host protein translation. A strain
lacking five translocated translation elongation inhibitors was unable to block
XBP1 splicing, but this could be rescued by expression of a single such
inhibitor, consistent with limitation of the response by translation elongation
inhibitors. Chemical inhibition of translation elongation blocked pattern
recognition receptor-mediated XBP1 splicing, mimicking the effects of the
bacterial translation inhibitors. In contrast, host cell-promoted inhibition of
translation initiation in response to the pathogen was ineffective in blocking
XBP1 splicing, demonstrating the need for the elongation inhibitors for
protection from the UPR. The inhibition of host translation elongation may be a
common strategy used by pathogens to limit the innate immune response by
interfering with signaling via the UPR.

PMCID: PMC4679008
PMID: 26598709  [PubMed - in process]


59. FEBS J. 2015 Nov 20. doi: 10.1111/febs.13598. [Epub ahead of print]

Cell death induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Iurlaro R(1), Muñoz-Pinedo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death Regulation Group, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle with multiple functions. The synthesis 
of transmembrane proteins and proteins that are to be secreted occurs in this
organelle. Many conditions that impose stress on cells, including hypoxia,
starvation, infections and changes in secretory needs, challenge the folding
capacity of the cell and promote endoplasmic reticulum stress. The cellular
response involves the activation of sensors that transduce signaling cascades
with the aim of restoring homeostasis. This is known as the unfolded protein
response, which also intersects with the integrated stress response that reduces 
protein synthesis through inactivation of the initiation factor eIF2a. Central to
the unfolded protein response are the sensors PERK, IRE1 and ATF6, as well as
other signaling nodes such as c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK) and the downstream 
transcription factors XBP1, ATF4 and CHOP. These proteins aim to restore
homeostasis, but they can also induce cell death, which has been shown to occur
by necroptosis and, more commonly, through the regulation of Bcl-2 family
proteins (Bim, Noxa and Puma) that leads to mitochondrial apoptosis. In addition,
endoplasmic reticulum stress and proteotoxic stress have been shown to induce
TRAIL receptors and activation of caspase-8. Endoplasmic reticulum stress is a
common feature in the pathology of numerous diseases because it plays a role in
neurodegeneration, stroke, cancer, metabolic diseases and inflammation.
Understanding how cells react to endoplasmic reticulum stress can accelerate
discovery of drugs against these diseases.

© 2015 FEBS.

PMID: 26587781  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. Neurotoxicology. 2016 Mar;53:334-42. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 
Nov 14.

Activation of ER stress and apoptosis by a- and ß-zearalenol in HCT116 cells,
protective role of Quercetin.

Ben Salem I(1), Prola A(2), Boussabbeh M(1), Guilbert A(2), Bacha H(3), Lemaire
C(4), Abid-Essefi S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds, Faculty of
Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia; Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, 
Carthage University, Tunisia. (2)INSERM UMR-S 769, LabEx LERMIT,
Châtenay-Malabry, France. (3)Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible
Compounds, Faculty of Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia. Electronic
address: hassen.bacha@fmdm.rnu.tn. (4)INSERM UMR-S 769, LabEx LERMIT,
Châtenay-Malabry, France; Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Châtenay-Malabry, France; Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines,
Versailles, France. (5)Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible
Compounds, Faculty of Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia. Electronic
address: salwaabid@yahoo.fr.

Zearalenone (ZEN) and its metabolites are found in many food products and are
known to induce many toxic effects. The major ZEN metabolites are a-zearalenol
(a-ZOL) and ß-zearalenol (ß-ZOL). The mechanisms by which they mediate their
cytotoxic effects are not well known and seem to differ depending on the type of 
cells. We investigated the possible underlying mechanism in a-ZOL and
ß-ZOL-induced toxicity in HCT116 cells. We showed that cell treatment with
a-ZOL/ß-ZOL generated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activated the
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) as evidenced by XBP1 mRNA splicing and
up-regulation of GADD34, GRP78, ATF4 and CHOP. Apoptosis was triggered by ZEN
metabolites-induced ER stress, and executed through a mitochondria-dependent
pathway, characterized by a loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), 
a downstream generation of O2(-) and caspase 3 activation. Cellular deficiency
of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Bak protected cells against a/ß-ZOL-induced
toxicity. However, treatment with a-ZOL or ß-ZOL combined with Quercetin (QUER), 
a common dietary flavonoid with well-known antioxidant activity, significantly
reduced damage induced by a and ß-ZOL in all tested markers. We concluded that
QUER protects against the cellular toxicity of a and ß-ZOL.×.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26584763  [PubMed - in process]


61. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 25;468(4):793-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.034. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Protective effect of carbenoxolone on ER stress-induced cell death in
hypothalamic neurons.

Kim J(1), Jung EJ(2), Moon SS(3), Seo M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Research, Dongguk University College of Medicine,
Gyeongju, South Korea; Department of Anatomy, Graduate School of Dongguk
University College of Medicine, Gyeongju, South Korea. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, Dongguk University College of Medicine, Gyeongju, South Korea.
(3)Institute of Medical Research, Dongguk University College of Medicine,
Gyeongju, South Korea; Department of Internal Medicine, Dongguk University
College of Medicine, Gyeongju, South Korea. Electronic address:
drmoonss@hanmail.net. (4)Institute of Medical Research, Dongguk University
College of Medicine, Gyeongju, South Korea. Electronic address:
nansmc@hanmail.net.

Hypothalamic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is known to be increased in
obesity. Induction of ER stress on hypothalamic neurons has been reported to
cause hypothalamic neuronal apoptosis and malfunction of energy balance, leading 
to obesity. Carbenoxolone is an 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
(11ß-HSD1) inhibitor that converts inactive glucocorticoid into an active form.
In addition to its metabolic effect via enzyme inhibitory action, carbenoxolone
has shown anti-apoptotic activity in several studies. In this study, the direct
effects of carbenoxolone on ER stress and cell death in hypothalamic neurons were
investigated. Carbenoxolone attenuated tunicamycin induced ER stress-mediated
molecules such as spliced XBP1, ATF4, ATF6, CHOP, and ROS generation. In vivo
study also revealed that carbenoxolone decreased tunicamycin-induced ER stress in
the hypothalamus. In conclusion, the results of this study show that
carbenoxolone has protective effects against tunicamycin induced-ER stress and
apoptosis in hypothalamic neurons, suggesting its direct protective effects
against obesity. Further study is warranted to clarify the effects of
carbenoxolone on hypothalamic regulation of energy balance in obesity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26577412  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Transl Med. 2015 Nov 16;13:363. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0725-4.

MicroRNA regulation of unfolded protein response transcription factor XBP1 in the
progression of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure in vivo.

Duan Q(1), Chen C(2), Yang L(3), Li N(4), Gong W(5), Li S(6), Wang DW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
duanquanlu@163.com. (2)Department of Internal Medicine and the Institute of
Hypertension, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030, Wuhan, People's Republic of 
China. chenchen@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Internal Medicine and the
Institute of Hypertension, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030, Wuhan,
People's Republic of China. wayl0808@126.com. (4)Department of Internal Medicine 
and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030,
Wuhan, People's Republic of China. nili23@126.com. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue,
430030, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. gongwei19860826@163.com. (6)Department
of Internal Medicine and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang
Avenue, 430030, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. shengli410@126.com.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
1095 Jiefang Avenue, 430030, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
dwwang@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: XBP1 is a key transcription factor of the unfolded protein response
in mammalian cells, which is involved in several cardiovascular pathological
progression including cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial infarction, but its
expression trend, function and upstream regulate mechanism in the development of 
heart failure are unclear. In the present study, therefore, the potential role of
miRNAs in the regulation of XBP1 expression in heart failure was examined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: First, western blots showed that cardiac expression of ER
stress marker XBP1 were induced in the early adaptive phase, but decreased in the
maladaptive phase in hypertrophic and failing heart, while there was no obvious
change of upstream ATF6 and IRE1 activity in this progression. Interestingly, we 
further found that XBP1 and its downstream target VEGF were attenuated by miR-30*
and miR-214 in cardiomyocyte. Moreover, we found that miR-30* was significantly
reduced in the early phase of cardiac hypertrophic animal model and in human
failing hearts, while both miR-214 and miR-30* were increased in the maladaptive 
diseased heart, thereby contribute to impairment of cardiac XBP1 and VEGF
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide the first clear link between miRNAs and direct
regulation of XBP1 in heart failure and reveal that miR-214 and miR-30*
synergistically regulates cardiac VEGF expression and angiogenesis by targeting
XBP1 in the progression from adaptive hypertrophy to heart failure.

PMCID: PMC4647486
PMID: 26572862  [PubMed - in process]


63. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 16;5:16580. doi: 10.1038/srep16580.

IRE1a-XBP1 is a novel branch in the transcriptional regulation of Ucp1 in brown
adipocytes.

Asada R(1), Kanemoto S(1), Matsuhisa K(1), Hino K(1), Cui M(1), Cui X(1), Kaneko 
M(1), Imaizumi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedical &Health Science, Hiroshima
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) not only resolves endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress, but also regulates cellular physiological functions. In this study, we
first linked the UPR to the physiological roles of brown adipose tissue (BAT).
BAT is one of the tissues that control energy homeostasis in the body. Brown
adipocytes are able to dissipate energy in the form of heat owing to their
mitochondrial protein, uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1). We found that one of the UPR 
branches, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, was activated during the transcriptional
induction of Ucp1. Inhibiting the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway reduced the induction of
Ucp1 expression. However, the activation of the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway by ER stress
never upregulated Ucp1. On the other hand, the activation of protein kinase A
(PKA) induced Ucp1 transcription through the activation of IRE1a-XBP1. The
inhibition of PKA abrogated the activation of IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, while the
inhibition of a p38 mitogen activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), which is one of 
the downstream molecules of PKA, never suppressed the activation of IRE1a-XBP1
pathway. These data indicate that PKA-dependent IRE1a-XBP1 activation is crucial 
for the transcriptional induction of Ucp1 in brown adipocytes, and they
demonstrate a novel, ER stress -independent role of the UPR during thermogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4644985
PMID: 26568450  [PubMed - in process]


64. Endocrinology. 2016 Jan;157(1):417-28. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1676. Epub 2015 Nov
12.

XBP1 Regulates the Biosynthetic Capacity of the Mammary Gland During Lactation by
Controlling Epithelial Expansion and Endoplasmic Reticulum Formation.

Davis KR(1), Giesy SL(1), Long Q(1), Krumm CS(1), Harvatine KJ(1), Boisclair
YR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science (K.R.D., S.L.G., C.S.K., Y.R.B.), Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853; Cam-Su Genome Resources and Laboratory Animal
Research Center (Q.L.), Suzhou University, Suzhou 215123, Peoples Republic of
China; and Department of Animal Science (K.J.H.), Penn State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania 16802.

Cells composing the mammary secretory compartment have evolved a high capacity to
secrete not only proteins but also triglycerides and carbohydrates. This feature 
is illustrated by the mouse, which can secrete nearly twice its own weight in
milk proteins, triglycerides and lactose over a short 20-day lactation. The
coordination of synthesis and export of products in other secretory cells is
orchestrated in part by the transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). 
To assess the role of XBP1 in mammary epithelial cells (MEC), we studied floxed
XBP1 female mice lacking (wild type; WT) or expressing the Cre recombinase under 
the control of the ovine ß-lactoglobulin promoter (<U+0394>XBP1(MEC)). Pregnant
<U+0394>XBP1(MEC) females had morphologically normal mammary development and gave birth 
to the same number of pups as WT mice. Their litters, however, suffered a weight 
gain deficit by lactation day 3 (L3)3 that grew to 80% by L14. <U+0394>XBP1(MEC) dams
had only modest changes in milk composition (-21% protein, +24% triglyceride) and
in the expression of associated genes in isolated MEC. By L5, WT glands were
fully occupied by dilated alveoli, whereas <U+0394>XBP1(MEC) glands contained fewer,
mostly unfilled alveoli and retained a prominent adipocyte population. The
smaller epithelial compartment in <U+0394>XBP1(MEC) glands was explained by lower MEC
proliferation and increased apoptosis. Finally, endoplasmic reticulum ribbons
were less abundant in <U+0394>XBP1(MEC) at pregnancy day 18 and failed to increase in
abundance by L5. Collectively, these results show that XBP1 is required for MEC
population expansion during lactation and its ability to develop an elaborate
endoplasmic reticulum compartment.

PMID: 26562262  [PubMed - in process]


65. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 15;422:31-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.11.005. Epub 
2015 Nov 6.

Anticipatory activation of the unfolded protein response by epidermal growth
factor is required for immediate early gene expression and cell proliferation.

Yu L(1), Andruska N(2), Zheng X(1), Shapiro DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA;
College of Medicine, University of Illinois, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA; University of Illinois Cancer
Center, USA; College of Medicine, University of Illinois, USA. Electronic
address: djshapir@life.illinois.edu.

The onco-protein epidermal growth factor (EGF) initiates a cascade that includes 
activation of the ERK and AKT signaling pathways and alters gene expression. We
describe a new action of EGF-EGF receptor (EGFR), rapid anticipatory activation
of the endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor, the unfolded protein response (UPR). 
Within 2 min, EGF elicits EGFR dependent activation of phospholipase C <U+03B3> (PLC<U+03B3>), 
producing inositol triphosphate (IP3), which binds to IP3 receptor (IP3R),
opening the endoplasmic reticulum IP3R Ca(2+) channels, resulting in increased
intracellular Ca(2+). This calcium release leads to transient and moderate
activation of the IRE1a and ATF6a arms of the UPR, resulting in induction of BiP 
chaperone. Knockdown or inhibition of EGFR, PLC<U+03B3> or IP3R blocks the increase in
intracellular Ca(2+). While blocking the increase in intracellular Ca(2+) by
locking the IP3R calcium channel with 2-APB had no effect on EGF activation of
the ERK or AKT signaling pathways, it abolished the rapid EGF-mediated induction 
and repression of gene expression. Knockdown of ATF6a or XBP1, which regulate
UPR-induced chaperone production, inhibited EGF stimulated cell proliferation.
Supporting biological relevance, increased levels of EGF receptor during tumor
progression were correlated with increased expression of the UPR gene signature. 
Anticipatory activation of the UPR is a new role for EGF. Since UPR activation
occurs in <2 min, it is an initial cell response when EGF binds EGFR.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26551735  [PubMed - in process]


66. J Cell Sci. 2016 Feb 15;129(4):717-28. doi: 10.1242/jcs.169623. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

ATF6a, a Runx2-activable transcription factor, is a new regulator of chondrocyte 
hypertrophy.

Guo F(1), Han X(2), Wu Z(2), Cheng Z(2), Hu Q(2), Zhao Y(3), Wang Y(4), Liu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China guo.fengjin@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (3)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012, China.
(4)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016 China. (5)Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Cell Biology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, 10016 NY, USA.

Our previous research has shown that the spliced isoform of XBP1 (XBP1s) is an
important downstream mediator of BMP2 and is involved in BMP2-stimulated
chondrocyte differentiation. Herein, we report that ATF6 and its cleaved
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain (known as ATF6a) are expressed in growth plate
chondrocytes. We find that these proteins are differentially induced during
BMP2-triggered chondrocyte differentiation. This differential expression probably
results from the activation of the ATF6 gene by Runx2 and its repression by the
Sox6 transcription factor. Runx2 and Sox6 act through their respective binding
elements on the ATF6 gene. When overexpressed, ATF6 and ATF6a intensify
chondrogenesis; our studies demonstrate that under the stimulation of ATF6 and
ATF6a, chondrocytes tend to be hypertrophied and mineralized, a process leading
to bone formation. By contrast, lowering expression of ATF6a by use of its
specific siRNA suppresses chondrocyte differentiation. Moreover, ATF6a interacts 
with Runx2 and augments the Runx2-mediated hypertrophication of chondrocytes.
Importantly, overexpression and knockdown of ATF6a during the chondrocyte
hypertrophy process also led to altered expressions of IHH and PTHrP (also known 
as PTHLH). Taken together, these findings indicate that ATF6a favorably controls 
chondrogenesis and bone formation (1) by acting as a co-factor of Runx2 and
enhancing Runx2-incited hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation, and (2) by
affecting IHH and PTHrP signaling.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26527399  [PubMed - in process]


67. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Feb;1860(2):402-11. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2015.10.025.
Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Oxytocin opposes effects of bacterial endotoxin on ER-stress signaling in Caco2BB
gut cells.

Klein BY(1), Tamir H(2), Hirschberg DL(3), Ludwig RJ(4), Glickstein SB(5), Myers 
MM(6), Welch MG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: 
bk2348@columbia.edu. (2)Division of Molecular Imaging and Neuropathology, New
York State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
NY 10032, USA; Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. (3)Center for Infection and
Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. (5)EB Sciences,
Oakland, CA 94611, USA. (6)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, New York State
Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY 10032, USA. (7)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, New York State
Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Department of Pathology & Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address: mgw13@columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: The neuropeptide neuromodulator and hormone oxytocin (OT) activates
signaling pathways involved in mRNA translation in response to endoplasmic
reticulum stress and reduces inflammation associated with experimental colitis in
rats. The anti-inflammatory effects of OT may serve a vital role in the
development, survival and function of newborn-type enterocytes during microbial
gut colonization, which coincides with the milk suckling period when OT receptor 
expression peaks in the gut. Furthermore, mice deficient in the OT receptor have 
abnormal gut structure and function, underscoring OT's developmental importance.
METHODS: We tested the effect of OT upon lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced markers
of the inflammatory response in Caco2BB gut cells in vitro using automated
immunocapillary electrophoresis.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that OT suppresses NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and presumably
inflammatory transcriptional programs, which are unleashed by LPS through the
modulation of I<U+03BA>B. We show that OT counteracts LPS-elicited silencing of the
unfolded protein response, a pathway limiting endoplasmic reticulum stress by
suppressing protein translation. OT selectively activates dsRNA-activated kinase 
(PKR), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP), A20 
(TNFa-induced protein 3) and inositol requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a). OT inactivates
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) without significant
activation of protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK).
CONCLUSIONS: Mild, preemptive stimulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress sensors
by OT may precondition newborn enterocytes to resist apoptosis associated with
inflammation and may support their differentiation and development by modulating 
cellular metabolism.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: OT may protect enterocytes and other cell types, such as
neurons, from stress-related complications during postnatal development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26520666  [PubMed - in process]


68. Cell Signal. 2016 Jan;28(1):34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.10.013. Epub 2015 
Oct 26.

CCN1/CYR61 overexpression in hepatic stellate cells induces ER stress-related
apoptosis.

Borkham-Kamphorst E(1), Steffen BT(2), Van de Leur E(2), Haas U(2), Tihaa L(2),
Friedman SL(3), Weiskirchen R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and
Clinical Chemistry, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany. Electronic address:
ekamphorst@ukaachen.de. (2)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental
Gene Therapy and Clinical Chemistry, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany.
(3)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NY, USA. 
(4)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and
Clinical Chemistry, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany. Electronic address:
rweiskirchen@ukaachen.de.

CCN1/CYR61 is a matricellular protein of the CCN family, comprising six secreted 
proteins specifically associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM). CCN1 acts
as an enhancer of the cutaneous wound healing process by preventing hypertrophic 
scar formation through induction of myofibroblast senescence. In liver fibrosis, 
the senescent cells are primarily derived from activated hepatic stellate cells
(HSC) that initially proliferate in response to liver damage and are the major
source of ECM. We investigate here the possible use of CCN1 as a senescence
inducer to attenuate liver fibrogenesis by means of adenoviral gene transfer in
primary HSC, myofibroblasts (MFB) and immortalized HSC lines (i.e. LX-2,
CFSC-2G). Infection with Ad5-CMV-CCN1 induced large amounts of CCN1 protein in
all these cells, resulting in an overload of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
in a compensatory unfolded protein response (UPR). The UPR resulted in
upregulation of ER chaperones including BIP/Grp78, Grp94 and led to an activation
of IRE1a as evidenced by spliced XBP1 mRNA with IRE1a-induced JNK
phosphorylation. The UPR arm PERK and eIF2a was phosphorylated, combined with
significant CHOP upregulation. Ad5-CMV-CCN1 induced HSC apoptosis that was
evident by proteolytic cleavage of caspase-12, caspase-9 and the executor
caspase-3 and positive TUNEL stain. Remarkably, Ad5-CMV-CCN1 effectively reduced 
collagen type I mRNA expression and protein. We conclude that the matricellular
protein CCN1 gene transfer induces HSC apoptosis through ER stress and UPR.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26515130  [PubMed - in process]


69. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 1;6(38):40692-703. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5827.

A novel chemical, STF-083010, reverses tamoxifen-related drug resistance in
breast cancer by inhibiting IRE1/XBP1.

Ming J(1), Ruan S(1), Wang M(1), Ye D(1), Fan N(2), Meng Q(3), Tian B(4,)(5),
Huang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Luoyang Central Hospital, Zhengzhou 
University, Luoyang, Henan 471009, P.R. China. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Peking Union Medical College hospital, Beijing 100730, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, P.R. China. (5)Key Laboratory of
Neurological Diseases of Hubei Province, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, P.R. China.

Recent studies show that the unfolded protein response (UPR) within the
endoplasmic reticulum is correlated with breast cancer drug resistance. In
particular, human X-box binding protein-1(XBP1), a transcription factor which
participates in UPR stress signaling, is reported to correlate with poor clinical
responsiveness to tamoxifen. In this study, we develop a tamoxifen-resistant
MCF-7 cell line by treating the cell line with low concentration of tamoxifen,
and we find that XBP1 is indeed up-regulated at both the mRNA and protein levels 
compared to normal MCF-7 cells. STF-083010, a novel inhibitor which specifically 
blocks the XBP1 splicing, reestablishes tamoxifen sensitivity to resistant MCF-7 
cells. Moreover, co-treatment with STF-083010 and tamoxifen can significantly
delay breast cancer progression in a xenograft mammary tumor model. We next
investigate the expression of XBP1s in over 170 breast cancer patients' samples
and the results demonstrate that XBP1s expression level is highly correlated with
overall survival in the ER+ subgroup, but not in the ER- subgroup, suggesting a
potential therapeutic application of XBP1 inhibitors in ER+breast cancer
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4747362
PMID: 26517687  [PubMed - in process]


70. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 28;35(43):14557-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0012-15.2015.

The Unfolded Protein Response and Cholesterol Biosynthesis Link Luman/CREB3 to
Regenerative Axon Growth in Sensory Neurons.

Ying Z(1), Zhai R(2), McLean NA(2), Johnston JM(2), Misra V(3), Verge VM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience Research
Center, and Department of Veterinary Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5, Canada. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience Research Center, and. (3)Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5,
Canada. (4)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Cameco MS Neuroscience
Research Center, and valerie.verge@usask.ca.

We recently revealed that the axon endoplasmic reticulum resident transcription
factor Luman/CREB3 (herein called Luman) serves as a unique retrograde injury
signal in regulation of the intrinsic elongating form of sensory axon
regeneration. Here, evidence supports that Luman contributes to axonal
regeneration through regulation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and
cholesterol biosynthesis in adult rat sensory neurons. One day sciatic nerve
crush injury triggered a robust increase in UPR-associated mRNA and protein
expression in both neuronal cell bodies and the injured axons. Knockdown of Luman
expression in 1 d injury-conditioned neurons by siRNA attenuated axonal outgrowth
to 48% of control injured neurons and was concomitant with reduced UPR- and
cholesterol biosynthesis-associated gene expression. UPR PCR-array analysis
coupled with qRT-PCR identified and confirmed that four transcripts involved in
cholesterol regulation were downregulated >2-fold by the Luman siRNA treatment of
the injury-conditioned neurons. Further, the Luman siRNA-attenuated outgrowth
could be significantly rescued by either cholesterol supplementation or 2 ng/ml
of the UPR inducer tunicamycin, an amount determined to elevate the depressed UPR
gene expression to a level equivalent of that observed with crush injury. Using
these approaches, outgrowth increased significantly to 74% or 69% that of
injury-conditioned controls, respectively. The identification of Luman as a
regulator of the injury-induced UPR and cholesterol at levels that benefit the
intrinsic ability of axotomized adult rat sensory neurons to undergo axonal
regeneration reveals new therapeutic targets to bolster nerve repair.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514557-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 26511246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):30142-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.676239. Epub
2015 Oct 26.

Hepatic Xbp1 Gene Deletion Promotes Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-induced Liver
Injury and Apoptosis.

Olivares S(1), Henkel AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611.
(2)From the Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611
a-henkel2@northwestern.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress activates the unfolded protein response (UPR), 
a highly conserved signaling cascade that functions to alleviate stress and
promote cell survival. If, however, the cell is unable to adapt and restore
homeostasis, then the UPR activates pathways that promote apoptotic cell death.
The molecular mechanisms governing the critical transition from adaptation and
survival to initiation of apoptosis remain poorly understood. We aim to determine
the role of hepatic Xbp1, a key mediator of the UPR, in controlling the adaptive 
response to ER stress in the liver. Liver-specific Xbp1 knockout mice (Xbp1(LKO))
and Xbp1(fl/fl) control mice were subjected to varying levels and durations of
pharmacologic ER stress. Xbp1(LKO) and Xbp1(fl/fl) mice showed robust and equal
activation of the UPR acutely after induction of ER stress. By 24 h, Xbp1(fl/fl) 
controls showed complete resolution of UPR activation and no liver injury,
indicating successful adaptation to the stress. Conversely, Xbp1(LKO) mice showed
ongoing UPR activation associated with progressive liver injury, apoptosis, and, 
ultimately, fibrosis by day 7 after induction of ER stress. These data indicate
that hepatic XBP1 controls the adaptive response of the UPR and is critical to
restoring homeostasis in the liver in response to ER stress.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706001 [Available on 2016-12-11]
PMID: 26504083  [PubMed - in process]


72. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 18;290(51):30366-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.664169. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) Stress Induces Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) Expression via the
PI3K-Akt-GSK3ß Signaling Pathway and Promotes Hepatocellular Injury.

Koga T(1), Suico MA(2), Shimasaki S(2), Watanabe E(2), Kai Y(2), Koyama K(2),
Omachi K(2), Morino-Koga S(2), Sato T(2), Shuto T(2), Mori K(3), Hino S(4), Nakao
M(4), Kai H(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto, 862-0973, Japan,
Department of Biochemistry, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan. (2)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, 
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi,
Kumamoto, 862-0973, Japan. (3)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of
Science, Kyoto University, Oiwake-machi, Kitashirakawa-oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto,
606-8502, Japan, and. (4)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku,
Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. (5)From the Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi,
Kumamoto, 862-0973, Japan, hirokai@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), an NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase, plays crucial roles
in various biological processes including longevity, stress response, and cell
survival. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is caused by dysfunction of ER
homeostasis and exacerbates various diseases including diabetes, fatty liver, and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Although several reports have shown that
SIRT1 negatively regulates ER stress and ER stress-induced responses in vitro and
in vivo, the effect of ER stress on SIRT1 is less explored. In this study, we
showed that ER stress induced SIRT1 expression in vitro and in vivo. We further
determined the molecular mechanisms of how ER stress induces SIRT1 expression.
Surprisingly, the conventional ER stress-activated transcription factors XBP1,
ATF4, and ATF6 seem to be dispensable for SIRT1 induction. Based on inhibitor
screening experiments with SIRT1 promoter, we found that the PI3K-Akt-GSK3ß
signaling pathway is required for SIRT1 induction by ER stress. Moreover, we
showed that pharmacological inhibition of SIRT1 by EX527 inhibited the ER
stress-induced cellular death in vitro and severe hepatocellular injury in vivo, 
indicating a detrimental role of SIRT1 in ER stress-induced damage responses.
Collectively, these data suggest that SIRT1 expression is up-regulated by ER
stress and contributes to ER stress-induced cellular damage.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4683260 [Available on 2016-12-18]
PMID: 26499802  [PubMed - in process]


73. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Dec;36(6):1519-28. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2387. Epub 2015 Oct
22.

Bushen Zhuangjin decoction inhibits TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis mediated by 
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Lin P(1), Weng X(1), Liu F(2), Ma Y(1), Chen H(2), Shao X(2), Zheng W(3), Liu
X(2), Ye H(1), Li X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China. (2)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China.
(3)Fujian Key Laboratory of Integrative Medicine on Geriatrics, Fujian University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China.

Chondrocyte apoptosis triggered by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress plays a
vital role in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA). Bushen Zhuangjin decoction
(BZD) has been widely used in the treatment of OA. However, the cellular and
molecular mechanisms responsible for the inhibitory effects of BZD on chondrocyte
apoptosis remain to be elucidated. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of BZD on ER stress-induced chondrocyte apoptosis using a chondrocyte in 
vitro model of OA. Chondrocytes obtained from the articular cartilage of the knee
joints of Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were detected by immunohistochemical staining 
for type <U+2161> collagen. The ER stress-mediated apoptosis of tunicamycin
(TM)-stimulated chondrocytes was detected using 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA). We 
found that 4-PBA inhibited TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis, which confirmed the 
successful induction of chondrocyte apoptosis. BZD enhanced the viability of the 
TM-stimulated chondrocytes in a dose- and time-dependent manner, as shown by MTT 
assay. The apoptotic rate and the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) 
of the TM-stimulated chondrocytes treated with BZD was markedly decreased
compared with those of chondrocytes not treated with BZD, as shown by
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining, Annexin V-FITC binding assay and
JC-1 assay. To further elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the inhibitory
effects of BZD on TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis mediated by ER stress, the
mRNA and protein expression levels of binding immunoglobulin protein (Bip), X-box
binding protein 1 (Xbp1), activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4),
C/EBP-homologous protein (Chop), caspase-9, caspase-3, B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) 
and Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) were measured by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot analysis. In
the TM-stimulated chondrocytes treated with BZD, the mRNA and protein expression 
levels of Bip, Atf4, Chop, caspase-9, caspase-3 and Bax were significantly
decreased, whereas the mRNA and protein expression levels of Xbp1 and Bcl-2 were 
significantly increased compared with the TM-stimulated chondrocytes not treated 
with BZD. Additionally, all our findings demonstrated that there was no
significant difference between the TM-stimulated chondrocytes treated with BZD
and those treated with 4-PBA. Taken together, our results indicate that BZD
inhibits TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis mediated by ER stress. Thus, BZD may be
a potential therapeutic agent for use in the treatment of OA.

PMCID: PMC4678159
PMID: 26497741  [PubMed - in process]


74. Genom Data. 2014 Oct 7;2:325-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.10.002. eCollection
2014.

Genome-wide analysis of thapsigargin-induced microRNAs and their targets in
NIH3T3 cells.

Groenendyk J(1), Fan X(2), Peng Z(2), Ilnytskyy Y(3), Kurgan L(2), Michalak M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S7, 
Canada. (2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2V4, Canada. (3)Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, Alberta T1K 3M4, Canada.

Disruption of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis is the cause of ER
stress. We performed microRNA (miRNA) analysis (deep sequencing) to search for
coping responses (including signaling pathways) induced by disrupted ER Ca(2 +)
homeostasis. Our focus was on a specific branch of UPR namely the bi-functional
protein kinase/endoribonuclease inositol-requiring element 1a (IRE1a). Activated 
IRE1a undergoes autophosphorylation and oligomerization, leading to the
activation of the endoribonuclease domain and splicing of the mRNA encoding XBP1 
specific transcription factor. This processing changes the coding reading frame, 
producing a potent transcription factor termed XBP1s. We utilized the XBP1
splicing luciferase reporter to screen for modulators of the IRE1a branch of the 
unfolded protein response (UPR). Here, we describe a detailed experimental design
and bioinformatics analysis of ER Ca(2 +) depletion (thapsigargin
treated)-induced microRNA (deep sequencing) profile. The data can be access at
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI), reference number GSE57138.

PMCID: PMC4535834
PMID: 26484121  [PubMed]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 19;36(1):108-18. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00921-15.

Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-Trisphosphate Phosphatase SKIP Links Endoplasmic
Reticulum Stress in Skeletal Muscle to Insulin Resistance.

Ijuin T(1), Hosooka T(2), Takenawa T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan tijuin@med.kobe-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kobe, Japan. (3)Division of Membrane Biology, Biosignal Research Center, Kobe
University, Kobe, Japan.

Insulin resistance is critical in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in liver and adipose tissues plays an important
role in the development of insulin resistance. Although skeletal muscle is a
primary site for insulin-dependent glucose disposal, it is unclear if ER stress
in those tissues contributes to insulin resistance. In this study, we show that
skeletal muscle kidney-enriched inositol polyphosphate phosphatase (SKIP), a PIP3
(phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate) phosphatase, links ER stress to
insulin resistance in skeletal muscle. SKIP expression was increased due to ER
stress and was higher in the skeletal muscle isolated from high-fat-diet-fed mice
and db/db mice than in that from wild-type mice. Mechanistically, ER stress
promotes activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1)-dependent expression of SKIP. These findings underscore the specific and
prominent role of SKIP in the development of insulin resistance in skeletal
muscle.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702590 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26483413  [PubMed - in process]


76. EMBO Rep. 2015 Dec;16(12):1688-98. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540955. Epub 2015 Oct
19.

A conformational RNA zipper promotes intron ejection during non-conventional XBP1
mRNA splicing.

Peschek J(1), Acosta-Alvear D(1), Mendez AS(2), Walter P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
jirka@walterlab.ucsf.edu diego.acosta-alvear@ucsf.edu peter@walterlab.ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

The kinase/endonuclease IRE1 is the most conserved signal transducer of the
unfolded protein response (UPR), an intracellular signaling network that monitors
and regulates the protein folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Upon sensing protein folding perturbations in the ER, IRE1 initiates the
unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA culminating in the production of the
transcription factor XBP1s, which expands the ER's protein folding capacity. We
show that an RNA-intrinsic conformational change causes the intron of XBP1 mRNA
to be ejected and the exons to zipper up into an extended stem, juxtaposing the
RNA ends for ligation. These conformational rearrangements are important for XBP1
mRNA splicing in vivo. The features that point to such active participation of
XBP1 mRNA in the splicing reaction are highly conserved throughout metazoan
evolution, supporting their importance in orchestrating XBP1 mRNA processing with
efficiency and fidelity.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4687415
PMID: 26483401  [PubMed - in process]


77. Phytochemistry. 2016 Jan;121:58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2015.10.002. Epub
2015 Oct 21.

Phenylpropanoid and lignan glycosides from the aerial parts of Lespedeza cuneata.

Zhou J(1), Li CJ(2), Yang JZ(2), Ma J(2), Wu LQ(2), Wang WJ(2), Zhang DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines,
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100050, People's Republic of China; Department of
Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, 
People's Republic of China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and
Function of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, People's
Republic of China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of
Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: zhangdm@imm.ac.cn.

Four phenylpropanoid glucosides (1-4) and five lignan glycosides (5-9) were
isolated from the aerial parts of Lespedeza cuneata, together with three known
lignan glycosides (10-12). Their structures were elucidated on the basis of
spectroscopic analyses, and the absolute configurations of compounds 5-9 were
determined from the CD spectra. In addition, the compounds were tested for their 
ability to activate the transcription effect on xbp1 promoter. Compounds 4, 5, 7,
9, 10, and 12 could activate the transcription of xbp1 to varying degrees, with
EC50 values ranging from 0.18 to 0.64 µM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26475664  [PubMed - in process]


78. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):G965-74. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00132.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 15.

Hepatocyte X-box binding protein 1 deficiency increases liver injury in mice fed 
a high-fat/sugar diet.

Liu X(1), Henkel AS(2), LeCuyer BE(2), Schipma MJ(3), Anderson KA(2), Green
RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and xiaoying-liu@northwestern.edu.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and. (3)Next Generation Sequencing Core:
Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois.

Fatty liver is associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the
hepatic unfolded protein response (UPR). Reduced hepatic expression of the UPR
regulator X-box binding protein 1 spliced (XBP1s) is associated with human
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and feeding mice a high-fat diet with
fructose/sucrose causes progressive, fibrosing steatohepatitis. This study
examines the role of XBP1 in nonalcoholic fatty liver injury and fatty
acid-induced cell injury. Hepatocyte-specific Xbp1-deficient (Xbp1(-/-)) mice
were fed a high-fat/sugar (HFS) diet for up to 16 wk. HFS-fed Xbp1(-/-) mice
exhibited higher serum alanine aminotransferase levels compared with Xbp1(fl/fl) 
controls. RNA sequencing and Gene Ontogeny pathway analysis of hepatic mRNA
revealed that apoptotic process, inflammatory response, and extracellular matrix 
structural constituent pathways had enhanced activation in HFS-fed Xbp1(-/-)
mice. Liver histology demonstrated enhanced injury and fibrosis but less
steatosis in the HFS-fed Xbp1(-/-) mice. Hepatic Col1a1 and Tgfß1 gene
expression, as well as Chop and phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK), were increased in
Xbp1(-/-) compared with Xbp1(fl/fl) mice after HFS feeding. In vitro, stable
XBP1-knockdown Huh7 cells (Huh7-KD) and scramble control cells (Huh7-SCR) were
generated and treated with palmitic acid (PA) for 24 h. PA-treated Huh7-KD cells 
had increased cytotoxicity measured by lactate dehydrogenase release, apoptotic
nuclei, and caspase3/7 activity assays compared with Huh7-SCR cells. CHOP and
p-JNK expression was also increased in Huh7-KD cells following PA treatment. In
conclusion, loss of XBP1 enhances injury in both in vivo and in vitro models of
fatty liver injury. We speculate that hepatic XBP1 plays an important protective 
role in pathogenesis of NASH.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4683298 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26472223  [PubMed - in process]


79. PLoS Biol. 2015 Oct 15;13(10):e1002277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002277.
eCollection 2015.

The IRE1a/XBP1s Pathway Is Essential for the Glucose Response and Protection of ß
Cells.

Hassler JR(1), Scheuner DL(2), Wang S(3), Han J(3), Kodali VK(3), Li P(3), Nguyen
J(3), George JS(4), Davis C(4), Wu SP(5), Bai Y(6), Sartor M(7), Cavalcoli J(7), 
Malhi H(4), Baudouin G(3), Zhang Y(8), Yates Iii JR(8), Itkin-Ansari P(3),
Volkmann N(3), Kaufman RJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Degenerative Diseases Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery
Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America; Department of
Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
United States of America. (2)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of
Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Lilly
Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly & Company, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis,
Indiana, United States of America. (3)Degenerative Diseases Program, Sanford
Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, California, United States
of America. (4)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (5)Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America. (6)NCIBI Department of Bioinformatics, University of Michigan 
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Department of
Biology, Indiana State University, Terre Haute, Indiana, United States of
America. (7)NCIBI Department of Bioinformatics, University of Michigan Medical
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (8)Department of Chemical 
Physiology and Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, United States of America. (9)Degenerative Diseases Program, Sanford
Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, California, United States
of America; Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America; Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United
States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2015 Oct;13(10):e1002278.

Although glucose uniquely stimulates proinsulin biosynthesis in ß cells,
surprisingly little is known of the underlying mechanism(s). Here, we demonstrate
that glucose activates the unfolded protein response transducer
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 alpha (IRE1a) to initiate X-box-binding protein 1
(Xbp1) mRNA splicing in adult primary ß cells. Using mRNA sequencing (mRNA-Seq), 
we show that unconventional Xbp1 mRNA splicing is required to increase and
decrease the expression of several hundred mRNAs encoding functions that expand
the protein secretory capacity for increased insulin production and protect from 
oxidative damage, respectively. At 2 wk after tamoxifen-mediated Ire1a deletion, 
mice develop hyperglycemia and hypoinsulinemia, due to defective ß cell function 
that was exacerbated upon feeding and glucose stimulation. Although previous
reports suggest IRE1a degrades insulin mRNAs, Ire1a deletion did not alter
insulin mRNA expression either in the presence or absence of glucose stimulation.
Instead, ß cell failure upon Ire1a deletion was primarily due to reduced
proinsulin mRNA translation primarily because of defective glucose-stimulated
induction of a dozen genes required for the signal recognition particle (SRP),
SRP receptors, the translocon, the signal peptidase complex, and over 100 other
genes with many other intracellular functions. In contrast, Ire1a deletion in ß
cells increased the expression of over 300 mRNAs encoding functions that cause
inflammation and oxidative stress, yet only a few of these accumulated during
high glucose. Antioxidant treatment significantly reduced glucose intolerance and
markers of inflammation and oxidative stress in mice with ß cell-specific Ire1a
deletion. The results demonstrate that glucose activates IRE1a-mediated Xbp1
splicing to expand the secretory capacity of the ß cell for increased proinsulin 
synthesis and to limit oxidative stress that leads to ß cell failure.

PMCID: PMC4607427
PMID: 26469762  [PubMed - in process]


80. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 12;15:679. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1707-x.

CA1 contributes to microcalcification and tumourigenesis in breast cancer.

Zheng Y(1), Xu B(1), Zhao Y(1), Gu H(1), Li C(2), Wang Y(1), Chang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center of Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong
University, Jingshi Road 16766, Jinan, Shandong, 250014, P. R. China. (2)People's
Central Hospital of Tengzhou, Tengzhou, Shandong, 277500, P. R. China. (3)Medical
Research Center of Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University, 
Jingshi Road 16766, Jinan, Shandong, 250014, P. R. China. changxt@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Although mammary microcalcification is frequently observed and has
been associated with poor survival in patients with breast cancer, the genesis of
calcification remains unclear. Carbonic anhydrase I (CA1) has been shown to
promote calcification by catalysing the hydration of CO2. This study aimed to
determine whether CA1 was correlated with microcalcification and with other
processes that are involved in breast cancer tumourigenesis.
METHODS: CA1 expression in breast cancer tissues and blood samples was detected
using western blotting, real-time PCR, immunohistochemistry and ELISA.
Calcification was induced in the cultured 4T1 cell line originating from mouse
breast tumours, using ascorbic acid and ß-glycerophosphate. Acetazolamide, a
chemical inhibitor of CA1, was also added to the culture to determine the role of
CA1 in calcification. The MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line was treated with
anti-CA1 siRNA and was assessed using a CCK-8 cell proliferation assay, an
annexin V cell apoptosis assay, transwell migration assay and a human breast
cancer PCR array. The tag SNP rs725605, which is located in the CA1 locus, was
genotyped using TaqMan® genotyping.
RESULTS: Increased CA1 expression was detected in samples of breast carcinoma
tissues and blood obtained from patients with breast cancer. A total of 15.3 % of
these blood samples exhibited a 2.1-fold or higher level of CA1 expression,
compared to the average level of CA1 expression in samples from healthy controls.
Following the induction of calcification of 4T1 cells, both the number of
calcium-rich deposits and the expression of CA1 increased, whereas the
calcification and CA1 expression were significantly supressed in the presence of 
acetazolamide. Increased migration and apoptosis were observed in MCF-7 cells
that were treated with anti-CA1 siRNA. The PCR array detected up-regulation of
the androgen receptor (AR) and down-regulation of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) 
in the treated MCF-7 cells. Significant differences in the allele and genotype
frequencies of rs725605 were detected in the cohort of patients with breast
cancer but not in other tumours.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study suggested that CA1 is a potential oncogene 
and that it contributes to abnormal cell calcification, apoptosis and migration
in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4603971
PMID: 26459317  [PubMed - in process]


81. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 13;467(2):179-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.024. Epub 2015 Oct 13.

Punicalagin exerts protective effect against high glucose-induced cellular stress
and neural tube defects.

Zhong J(1), Reece EA(2), Yang P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (2)Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA. Electronic address: pyang@upi.umaryland.edu.

Maternal diabetes-induced birth defects remain a significant health problem.
Studying the effect of natural compounds with antioxidant properties and minimal 
toxicities on diabetic embryopathy may lead to the development of new and safe
dietary supplements. Punicalagin is a primary polyphenol found in pomegranate
juice, which possesses antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-tumorigenic
properties, suggesting a protective effect of punicalagin on diabetic
embryopathy. Here, we examined whether punicalagin could reduce high
glucose-induced neural tube defects (NTDs), and if this rescue occurs through
blockage of cellular stress and caspase activation. Embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5)
mouse embryos were cultured for 24 or 36 h with normal (5 mM) glucose or high
glucose (16.7 mM), in presence or absence of 10 or 20 µM punicalagin. 10 µM
punicalagin slightly reduced NTD formation under high glucose conditions;
however, 20 µM punicalagin significantly inhibited high glucose-induced NTD
formation. Punicalagin suppressed high glucose-induced lipid peroxidation marker 
4-hydroxynonenal, nitrotyrosine-modified proteins, and lipid peroxides. Moreover,
punicalagin abrogated endoplasmic reticulum stress by inhibiting phosphorylated
protein kinase ribonucleic acid (RNA)-like ER kinase (p-PERK), phosphorylated
inositol-requiring protein-1a (p-IRE1a), phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation
factor 2a (p-eIF2a), C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), binding immunoglobulin
protein (BiP) and x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing. Additionally,
punicalagin suppressed high glucose-induced caspase 3 and caspase 8 cleavage.
Punicalagin reduces high glucose-induced NTD formation by blocking cellular
stress and caspase activation. These observations suggest punicalagin supplements
could mitigate the teratogenic effects of hyperglycemia in the developing embryo,
and possibly prevent diabetes-induced NTDs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4621080 [Available on 2016-11-13]
PMID: 26453010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(12):1980-4. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00618. Epub 2015 Oct 8.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response and Mutant Protein Degradation in CHO Cells
Accumulating Antithrombin (C95R) in Russell Bodies.

Kimura K(1), Inoue K, Okubo J, Ueda Y, Kawaguchi K, Sakurai H, Wada I, Morita M, 
Imanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Toyama.

Newly synthesized secretory proteins are folded and assembled in the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER), where an efficient protein quality control system performs a
critically important function. When unfolded or aggregated proteins accumulate in
the ER, certain signaling pathways such as the unfolded protein response (UPR)
and ER-overload response (EOR) are functionally active in maintaining cell
homeostasis. Recently we prepared Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing
mutant antithrombin (AT)(C95R) under control of the Tet-On system and showed that
AT(C95R) accumulated in Russell bodies (RB), large distinctive structures derived
from the ER. To characterize whether ER stress takes place in CHO cells, we
examined characteristic UPR and EOR in ER stress responses. We found that the
induction of ER chaperones such as Grp97, Grp78 and protein disulfide isomerase
(PDI) was limited to a maximum of approximately two-fold. The processing of
X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA and the phosphorylation of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) subunit were not induced. Furthermore,
the activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) was not observed. In contrast,
CHO cells displayed UPR and EOR when the cells were treated with thapsigargin and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, respectively. In addition, a portion of the mutant
AT(C95R) was degraded through proteasomes and autophagy. CHO cells do respond to 
ER stress but the folding state of mutant AT(C95R) does not appear to activate
the ER stress signal pathway.

PMID: 26447095  [PubMed - in process]


83. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Sep 22;8:2681-8. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S88463. eCollection
2015.

Bioinformatics analyses of differentially expressed genes associated with
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with multiple
myeloma.

Sun J(1), Wen X(1), Jin F(1), Li Y(1), Hu J(2), Sun Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China. (2)Stanford University Medical
School, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(3)Cardiovascular Surgery Department, First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to explore the molecular mechanisms associated with
bisphosphonate (BP)-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) in patients with
multiple myeloma (MM).
METHODS: The gene expression profile GSE7116 was downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from eleven
patients with ONJ resulting from MM treated with BPs (ONJBPs) and ten MM patients
without ONJ treated with BPs (MMBPs) were analyzed. Gene ontology (GO) and
pathway enrichment analyses of DEGs were performed, followed by functional
annotation and protein-protein interaction network construction. Finally,
sub-network modules were constructed and analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 166 up- and 473 down-regulated DEGs were identified. The
up-regulated DEGs were enriched in pathways related to cancer, and the
down-regulated DEGs were enriched in pathways related to the immune system.
Moreover, the GO terms enriched by the up-regulated DEGs were associated with
misfolded proteins, and the down-regulated DEGs were associated with immune
responses. After functional annotation, 16 transcription factors were identified,
including X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). In protein-protein interaction network 
analysis, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin 1, beta (IL1B) had higher
connectivity degrees. Among the constructed sub-network modules, module 1 was the
best one, and DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box helicase 5 (DDX5) was a hub gene. The
DEGs in module 1 were mainly enriched in GO terms related to RNA splicing.
CONCLUSION: DEGs of ONJ were mainly enriched in pathways related to the immune
system and RNA splicing. DEGs such as TNF, ILB1, DDX5, and XBP1 may be the
potential targets of ONJ treatment.

PMCID: PMC4590669
PMID: 26445550  [PubMed]


84. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:297423. doi: 10.1155/2015/297423.
Epub 2015 Sep 7.

The Chondroprotective Role of TMF in PGE2-Induced Apoptosis Associating with
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress.

Yang J(1), Liu H(2), Li L(2), Liu H(2), Shi W(2), Wu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Gannan Medical University, Ganzhou 341000, China. (2)College of Pharmacy, Gannan 
Medical University, Ganzhou 341000, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) has been demonstrated to exhibit a critical
role in osteoarthritic chondrocytes. Whether 5,7,3',4'-tetramethoxyflavone (TMF) 
plays the chondroprotective role in inhibition of PGE2-induced chondrocytes
apoptosis associating with ERS has not been reported. To investigate this, the
activation of PERK, ATF6, and IRE1 signaling pathways in ERS in chondrocytes
pretreated with PGE2 was studied. By treatment with PGE2, the chondrocytes
apoptosis was significantly increased, the proapoptotic CHOP and JNK were
upregulated, the prosurvival GRP78 and XBP1 were downregulated, and GSK-3ß was
also upregulated. However, TMF exhibited the effectively protective functions via
counteracting these detrimental effects of PGE2. Finally, the inflammatory
cytokine PGE2 can activate ERS signaling and promote chondrocytes apoptosis,
which might be associated with upregulation of GSK-3ß. TMF exhibits a
chondroprotective role in inhibiting PGE2-induced ERS and GSK-3ß.

PMCID: PMC4576019
PMID: 26435723  [PubMed]


85. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Dec 10;339(2):397-406. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.022. Epub 
2015 Oct 5.

Exocrine pancreas ER stress is differentially induced by different fatty acids.

Danino H(1), Ben-Dror K(1), Birk R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Health Science, Ariel University, Israel. 
(2)Department of Nutrition, Faculty of Health Science, Ariel University, Israel. 
Electronic address: ruthb@ariel.ac.il.

Exocrine pancreas acinar cells have a highly developed endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), accommodating their high protein production rate. Overload of dietary fat
(typical to obesity) is a recognized risk factor in pancreatitis and pancreatic
cancer. Dietary fat, especially saturated fat, has been suggested by others and
us to induce an acinar lipotoxic effect. The effect of different dietary fatty
acids on the ER stress response is unknown. We studied the effect of acute (24h) 
challenge with different fatty acids (saturated, mono and poly-unsaturated) at
different concentrations (between 200 and 500µM, typical to normal and obese
states, respectively), testing fat accumulation, ER stress indicators, X-box
binding protein 1 (Xbp1) splicing and nuclear translocation, as well as unfolded 
protein response (UPR) transcripts and protein levels using exocrine pancreas
acinar AR42J and primary cells. Acute exposure of AR42J cells to different fatty 
acids caused increased accumulation of triglycerides, dependent on the type of
fat. Different FAs had different effects on ER stress: most notably, saturated
palmitic acid significantly affected the UPR response, as demonstrated by altered
Xbp1 splicing, elevation in transcript levels of UPR (Xbp, CHOP, Bip) and immune 
factors (Tnfa, Tgfß), and enhanced Xbp1 protein levels and Xbp1 time-dependent
nuclear translocation. Poly-unsaturated FAs caused milder elevation of ER stress 
markers, while mono-unsaturated oleic acid attenuated the ER stress response.
Thus, various fatty acids differentially affect acinar cell fat accumulation and,
apart from oleic acid, induce ER stress. The differential effect of the various
fatty acids could have potential nutritional and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26433148  [PubMed - in process]


86. Iran Biomed J. 2016;20(1):63-7. Epub 2015 Oct 3.

Role of Oxidative Stress in Modulating Unfolded Protein Response Activity in
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Cell Line.

Bazi A(1,)(2), Keramati MR(1), Gholamin M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Molecular Pathology Research Center, Imam Reza Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (2)Faculty of
Allied Medical Sciences, Zabol University of Medical Sciences, Zabol, Iran.
(3)Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research
Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.

Recently, it has been revealed that tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) act through
inducing both oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in chronic myeloid 
leukemia cells. However, ER stress signaling triggers both apoptotic and survival
processes within cells. Nevertheless, mechanisms by which TKIs avoid the
pro-survival effects are not clear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
potential role of oxidative stress in activity of unfolded protein response (UPR)
survival pathway within K562 cell line.METHODS: The expression of UPR survival
target genes, Xbp1, and Grp94 (glucose requiring protein 94) was studied in
single and combined exposure to oxidative and ER stress in K562 cell line by
quantitative and qualitative PCR.
RESULTS: The expression of UPR-related survival gene Grp94 was hampered by
exposing to oxidative stress in cell induced with ER stress.
CONCLUSION: Interaction of oxidative and ER stress may role as a mediator
influencing UPR signaling activity.

PMCID: PMC4689283
PMID: 26432458  [PubMed - in process]


87. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2015 Sep;3(3):171-81. doi: 10.1002/iid3.57. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

BTK mutations selectively regulate BTK expression and upregulate monocyte XBP1
mRNA in XLA patients.

Teocchi MA(1), Domingues Ramalho V(1), Abramczuk BM(1), D'Souza-Li L(2), Santos
Vilela MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Investigation in Pediatrics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Center for Investigation in Pediatrics,
University of Campinas (UNICAMP) Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil ; Department of
Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

Mutations in the Bruton agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (BTK) gene are
responsible for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). Unfolded or misfolded proteins
can trigger stress pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), known as unfolded 
protein response (UPR). The aim was to clarify the involvement of UPR in XLA
pathophysiology. By reverse transcription-quantitative PCR, we evaluated the
expression of BTK and 12 UPR-related genes in eight patients. Moreover, we
assessed the BTK protein expression and pattern in the patients' monocytes by
flow cytometry and fluorescence immunocytochemistry. We found a reduced BTK
expression in patients with stop codon mutations (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02). However, missense
mutations did not affect BTK expression. Flow cytometry showed a reduction of BTK
in patients which was corroborated by an absent or nonfunctional protein
synthesis revealed by immunocytochemistry. In contrast with the other UPR-related
genes, X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) was markedly upregulated in the patients
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), suggesting Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation since BTK directly
interacts with TLRs as a negative regulator and XBP1 can be activated in direct
response to TLR ligation. Different BTK mutations can be identified by the BTK
expression. Inasmuch as UPR-related genes were downregulated or unaltered in
patients, we speculate the involvement of the TLRs-XBP1 axis in the XLA
pathophysiology. Such data could be the basis for further studies of this novel
pathomechanism concerning XLA.

PMCID: PMC4578518
PMID: 26417435  [PubMed]


88. J Orthop Res. 2015 Sep 25. doi: 10.1002/jor.23056. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression of XBP1s in fibroblasts is critical for TiAl6 V4 particle-induced
RANKL expression and osteolysis.

Wang Z(1), Liu N(1), Zhou G(2), Shi T(2), Wang Z(2), Gan J(2), Wang R(1), Qian
H(1), Bao N(1), Guo T(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing
University, 210093, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 210093, China.

Wear particle-induced osteolysis is a major cause of aseptic loosening, which is 
one of the most common reasons for total hip arthroplasty (THA) failure. Previous
studies have shown that the expression of Receptor activation of nuclear factor
(NF)-kB (RANKL) by fibroblasts in periprosthetic membrane played a crucial role
in wear particle-induced osteolysis. However, the underlying mechanism of RANKL
expression remains largely unknown. In the present study, we investigated the
effect of TiAl6 V4 particle (TiPs)-induced XBP1s (spliced form of X-box binding
protein 1) on RANKL expression and osteoclastogenesis both in vitro and in vivo. 
The levels of XBP1s in peri-implant membrane, animal models and TiPs-stimulated
fibroblasts were determined by western blots. To assess the effect of XBP1s on
RANKL expression, fibroblasts were treated with both a small interfering RNA
(siRNA) and an inhibitor of XBP1 prior to exposure to TiPs. The effect of XBP1s
on osteoclasts formation was determined by tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
(TRAP) staining in vitro osteoclastogenesis assay and in animal models. The
resorption of bone was assessed by micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) with
three-dimensional reconstruction. Our results demonstrated that XBP1s was
activated in periprosthetic membrane, mouse calvaria models and TiPs-stimulated
human synovial fibroblasts. Further, inhibition of XBP1s decreased the expression
of RANKL and osteoclasts formation in vitro. In mouse calvaria models, both of
the osteoclastogenesis and osteolysis were inhibited XBP1s inhibitor. Our results
suggested that XBP1s mediated TiPs-induced of RANKL expression in fibroblasts,
and down regulating XBP1s may represented a potential therapy for wear
particle-induced osteolysis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26403762  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


89. J Neurosurg. 2016 Mar;124(3):687-702. doi: 10.3171/2015.3.JNS141802. Epub 2015
Sep 18.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress implicated in chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

Lucke-Wold BP(1,)(2), Turner RC(1,)(2), Logsdon AF(2,)(3), Nguyen L(2,)(3),
Bailes JE(4), Lee JM(4), Robson MJ(3,)(5), Omalu BI(6), Huber JD(2,)(3), Rosen
CL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, West Virginia University School of Medicine;
(2)The Center for Neuroscience, West Virginia University School of Medicine;
(3)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, West Virginia University School
of Pharmacy, Morgantown, West Virginia; (4)Department of Neurosurgery, NorthShore
University HealthSystem, University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine,
Evanston, Illinois; (5)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee; and. (6)Department of Medical Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, UC Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California.

OBJECT Chronic traumatic encephalopathy is a progressive neurodegenerative
disease characterized by neurofibrillary tau tangles following repetitive
neurotrauma. The underlying mechanism linking traumatic brain injury to chronic
traumatic encephalopathy has not been elucidated. The authors investigate the
role of endoplasmic reticulum stress as a link between acute neurotrauma and
chronic neurodegeneration. METHODS The authors used pharmacological, biochemical,
and behavioral tools to assess the role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in
linking acute repetitive traumatic brain injury to the development of chronic
neurodegeneration. Data from the authors' clinically relevant and validated
rodent blast model were compared with those obtained from postmortem human
chronic traumatic encephalopathy specimens from a National Football League player
and World Wrestling Entertainment wrestler. RESULTS The results demonstrated
strong correlation of endoplasmic reticulum stress activation with subsequent tau
hyperphosphorylation. Various endoplasmic reticulum stress markers were increased
in human chronic traumatic encephalopathy specimens, and the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response was associated with an increase in the tau kinase,
glycogen synthase kinase-3ß. Docosahexaenoic acid, an endoplasmic reticulum
stress inhibitor, improved cognitive performance in the rat model 3 weeks after
repetitive blast exposure. The data showed that docosahexaenoic acid
administration substantially reduced tau hyperphosphorylation (t = 4.111, p <
0.05), improved cognition (t = 6.532, p < 0.001), and inhibited C/EBP homology
protein activation (t = 5.631, p < 0.01). Additionally the data showed, for the
first time, that endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the pathophysiology 
of chronic traumatic encephalopathy. CONCLUSIONS Docosahexaenoic acid therefore
warrants further investigation as a potential therapeutic agent for the
prevention of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

PMID: 26381255  [PubMed - in process]


90. PLoS Genet. 2015 Sep 15;11(9):e1005505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005505.
eCollection 2015.

XBP1-Independent UPR Pathways Suppress C/EBP-ß Mediated Chondrocyte
Differentiation in ER-Stress Related Skeletal Disease.

Cameron TL(1), Bell KM(1), Gresshoff IL(1), Sampurno L(1), Mullan L(2), Ermann
J(3), Glimcher LH(4), Boot-Handford RP(2), Bateman JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences,
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Immunology
and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America. (4)Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, New York, United States of America. (5)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (MCDS) involves dwarfism and growth plate
cartilage hypertrophic zone expansion resulting from dominant mutations in the
hypertrophic zone collagen, Col10a1. Mouse models phenocopying MCDS through the
expression of an exogenous misfolding protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
in hypertrophic chondrocytes have demonstrated the central importance of ER
stress in the pathology of MCDS. The resultant unfolded protein response (UPR) in
affected chondrocytes involved activation of canonical ER stress sensors, IRE1,
ATF6, and PERK with the downstream effect of disrupted chondrocyte
differentiation. Here, we investigated the role of the highly conserved IRE1/XBP1
pathway in the pathology of MCDS. Mice with a MCDS collagen X p.N617K knock-in
mutation (ColXN617K) were crossed with mice in which Xbp1 was inactivated
specifically in cartilage (Xbp1Cart<U+0394>Ex2), generating the compound mutant, C/X.
The severity of dwarfism and hypertrophic zone expansion in C/X did not differ
significantly from ColXN617K, revealing surprising redundancy for the IRE1/XBP1
UPR pathway in the pathology of MCDS. Transcriptomic analyses of hypertrophic
zone cartilage identified differentially expressed gene cohorts in MCDS that are 
pathologically relevant (XBP1-independent) or pathologically redundant
(XBP1-dependent). XBP1-independent gene expression changes included large-scale
transcriptional attenuation of genes encoding secreted proteins and disrupted
differentiation from proliferative to hypertrophic chondrocytes. Moreover, these 
changes were consistent with disruption of C/EBP-ß, a master regulator of
chondrocyte differentiation, by CHOP, a transcription factor downstream of PERK
that inhibits C/EBP proteins, and down-regulation of C/EBP-ß transcriptional
co-factors, GADD45-ß and RUNX2. Thus we propose that the pathology of MCDS is
underpinned by XBP1 independent UPR-induced dysregulation of C/EBP-ß-mediated
chondrocyte differentiation. Our data suggest that modulation of C/EBP-ß activity
in MCDS chondrocytes may offer therapeutic opportunities.

PMCID: PMC4651170
PMID: 26372225  [PubMed - in process]


91. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.242. [Epub ahead of print]

The HSP90 inhibitor, 17AAG, protects the intestinal stem cell niche and inhibits 
graft versus host disease development.

Joly AL(1,)(2), Deepti A(1,)(2), Seignez A(1,)(2,)(3), Goloudina A(1,)(2),
Hebrard S(1,)(2), Schmitt E(1,)(2), Richaud S(1,)(2), Fourmaux E(1,)(2), Hammann 
A(1,)(2), Collura A(4), Svrcek M(4), Jego G(1,)(2), Robinet E(5,)(6), Solary
E(7,)(8), Demidov O(1,)(2), Kohli E(1,)(2), Garrido C(1,)(2,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 866, « Equipe labellisée» Association pour la Recherche contre le
Cancer and Laboratoire d'Excellence LipSTIC, Dijon, France. (2)Université de
Bourgogne, Dijon, France. (3)CHU, Dijon, France. (4)INSERM, UMR S938, Centre de
Recherche Saint-Antoine, Paris, France. (5)INSERM U748, Institut de Virologie,
Strasbourg, France. (6)Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France. (7)INSERM UMR1009, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France. (8)Université Paris-Sud 11, Villejuif, France. (9)Anticancer Centre
George François Leclerc, Dijon, France.

Graft versus host disease (GvHD), which is the primary complication of allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation, can alter the intestinal barrier targeted by
activated donor T-cells. Chemical inhibition of the stress protein HSP90 was
demonstrated in vitro to inhibit T-cell activation and to modulate endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress to which intestinal cells are highly susceptible. Since the
HSP90 inhibitor 17-allylamino-demethoxygeldanamycin (17AAG) is developed in
clinics, we explored here its ability to control intestinal acute GvHD in vivo in
two mouse GvHD models (C57BL/6<U+E232>BALB/c and FVB/N<U+E232>Lgr5-eGFP), ex vivo in intestine 
organoids and in vitro in intestinal epithelial cultures. We show that 17AAG
decreases GvHD-associated mortality without impairing graft versus leukemia
effect. While 17AAG effect in T-cell activation is just moderate at the dose used
in vivo, we observe a striking intestinal integrity protection. At the intestine 
level, the drug promotes the splicing of the transcription factor X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1), which is a key component of the ER stress. This effect is
associated with a decrease in intestinal damage and an increase in Lgr5(+) stem
cells, Paneth cells and defensins production. The importance of XBP1 splicing
control is further confirmed in cultured cells and organoids of primary
intestinal epithelium where XBP1 is either shRNA depleted or inhibited with
toyocamycin. In conclusion, 17AAG has a protective effect on the epithelial
intestinal barrier in mouse models of acute GvHD. This compound deserves to be
tested in the therapeutic control of acute GvHD.Oncogene advance online
publication, 14 September 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.242.

PMID: 26364610  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. Mod Pathol. 2015 Nov;28(11):1435-47. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.99. Epub 2015
Sep 11.

Plasma cell and terminal B-cell differentiation in mantle cell lymphoma mainly
occur in the SOX11-negative subtype.

Ribera-Cortada I(1,)(2), Martinez D(1), Amador V(3), Royo C(3), Navarro A(3), Beà
S(3), Gine E(3,)(4), de Leval L(5), Serrano S(6), Wotherspoon A(7), Colomer
D(1,)(3), Martinez A(1,)(3), Campo E(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Hospital Nostra Senyora de
Meritxell, Escaldes-Engordany, Principat d'Andorra. (3)Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Department of
Hematology, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (6)Department of Pathology, Hospital del Mar, Autonomous University 
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Department of Histopathology, Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, UK.

Mantle cell lymphoma is a mature lymphoid neoplasm characterized by the
t(11;14)(q13;q32) and cyclin D1 overexpression. SOX11 is a transcription factor
commonly overexpressed in these tumors but absent in most other mature B-cell
lymphomas whose function is not well understood. Experimental studies have shown 
that silencing of SOX11 in mantle cell lymphoma cells promotes the shift from a
mature B cell into an early plasmacytic differentiation phenotype, suggesting
that SOX11 may contribute to tumor development by blocking the B-cell
differentiation program. The relationship between SOX11 expression and terminal
B-cell differentiation in primary mantle cell lymphoma and its relationship to
the plasmacytic differentiation observed in occasional cases is not known. In
this study we have investigated the terminal B-cell differentiation phenotype in 
60 mantle cell lymphomas, 41 SOX11-positive and 19 SOX11-negative. Monotypic
plasma cells and lymphoid cells with plasmacytic differentiation expressing
cyclin D1 were observed in 7 (37%) SOX11-negative but in none of 41
SOX11-positive mantle cell lymphomas (P<0.001). Intense cytoplasmic expression of
a restricted immunoglobulin light chain was significantly more frequent in
SOX11-negative than -positive tumors (58 vs 13%) (P=0.001). Similarly, BLIMP1 and
XBP1 expression was also significantly more frequent in SOX11-negative than in
-positive cases (83 vs 34% and 75 vs 11%, respectively) (P=0.001). However, no
differences in the expression of IRF4/MUM1 were observed among these subtypes of 
mantle cell lymphoma. In conclusion, these results indicate that SOX11-negative
mantle cell lymphoma may be a particular subtype of this tumor characterized by
more frequent morphological and immunophenotypic terminal B-cell differentiation 
features that may be facilitated by the absence of SOX11 transcription factor.

PMID: 26360498  [PubMed - in process]


93. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 9;10(9):e0137582. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137582.
eCollection 2015.

UPR Activation and the Down-Regulation of a-Crystallin in Human High
Myopia-Related Cataract Lens Epithelium.

Yang J(1), Zhou S(2), Gu J(1), Guo M(3), Xia H(4), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China; Department
of Ophthalmology, the First People's Hospital of Foshan, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, the Huichang County People's Hospital, Jiangxi,
China. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Zhaoqing Gaoyao People's Hospital,
Guangdong, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the expression of aA- and aB-crystallin and the unfolded 
protein response in the lens epithelium of patients with high myopia-related
cataracts.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: The central portion of the human anterior lens capsule
together with the adhering epithelial cells, approximately 5 mm in diameter, were
harvested and processed within two hours after cataract surgery from high
myopia-related (spherical equivalent =-10.00 diopters) and age-related cataract
patients or from high myopia but non-cataractous patients (tissue were collected 
from ocular trauma patients with high myopia and lens trauma). Anterior lens
samples from fresh cadaver normal human eyes were used as normal control
(collected within 6 hours from death). Real-time PCR was performed to detect the 
mRNA levels of a-crystallins as well as unfolded protein response (UPR)-related
GRP78, spliced-XBP1, ATF4 and ATF6. Western blot analysis was used to determine
the protein level of a-crystallin, GRP78, p-IRE1a, p-eIF2a and ATF6.
RESULTS: In the lens epithelium of the high myopia-related cataract group and the
age related cataract group, the mRNA and soluble protein expression of aA- and
aB-crystallin were both decreased; additionally, the protein levels of ATF6,
p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and the gene expression levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78, ATF6
and ATF4 were greatly increased relative to the normal control.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the significant loss of soluble a-crystallin
and the activation of the UPR in the lens epithelium of patients with high
myopia-related cataract, which may be associated with the cataractogenesis of
high myopia-related cataract.

PMCID: PMC4564188
PMID: 26351848  [PubMed - in process]


94. Hepatol Res. 2015 Sep 8. doi: 10.1111/hepr.12587. [Epub ahead of print]

PNPLA3 is involved in hepatic fatty acid and triglyceride metabolism through XBP1
and modulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice.

Ochi T(1), Munekage K(1), Ono M(1), Higuchi T(2), Tsuda M(3), Hayashi Y(4),
Okamoto N(1), Toda K(5), Sakamoto S(2), Oben JA(6,)(7), Saibara T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi,
Japan. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Science Research Center, Kochi Medical
School, Kochi, Japan. (3)The Division of Laboratory Animal Science, Science
Research Center, Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, 
Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Kochi Medical 
School, Kochi, Japan. (6)Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, Royal Free
Hospital, University College London, London, United Kingdom. (7)Department of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Guy's and St. Thomas' Hospital, London, United
Kingdom.

AIM: Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is the major cause of chronic liver
disease worldwide. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is considered to be an
important pathological characteristic in NASH. A sequence variation (I148M) in
the patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 3/adiponutrin (PNPLA3)
gene is known to be associated with the development of NASH. However, PNPLA3
deficient has been considered to not be associated with fatty liver disease. To
clarify, therefore, the role of PNPLA3 in liver, we established PNPLA3 knockout
(KO) mice and investigated the phenotypes and involved factors under ER stress.
METHODS: ER stress was induced by intra-peritoneally injection with tunicamycin
or with saline at 0 and 24<U+2009>hours in KO and C57BL/6 (WT) mice. At 48<U+2009>hours after
the starting of treatment, blood and liver samples were studied.
RESULTS: Hepatic steatosis and triglyceride content were remarkably increased in 
WT mice than in KO mice under ER stress. The hepatic palmitate/oleate ratio was
significantly higher originally in KO mice than in WT mice. Moreover, the
expression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1) in KO mice under ER stress was
decreased further than that in WT mice. Expression of ER stress markers X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) and ERdj4 was increased in WT mice but not in KO mice
under ER stress.
CONCLUSIONS: We first demonstrated the hepatic phenotype of PNPLA3 deficient
under ER stress. Our observations would indicate that PNPLA3 has an important
role in hepatic fatty acid metabolism and triglyceride accumulation through XBP1 
under ER stress. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26347999  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


95. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Nov;36(5):1311-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2331. Epub 2015 Sep 
1.

Duhuo Jisheng decoction inhibits endoplasmic reticulum stress in chondrocytes
induced by tunicamycin through the downregulation of miR-34a.

Liu F(1), Weng X(2), Lin P(2), Zheng C(1), Xu H(1), Liu X(1), Ye H(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China. (2)College of Pharmacy, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China.

Our previous study showed that Duhuo Jisheng decoction (DHJSD) inhibited
chondrocyte apoptosis by the mitochondria-dependent signaling pathway.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is upstream of the mitochondria-dependent
signaling pathway and has been shown to promote chondrocyte apoptosis that occurs
in osteoarthritis (OA). The present study aimed to evaluate whether DHJSD
inhibits the chondrocyte apoptosis by regulating ER stress. DHJSD enhanced the
viability of tunicamycin (TM)-exposed chondrocytes, a model of ER stress-induced 
apoptosis, in a dose- and time-dependent manner, as shown by MTT assay. The
present results showed that DHJSD and sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (PBA), an ER stress
inhibitor, reduced TM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis by
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining. To gain insight into the mechanisms of
DHJSD that are responsible for enhancing the viability and inhibiting TM-induced 
chondrocyte apoptosis, the associated mRNA expressions and protein levels were
detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western 
blot analysis, respectively. The results showed that the expression levels of
Xbp1, Xbp1s and Bcl-2 were increased, and the expression levels of Bip, Atf4,
Chop, Bax, caspase-9 and -3 were decreased in the TM-exposed chondrocytes treated
with DHJSD or PBA compared with that in the TM-exposed chondrocytes. To identify 
the possible mechanisms, the expression of miR-34a was examined by the TaqMan
microRNA assay, and was downregulated in the TM-exposed chondrocytes treated with
DHJSD or PBA compared with that in the TM-exposed chondrocytes. DHJSD inhibits ER
stress in chondrocytes induced by exposure to TM by downregulating miR-34a,
suggesting that DHJSD may be a potential therapeutic agent for OA.

PMID: 26329269  [PubMed - in process]


96. J Med Chem. 2015 Sep 24;58(18):7557-71. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00964. Epub
2015 Sep 10.

Synthesis and Structure-Activity Relationships of Quaternary Coptisine
Derivatives as Potential Anti-ulcerative Colitis Agents.

Zhang ZH(1), Zhang HJ(1), Deng AJ(1), Wang B(1), Li ZH(1), Liu Y(1), Wu LQ(1),
Wang WJ(1), Qin HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines,
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College , Beijing 100050, China.

Thirty quaternary coptisine derivatives from a synthesized library were found to 
activate the in vitro transcription of x-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). Among
these, the dihydrocoptisines were demonstrated by in vitro XBP1 transcriptional
activity assays and animal experiments to be much more active anti-ulcerative
colitis (UC) agents than quaternary coptisines, tetrahydrocoptisines, and the
positive control. Unsubstituted dihydrocoptisine exhibited more significant
anti-UC efficacy than dihydrocoptisines substituted at the C-8 or C-13 position. 
The EC50 value of dihydrocoptisine for XBP1 transcriptional activation was 2.25
nM. Dihydrocoptisine exhibited a significant dose-effect relationship, as
indicated by biomarkers in in vitro and in vivo experiments. According to this
study, the starting material's reductive states and the substitution patterns of 
the dihydrocoptisines were determined to be the critical parameters for
modulating their anti-UC efficacy, and the dihydrocoptisine skeleton was
designated as the key pharmacophore. The synthesized dihydrocoptisine is a
promising lead for developing anti-UC drugs.

PMID: 26321079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Oct;35(10):2134-44. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.305420. Epub 2015 Aug 27.

XBP 1-Deficiency Abrogates Neointimal Lesion of Injured Vessels Via Cross Talk
With the PDGF Signaling.

Zeng L(1), Li Y(2), Yang J(2), Wang G(2), Margariti A(2), Xiao Q(2), Zampetaki
A(2), Yin X(2), Mayr M(2), Mori K(2), Wang W(2), Hu Y(2), Xu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Division, King's College London BHF Centre, London,
United Kingdom (L.Z., Y.L., J.Y., A.Z., X.Y., M.M., Y.H., Q.X.); Institute of
Bioengineering (J.Y., W.W.) and Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey 
Research Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry (Q.X.),
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom; Department of Emergency 
Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, China (G.W.); Centre for Experimental Medicine, Queen's
University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom (A.M.); and Department of Biophysics,
Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan (K.M.).
lingfang.zeng@kcl.ac.uk qingbo.xu@kcl.ac.uk. (2)From the Cardiovascular Division,
King's College London BHF Centre, London, United Kingdom (L.Z., Y.L., J.Y., A.Z.,
X.Y., M.M., Y.H., Q.X.); Institute of Bioengineering (J.Y., W.W.) and Centre for 
Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry (Q.X.), Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom; Department of Emergency Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China (G.W.); Centre for
Experimental Medicine, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom
(A.M.); and Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan (K.M.).

OBJECTIVE: Smooth muscle cell (SMC) migration and proliferation play an essential
role in neointimal formation after vascular injury. In this study, we intended to
investigate whether the X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) was involved in these
processes.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: In vivo studies on femoral artery injury models revealed
that vascular injury triggered an immediate upregulation of XBP1 expression and
splicing in vascular SMCs and that XBP1 deficiency in SMCs significantly
abrogated neointimal formation in the injured vessels. In vitro studies indicated
that platelet-derived growth factor-BB triggered XBP1 splicing in SMCs via the
interaction between platelet-derived growth factor receptor ß and the
inositol-requiring enzyme 1a. The spliced XBP1 (XBP1s) increased SMC migration
via PI3K/Akt activation and proliferation via downregulating calponin h1 (CNN1). 
XBP1s directed the transcription of mir-1274B that targeted CNN1 mRNA
degradation. Proteomic analysis of culture media revealed that XBP1s decreased
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß family proteins secretion via transcriptional 
suppression. TGF-ß3 but not TGF-ß1 or TGF-ß2 attenuated XBP1s-induced CNN1
decrease and SMC proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that XBP1 is crucial for 
SMC proliferation via modulating the platelet-derived growth factor/TGF-ß
pathways, leading to neointimal formation.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26315405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(22):11256-68. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01492-15. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Host Gene Expression Is Regulated by Two Types of Noncoding RNAs Transcribed from
the Epstein-Barr Virus BamHI A Rightward Transcript Region.

Marquitz AR(1), Mathur A(1), Edwards RH(1), Raab-Traub N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA nrt@med.unc.edu.

In Epstein-Barr virus-infected epithelial cancers, the alternatively spliced
BamHI A rightward transcripts (BARTs) are the most abundant viral polyadenylated 
RNA. The BART introns form the template for the production of 44 microRNAs
(miRNAs), and the spliced and polyadenylated exons form nuclear
non-protein-coding RNAs. Analysis of host cell transcription by RNA-seq during
latency in AGS cells identified a large number of reproducibly changed genes.
Genes that were downregulated were enriched for BART miRNA targets.
Bioinformatics analysis predicted activation of the myc pathway and
downregulation of XBP1 as likely mediators of the host transcriptional changes.
Effects on XBP1 activity were not detected in these cells; however, myc
activation was confirmed through use of a myc-responsive luciferase reporter. To 
identify potential regulatory properties of the spliced, polyadenylated BART
RNAs, a full-length cDNA clone of one of the BART isoforms was obtained and
expressed in the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-negative AGS cells. The BART cDNA
transcript remained primarily nuclear yet induced considerable and consistent
changes in cellular transcription, as profiled by RNA-seq. These transcriptional 
changes significantly overlapped the transcriptional changes induced during
latent EBV infection of these same cells, where the BARTs are exclusively nuclear
and do not encode proteins. These data suggest that the nuclear BART RNAs are
functional long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). The abundant expression of multiple
forms of noncoding RNAs that contribute to growth regulation without expression
of immunogenic proteins would be an important mechanism for viral oncogenesis in 
the presence of a functional immune system.IMPORTANCE: Infection with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is nearly ubiquitous in the human population; however,
it does contribute to the formation of multiple types of cancer. In
immunocompromised patients, EBV causes multiple types of lymphomas by expressing 
viral oncogenes that promote growth and survival of infected B lymphocytes.
EBV-positive gastric carcinoma does not require immune suppression, and the viral
oncoproteins that are frequent targets for an immunological response are not
expressed. This study demonstrates using transcriptional analysis that the
expression of various classes of viral non-protein-coding RNAs likely contribute 
to the considerable changes in the host transcriptional profile in the AGS
gastric cancer cell line. This is the first report to show that the highly
expressed polyadenylated BamHI A rightward transcripts (BART) viral transcript in
gastric carcinoma is in fact a functional viral long noncoding RNA. These studies
provide new insight into how EBV can promote transformation in the absence of
viral protein expression.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645673
PMID: 26311882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Endocrinology. 2015 Nov;156(11):3895-908. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1367. Epub 2015
Aug 25.

Mitotane Inhibits Sterol-O-Acyl Transferase 1 Triggering Lipid-Mediated
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Apoptosis in Adrenocortical Carcinoma Cells.

Sbiera S(1), Leich E(1), Liebisch G(1), Sbiera I(1), Schirbel A(1), Wiemer L(1), 
Matysik S(1), Eckhardt C(1), Gardill F(1), Gehl A(1), Kendl S(1), Weigand I(1),
Bala M(1), Ronchi CL(1), Deutschbein T(1), Schmitz G(1), Rosenwald A(1), Allolio 
B(1), Fassnacht M(1), Kroiss M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit (S.S.,
I.S., E.C., F.G., A.G., I.W., M.B., C.L.R., T.D., B.A., M.F.), University
Hospital Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center
Mainfranken (S.S., A.R., M.F., M.K.), 97080 Würzburg, Germany; Institute of
Pathology (E.L., A.R.), University of Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany;
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (S.M., G.L., G.S.),
University Hospital Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany; Department of Nuclear 
Medicine (A.S.), University Hospital Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany; and
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (S.K., M.F.), University Hospital
Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2015 Nov;156(11):3873-5.

Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy that harbors a dismal
prognosis in advanced stages. Mitotane is approved as an orphan drug for
treatment of ACC and counteracts tumor growth and steroid hormone production.
Despite serious adverse effects, mitotane has been clinically used for decades.
Elucidation of its unknown molecular mechanism of action seems essential to
develop better ACC therapies. Here, we set out to identify the molecular target
of mitotane and altered downstream mechanisms by combining expression genomics
and mass spectrometry technology in the NCI-H295 ACC model cell line. Pathway
analyses of expression genomics data demonstrated activation of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and profound alteration of lipid-related genes caused by
mitotane treatment. ER stress marker CHOP was strongly induced and the two
upstream ER stress signalling events XBP1-mRNA splicing and eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 A (eIF2a) phosphorylation were activated by mitotane in NCI-H295 cells
but to a much lesser extent in four nonsteroidogenic cell lines. Lipid mass
spectrometry revealed mitotane-induced increase of free cholesterol, oxysterols, 
and fatty acids specifically in NCI-H295 cells as cause of ER stress. We
demonstrate that mitotane is an inhibitor of sterol-O-acyl-transferase 1 (SOAT1) 
leading to accumulation of these toxic lipids. In ACC tissue samples we show
variable SOAT1 expression correlating with the response to mitotane treatment. In
conclusion, mitotane confers adrenal-specific cytotoxicity and down-regulates
steroidogenesis by inhibition of SOAT1 leading to lipid-induced ER stress.
Targeting of cancer-specific lipid metabolism opens new avenues for treatment of 
ACC and potentially other types of cancer.

PMID: 26305886  [PubMed - in process]


100. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Apr;27(4):1055-65. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015020191. Epub 2015 
Aug 24.

Essential Role of X-Box Binding Protein-1 during Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in 
Podocytes.

Hassan H(1), Tian X(2), Inoue K(2), Chai N(2), Liu C(2), Soda K(2), Moeckel G(3),
Tufro A(1), Lee AH(4), Somlo S(2), Fedeles S(2), Ishibe S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics. (2)Internal Medicine, and. (3)Pathology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, and. (4)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New
York. (5)Internal Medicine, and shuta.ishibe@yale.edu.

Podocytes are terminally differentiated epithelial cells that reside along the
glomerular filtration barrier. Evidence suggests that after podocyte injury,
endoplasmic reticulum stress response is activated, but the molecular mechanisms 
involved are incompletely defined. In a mouse model, we confirmed that podocyte
injury induces endoplasmic reticulum stress response and upregulated unfolded
protein response pathways, which have been shown to mitigate damage by preventing
the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Furthermore,
simultaneous podocyte-specific genetic inactivation of X-box binding protein-1
(Xbp1), a transcription factor activated during endoplasmic reticulum stress and 
critically involved in the untranslated protein response, andSec63, a heat shock 
protein-40 chaperone required for protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum,
resulted in progressive albuminuria, foot process effacement, and histology
consistent with ESRD. Finally, loss of bothSec63andXbp1induced apoptosis in
podocytes, which associated with activation of the JNK pathway. Collectively, our
results indicate that an intactXbp1pathway operating to mitigate stress in the
endoplasmic reticulum is essential for the maintenance of a normal glomerular
filtration barrier.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26303067  [PubMed - in process]


101. Mol Cell. 2015 Sep 3;59(5):732-43. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.07.014. Epub 2015
Aug 20.

Global Promoter Targeting of a Conserved Lysine Deacetylase for Transcriptional
Shutoff during Quiescence Entry.

McKnight JN(1), Boerma JW(1), Breeden LL(2), Tsukiyama T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. (2)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. Electronic address: lbreeden@fredhutch.org. (3)Basic
Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109,
USA. Electronic address: ttsukiya@fredhutch.org.

Quiescence is a conserved cell-cycle state characterized by cell-cycle arrest,
increased stress resistance, enhanced longevity, and decreased transcriptional,
translational, and metabolic output. Although quiescence plays essential roles in
cell survival and normal differentiation, the molecular mechanisms leading to
this state are not well understood. Here, we determined changes in the
transcriptome and chromatin structure of S. cerevisiae upon quiescence entry. Our
analyses revealed transcriptional shutoff that is far more robust than previously
believed and an unprecedented global chromatin transition, which are tightly
correlated. These changes require Rpd3 lysine deacetylase targeting to at least
half of gene promoters via quiescence-specific transcription factors including
Xbp1 and Stb3. Deletion of RPD3 prevents cells from establishing transcriptional 
quiescence, leading to defects in quiescence entry and shortening of
chronological lifespan. Our results define a molecular mechanism for global
reprogramming of transcriptome and chromatin structure for quiescence driven by a
highly conserved chromatin regulator.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4560983 [Available on 2016-09-03]
PMID: 26300265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Gene. 2016 Jan 1;575(1):71-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.08.037. Epub 2015 Aug 21.

Polymorphism - 116C/G of the human X box binding protein 1 gene is associated
with risk of type 2 diabetes in a Chinese Han population.

Liu S(1), Ma G(2), Yao S(3), Chen Z(4), Wang C(4), Zhao B(5), Li K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and Cerebral Diseases,
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, China; Department of
Chronic Disease, Shenzhen Nanshan Center for Chronic Disease Control, Shenzhen
518054, China. (2)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and Cerebral
Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Statistics, College of Public Health, Jiamusi
University, Jiamusi 154007, China. (4)Department of Chronic Disease, Shenzhen
Nanshan Center for Chronic Disease Control, Shenzhen 518054, China. (5)Institute 
of Neurology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang 524001, China. Electronic
address: zhaobine@163.net. (6)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and
Cerebral Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang,
China. Electronic address: likeshen1971@126.com.

Evidence has been obtained showing that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is
closely associated with the development of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and that the
human X box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is an important transcription factor
involved in the development of ER stress. The study aimed to analyze the
potential association between polymorphism -116C/G of XBP1 and the risk of T2D.
The association between XBP1 polymorphism -116C/G and T2D risk was assessed among
1058 consecutive unrelated subjects, including 523 T2D patients and 535 healthy
controls, in a case control study. The -116GG genotype and -116G allele were more
frequent in T2D subjects compared with control subjects by statistical analysis, 
showing that the -116GG homozygote polymorphism of XBP1 might lead to increased
susceptibility to T2D in a Chinese Han population. T2D subjects with the -116GG
genotype had higher fasting plasma glucose levels, fasting insulin levels, and
HbA1c and worse HOMA-IR than the T2D subjects with -116CG and -116CC genotypes
(P<0.0001). The study supports a role for -116C/G polymorphism of the XBP1
promoter in the pathogenesis of T2D in a Chinese Han population, and more studies
are needed to further evaluate our results.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26299655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;31(10):783-7. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2015.1062862.
Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Evidence of the activation of unfolded protein response in granulosa and cumulus 
cells during follicular growth and maturation.

Harada M(1), Nose E(1), Takahashi N(1), Hirota Y(1), Hirata T(1), Yoshino O(2),
Koga K(1), Fujii T(1), Osuga Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine , University of
Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan and. (2)b Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty 
of Medicine , University of Toyama , Toyama , Japan.

The objective of the present study is to investigate whether unfolded protein
response (UPR), activated by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, in granulosa
cells (GC) and cumulus cells (CC) is involved in the process of follicular growth
and maturation. First, to examine the presence of UPR in growing follicles, the
expression of spliced form of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1(S)) and heat shock
70<U+2009>kDa protein 5 (HSPA5) mRNA, typical UPR genes, in mice ovaries were examined
by in situ hybridization. GC of later stage than large secondary follicles
expressed both XBP1(S) and HSPA5 mRNA, which was accompanied with the activation 
of ER stress sensor proteins, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) and
double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK), confirmed by 
immunohistochemistry. Next, to examine the association between the fertilization 
capacity of oocytes and the expression levels of UPR genes in surrounding CC,
human CC were collected from patients undergoing ICSI. The expression levels of
XBP1(S) mRNA, quantified by RT-PCR, in CC enclosing human oocytes achieving
fertilization were two-fold higher, than those in CC enclosing oocytes without
fertilization capacity. In conclusion, UPR is activated during follicular growth 
and suggested to be involved in the process of follicular growth and maturation.

PMID: 26291812  [PubMed - in process]


104. Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2098-109. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-626176. Epub 2015
Aug 19.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 represses human plasma cell
differentiation.

van Keimpema M(1), Grüneberg LJ(1), Mokry M(2), van Boxtel R(3), van Zelm MC(4), 
Coffer P(5), Pals ST(1), Spaargaren M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lymphoma and Myeloma Center Amsterdam (LYMMCARE),
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Department of Pediatric
Gastroenterology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(3)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; (4)Department of
Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
and. (5)Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2076-7.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is essential for early
B-cell development, whereas downregulation of FOXP1 at the germinal center (GC)
stage is required for GC B-cell function. Aberrantly high FOXP1 expression is
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma, being associated with poor prognosis. Here, by gene
expression analysis upon ectopic overexpression of FOXP1 in primary human memory 
B cells (MBCs) and B-cell lines, combined with chromatin immunoprecipitation and 
sequencing, we established that FOXP1 directly represses expression of PRDM1,
IRF4, and XBP1, transcriptional master regulators of plasma cell (PC)
differentiation. In accordance, FOXP1 is prominently expressed in primary human
naive and MBCs, but expression strongly decreases during PC differentiation.
Moreover, as compared with immunoglobulin (Ig) M(+) MBCs, IgG(+) MBCs combine
lower expression of FOXP1 with an enhanced intrinsic PC differentiation
propensity, and constitutive (over)expression of FOXP1 in B-cell lines and
primary human MBCs represses their ability to differentiate into PCs. Taken
together, our data indicate that proper control of FOXP1 expression plays a
critical role in PC differentiation, whereas aberrant expression of FOXP1 might
contribute to lymphomagenesis by blocking this terminal B-cell differentiation.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4626252
PMID: 26289642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Aug 13;5(10):2091-104. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.019950.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Related Genes in Yellow Catfish Pelteobagrus
fulvidraco: Molecular Characterization, Tissue Expression, and Expression
Responses to Dietary Copper Deficiency and Excess.

Song YF(1), Luo Z(2), Huang C(1), Chen QL(1), Pan YX(1), Xu YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Fishery
College, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China Freshwater
Aquaculture Collaborative Innovative Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Fishery College, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China Freshwater
Aquaculture Collaborative Innovative Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070,
China luozhi99@mail.hzau.edu.cn luozhi99@aliyun.com.

Two endoplasmic reticulum (ER) molecular chaperones [glucose-regulated protein 78
(grp78) and calreticulin (crt)] and three ER stress sensors [PKR-like ER kinase
(perk), inositol requiring enzyme (ire)-1a, and activating transcription factor
(atf)-6a] cDNAs were first characterized from yellow catfish, Pelteobagrus
fulvidraco. The predicted amino acid sequences for the yellow catfish grp78, crt,
perk, ire-1a, and atf-6a revealed that the proteins contained all of the
structural features that were characteristic of the five genes in other species, 
including the KDEL motif, signal peptide, sensor domain, and effector domain.
mRNAs of the five genes mentioned above were expressed in various tissues, but
their mRNA levels varied among tissues. Dietary Cu excess, but not Cu deficiency,
activated the chaperones (grp78 and crt) and folding sensors in ER, and the UPR
signaling pathways (i.e., perk-eif2a and the ire1-xbp1) in a tissue-specific
manner. For the first time, our study cloned grp78, crt, perk, ire-1a, and atf-6a
genes in yellow catfish and demonstrated their differential expression among
tissues. Moreover, the present study also indicated differential regulation of
these ER stress-related genes by dietary Cu deficiency and excess, which will be 
beneficial for us to evaluate effects of dietary Cu levels in fish at the
molecular level, based on the upstream pathway of lipid metabolism (the ER) and
thus provide novel insights regarding the nutrition of Cu in fish.

Copyright © 2015 Song et al.

PMCID: PMC4592992
PMID: 26276384  [PubMed - in process]


106. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Sep;153(2):285-97. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3536-7. 
Epub 2015 Aug 13.

TMEM33: a new stress-inducible endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane protein and
modulator of the unfolded protein response signaling.

Sakabe I(1), Hu R, Jin L, Clarke R, Kasid UN.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center and Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to activation of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) signaling cascade and induction of an apoptotic cell death,
autophagy, oncogenesis, metastasis, and/or resistance to cancer therapies.
Mechanisms underlying regulation of ER transmembrane proteins PERK, IRE1a, and
ATF6a/ß, and how the balance of these activities determines outcome of the
activated UPR, remain largely unclear. Here, we report a novel molecule
transmembrane protein 33 (TMEM33) and its actions in UPR signaling.
Immunoblotting and northern blot hybridization assays were used to determine the 
effects of ER stress on TMEM33 expression levels in various cell lines. Transient
transfections, immunofluorescence, subcellular fractionation,
immunoprecipitation, and immunoblotting were used to study the subcellular
localization of TMEM33, the binding partners of TMEM33, and the expression of
downstream effectors of PERK and IRE1a. Our data demonstrate that TMEM33 is a
unique ER stress-inducible and ER transmembrane molecule, and a new binding
partner of PERK. Exogenous expression of TMEM33 led to increased expression of
p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and their known downstream effectors, ATF4-CHOP and XBP1-S,
respectively, in breast cancer cells. TMEM33 overexpression also correlated with 
increased expression of apoptotic signals including cleaved caspase-7 and cleaved
PARP, and an autophagosome protein LC3II, and reduced expression of the autophagy
marker p62. TMEM33 is a novel regulator of the PERK-eIE2a-ATF4 and IRE1-XBP1 axes
of the UPR signaling. Therefore, TMEM33 may function as a determinant of the ER
stress-responsive events in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4559576
PMID: 26268696  [PubMed - in process]


107. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Aug 10;16(8):18628-41. doi: 10.3390/ijms160818628.

ALS-Linked P56S-VAPB Mutation Impairs the Formation of Multinuclear Myotube in
C2C12 Cells.

Tokutake Y(1), Yamada K(2), Ohata M(3), Obayashi Y(4), Tsuchiya M(5), Yonekura
S(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and Technology, Shinshu
University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan.
14st505j@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (2)Graduate School of Agriculture, Shinshu University, 
8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan. 14aa114c@shinshu-u.ac.jp.
(3)Graduate School of Agriculture, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa,
Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan. 14aa104f@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (4)Graduate School of 
Agriculture, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598,
Japan. 15aa103a@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (5)Graduate School of Agriculture, Shinshu
University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan.
15aa111b@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (6)Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598,
Japan. yonekura@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (7)Graduate School of Agriculture, Shinshu
University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina, Nagano 399-4598, Japan.
yonekura@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (8)Department of Interdisciplinary Genome Sciences and 
Cell Metabolism, Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Interdisciplinary Cluster for
Cutting Edge Research (ICCER), Shinshu University, 8304 Minamiminowa, Kamiina,
Nagano 399-4598, Japan. yonekura@shinshu-u.ac.jp.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative
disorder that affects upper and lower motor neurons. Since motor neurons target
skeletal muscles, the maintenance system of muscles is disturbed in ALS; however,
the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. In the present study, we
investigated the effects of ALS-associated P56S-vesicle-associated membrane
protein-associated protein B (VAPB) (P56S-VAPB) on the IRE1-XBP1 pathway, which
is involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR) of the mouse myoblast cell
line (C2C12 cells). Experiments with C2C12 cells transfected with wild-type
wt-VAPB and P56S-VAPB expression vectors showed reduced myotube formation and
aberrant myonuclear position in cells expressing P56S-VAPB. Activity of the
IRE1-XBP1 pathway in the cells visualized with the ERAI system revealed that the 
pathway was disrupted in cells expressing P56S-VAPB, whereas the IRE1-XBP1
pathway activity was enhanced in the differentiation process of normal C2C12
cells. These results suggest that disruption of the IRE1-XBP1 pathway is a cause 
for the reduced myotube formation in P56S-VAPB-expressing cells. The expression
level of the VAPB protein has been reported to be reduced in the neurons of
patients with ALS. Therefore, it is expected that the IRE1-XBP1 pathway is also
impaired in muscle tissues of patients with ALS, which causes a disturbance in
the muscle maintenance system.

PMCID: PMC4581263
PMID: 26266407  [PubMed - in process]


108. J Biomol Screen. 2015 Dec;20(10):1232-45. doi: 10.1177/1087057115600414. Epub
2015 Aug 11.

Cell-Based High-Throughput Luciferase Reporter Gene Assays for Identifying and
Profiling Chemical Modulators of Endoplasmic Reticulum Signaling Protein, IRE1.

Rong J(1), Pass I(2), Diaz PW(3), Ngo TA(2), Sauer M(2), Magnuson G(2), Zeng
FY(2), Hassig CA(2), Jackson MR(2), Cosford ND(1), Matsuzawa S(4), Reed JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Death and Survival Networks Program, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA Conrad Prebys Center for Chemical
Genomics, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
(2)Conrad Prebys Center for Chemical Genomics, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Cell Death and Survival Networks
Program, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Cell Death and Survival Networks Program, Sanford-Burnham-Prebys Medical
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA smatsuzawa@SBPdicovery.org
reedoffice@SBPdiscovery.org.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress activates three distinct signal transducers on 
the ER membrane. Inositol-requiring protein 1 (IRE1), the most conserved signal
transducer, plays a key role in ER stress-mediated signaling. During ER stress,
IRE1 initiates two discrete signaling cascades: the "adaptive" signaling cascade 
mediated by the XBP1 pathway and the "alarm" signaling cascade mediated by
stress-activated protein kinase pathways. Fine-tuning of the balance between the 
adaptive and alarm signals contributes significantly to cellular fate under ER
stress. Thus, we propose that the design of high-throughput screening (HTS)
assays to selectively monitor IRE1 mediated-signaling would be desirable for drug
discovery. To this end, we report the generation of stable human neural cell
lines and development of cell-based HTS luciferase (Luc) reporter gene assays for
the identification of pathway-specific chemical modulators of IRE1. We
implemented a cell-based Luc assay using a chimeric CHOP-Gal4 transcription
factor in 384-well format for monitoring IRE1 kinase-mediated p38MAPK activation 
and an unfolded response pathway element (URPE)-Luc cell-based assay in 1536-well
format for monitoring IRE1's RNase-mediated activation of XBP1. Chemical library 
screening was successfully conducted with both the CHOP/Gal4-Luc cells and
UPRE-Luc engineered cells. The studies demonstrate the feasibility of using these
HTS assays for discovery of pathway-selective modulators of IRE1.

© 2015 Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening.

PMID: 26265713  [PubMed - in process]


109. Adipocyte. 2015 Jan 12;4(3):188-202. doi: 10.4161/21623945.2014.989728.

Glucose starvation and hypoxia, but not the saturated fatty acid palmitic acid or
cholesterol, activate the unfolded protein response in 3T3-F442A and 3T3-L1
adipocytes.

Mihai AD(1), Schröder M(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences; Durham University ; Durham,
United Kingdom ; Biophysical Sciences Institute; Durham University ; Durham,
United Kingdom ; North East England Stem Cell Institute (NESCI); Life Bioscience 
Center; International Center for Life; Central Parkway ; Newcastle Upon Tyne,
United Kingdom.

Obesity is associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activation of
the unfolded protein response (UPR) in adipose tissue. In this study we identify 
physiological triggers of ER stress and of the UPR in adipocytes in vitro. We
show that two markers of adipose tissue remodelling in obesity, glucose
starvation and hypoxia, cause ER stress in 3T3-F442A and 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Both 
conditions induced molecular markers of the IRE1a and PERK branches of the UPR,
such as splicing of XBP1 mRNA and CHOP, as well as transcription of the ER stress
responsive gene BiP. Hypoxia also induced an increase in phosphorylation of the
PERK substrate eIF2a. By contrast, physiological triggers of ER stress in many
other cell types, such as the saturated fatty acid palmitic acid, cholesterol, or
several inflammatory cytokines including TNF-a, IL-1ß, and IL-6, do not cause ER 
stress in 3T3-F442A and 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Our data suggest that physiological
changes associated with remodelling of adipose tissue in obesity, such as hypoxia
and glucose starvation, are more likely physiological ER stressors of adipocytes 
than the lipid overload or hyperinsulinemia associated with obesity.

PMCID: PMC4496967
PMID: 26257992  [PubMed]


110. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):19990-20001.

Loss of p53 enhances the function of the endoplasmic reticulum through activation
of the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway.

Namba T(1,)(2), Chu K(2), Kodama R(1), Byun S(2), Yoon KW(2), Hiraki M(2),
Mandinova A(2), Lee SW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Science Research Center, Kochi University, Kohasu Oko-cho Nankoku-shi, Kochi, 
Japan. (2)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA, USA.

Altered regulation of ER stress response has been implicated in a variety of
human diseases, such as cancer and metabolic diseases. Excessive ER function
contributes to malignant phenotypes, such as chemoresistance and metastasis. Here
we report that the tumor suppressor p53 regulates ER function in response to
stress. We found that loss of p53 function activates the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway to
enhance protein folding and secretion through upregulation of IRE1a and
subsequent activation of its target XBP1. We also show that wild-type p53
interacts with synoviolin (SYVN1)/HRD1/DER3, a transmembrane E3 ubiquitin ligase 
localized to ER during ER stress and removes unfolded proteins by reversing
transport to the cytosol from the ER, and its interaction stimulates IRE1a
degradation. Moreover, IRE1a inhibitor suppressed protein secretion, induced cell
death in p53-deficient cells, and strongly suppressed the formation of tumors by 
p53-deficient human tumor cells in vivo compared with those that expressed
wild-type p53. Therefore, our data imply that the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway serves as a 
target for therapy of chemoresistant tumors that express mutant p53.

PMCID: PMC4652982
PMID: 26254280  [PubMed - in process]


111. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 18;290(38):23282-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.677542. Epub
2015 Aug 3.

Sphingosine Kinase 1 Protects Hepatocytes from Lipotoxicity via Down-regulation
of IRE1a Protein Expression.

Qi Y(1), Wang W(2), Chen J(1), Dai L(1), Kaczorowski D(1), Gao X(2), Xia P(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Signal Transduction Program, Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2042, Australia and. (2)the Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.
(3)From the Signal Transduction Program, Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2042, Australia and the Department of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China
xiapu_fudan@163.com.

Aberrant deposition of fat including free fatty acids in the liver often causes
damage to hepatocytes, namely lipotoxicity, which is a key pathogenic event in
the development and progression of fatty liver diseases. This study demonstrates 
a pivotal role of sphingosine kinase 1 (SphK1) in protecting hepatocytes from
lipotoxicity. Exposure of primary murine hepatocytes to palmitate resulted in
dose-dependent cell death, which was enhanced significantly in Sphk1-deficient
cells. In keeping with this, expression of dominant-negative mutant SphK1 also
markedly promoted palmitate-induced cell death. In contrast, overexpression of
wild-type SphK1 profoundly protected hepatocytes from lipotoxicity.
Mechanistically, the protective effect of SphK1 is attributable to suppression of
ER stress-mediated pro-apoptotic pathways, as reflected in the inhibition of
IRE1a activation, XBP1 splicing, JNK phosphorylation, and CHOP induction. Of
note, SphK1 inhibited the IRE1a pathway by reducing IRE1a expression at the
transcriptional level. Moreover, S1P mimicked the effect of SphK1, suppressing
IRE1a expression in a receptor-dependent manner. Furthermore, enforced
overexpression of IRE1a significantly blocked the protective effect of SphK1
against lipotoxicity. Therefore, this study provides new insights into the role
of SphK1 in hepatocyte survival and uncovers a novel mechanism for protection
against ER stress-mediated cell death.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4645625 [Available on 2016-09-18]
PMID: 26240153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Oct;81(20):6982-93. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01440-15. Epub 
2015 Jul 31.

Hansenula polymorpha Hac1p Is Critical to Protein N-Glycosylation Activity
Modulation, as Revealed by Functional and Transcriptomic Analyses.

Moon HY(1), Cheon SA(2), Kim H(2), Agaphonov MO(3), Kwon O(4), Oh DB(4), Kim
JY(5), Kang HA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology,
College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science,
Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)A. N. Bach Institute of
Biochemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. (4)Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jykim@cnu.ac.kr hyunkang@cau.ac.kr. (6)Department of Life Science, College of
Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea jykim@cnu.ac.kr
hyunkang@cau.ac.kr.

Aggregation of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induces a
cellular protective response to ER stress, the unfolded protein response (UPR),
which is mediated by a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription factor,
Hac1p/Xbp1. In this study, we identified and studied the molecular functions of a
HAC1 homolog from the thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha (HpHAC1). We
found that the HpHAC1 mRNA contains a nonconventional intron of 177 bp whose
interaction with the 5' untranslated region is responsible for the translational 
inhibition of the HpHAC1 mRNA. The H. polymorpha hac1-null (Hphac1<U+0394>) mutant
strain grew slowly, even under normal growth conditions, and was less
thermotolerant than the wild-type (WT) strain. The mutant strain was also more
sensitive to cell wall-perturbing agents and to the UPR-inducing agents
dithiothreitol (DTT) and tunicamycin (TM). Using comparative transcriptome
analysis of the WT and Hphac1<U+0394> strains treated with DTT and TM, we identified
HpHAC1-dependent core UPR targets, which included genes involved in protein
secretion and processing, particularly those required for N-linked protein
glycosylation. Notably, different glycosylation and processing patterns of the
vacuolar glycoprotein carboxypeptidase Y were observed in the WT and Hphac1<U+0394>
strains. Moreover, overexpression of active HpHac1p significantly increased the
N-linked glycosylation efficiency and TM resistance. Collectively, our results
suggest that the function of HpHac1p is important not only for UPR induction but 
also for efficient glycosylation in H. polymorpha.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4579441
PMID: 26231645  [PubMed - in process]


113. Science. 2015 Jul 31;349(6247):500-6. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa0079.

METABOLISM. S-Nitrosylation links obesity-associated inflammation to endoplasmic 
reticulum dysfunction.

Yang L(1), Calay ES(1), Fan J(1), Arduini A(1), Kunz RC(2), Gygi SP(2), Yalcin
A(1), Fu S(1), Hotamisligil GS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases and Sabri Ülker Center, Harvard
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Genetics
and Complex Diseases and Sabri Ülker Center, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA. ghotamis@hsph.harvard.edu.

The association between inflammation and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has
been observed in many diseases. However, if and how chronic inflammation
regulates the unfolded protein response (UPR) and alters ER homeostasis in
general, or in the context of chronic disease, remains unknown. Here, we show
that, in the setting of obesity, inflammatory input through increased inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activity causes S-nitrosylation of a key UPR
regulator, IRE1a, which leads to a progressive decline in hepatic IRE1a-mediated 
XBP1 splicing activity in both genetic (ob/ob) and dietary (high-fat
diet-induced) models of obesity. Finally, in obese mice with liver-specific IRE1a
deficiency, reconstitution of IRE1a expression with a nitrosylation-resistant
variant restored IRE1a-mediated XBP1 splicing and improved glucose homeostasis in
vivo. Taken together, these data describe a mechanism by which inflammatory
pathways compromise UPR function through iNOS-mediated S-nitrosylation of IRE1a, 
which contributes to defective IRE1a activity, impaired ER function, and
prolonged ER stress in obesity.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4573582
PMID: 26228140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 29;6:7887. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8887.

Legionella suppresses the host unfolded protein response via multiple mechanisms.

Treacy-Abarca S(1), Mukherjee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143-0552, USA [2]
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, George Williams Hooper Foundation, 513
Parnassus Avenue, Box 0552, Rm HSW 1522, San Francisco, California 94143-0552,
USA.

The intracellular pathogen, Legionella pneumophila, secretes ~300 effector
proteins to modulate the host environment. Given the intimate interaction between
L. pneumophila and the endoplasmic reticulum, we investigated the role of the
host unfolded protein response (UPR) during L. pneumophila infection.
Interestingly, we show that the host identifies L. pneumophila infection as a
form of endoplasmic reticulum stress and the sensor pATF6 is processed to
generate pATF6(N), a transcriptional activator of downstream UPR genes. However, 
L. pneumophila is able to suppress the UPR and block the translation of
prototypical UPR genes, BiP and CHOP. Furthermore, biochemical studies reveal
that L. pneumophila uses two effectors (Lgt1 and Lgt2) to inhibit the splicing of
XBP1u mRNA to spliced XBP1 (XBP1s), an UPR response regulator. Thus, we
demonstrate that L. pneumophila is able to inhibit the UPR by multiple mechanisms
including blocking XBP1u splicing and causing translational repression. This
observation highlights the utility of L. pneumophila as a powerful tool for
studying a critical protein homeostasis regulator.

PMCID: PMC4519984
PMID: 26219498  [PubMed - in process]


115. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar;27(3):863-76. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015020196. Epub 2015
Jul 20.

Angiogenin Mediates Cell-Autonomous Translational Control under Endoplasmic
Reticulum Stress and Attenuates Kidney Injury.

Mami I(1), Bouvier N(2), El Karoui K(3), Gallazzini M(3), Rabant M(4),
Laurent-Puig P(5), Li S(6), Tharaux PL(7), Beaune P(5), Thervet E(8), Chevet
E(9), Hu GF(6), Pallet N(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1147,
Saints-Pères Research Center Paris, France; Paris Descartes University Paris,
France; (2)Nephrology Department Caen University Hospital, France; (3)Paris
Descartes University Paris, France; INSERM U1151, Sick Childrens Necker Institute
Paris, France; (4)Paris Descartes University Paris, France; Pathology Department,
Necker Hospital Paris, France; (5)Institut National de la Sante et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1147, Saints-Pères Research Center Paris, France;
Paris Descartes University Paris, France; Clinical Chemistry and. (6)Molecular
Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts;
(7)Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, INSERM, Paris, France; and. (8)Paris
Descartes University Paris, France; Nephrology Departments, Georges Pompidou
European Hospital Paris, France; (9)INSERM, UMR-U1053, Team Endoplasmic Reticulum
Stress and Cancer, Bordeaux, France. (10)Institut National de la Sante et de la
Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U1147, Saints-Pères Research Center Paris, France;
Paris Descartes University Paris, France; Clinical Chemistry and Nephrology
Departments, Georges Pompidou European Hospital Paris, France; npallet@yahoo.fr.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in the pathophysiology of kidney
disease and aging, but the molecular bases underlying the biologic outcomes on
the evolution of renal disease remain mostly unknown. Angiogenin (ANG) is a
ribonuclease that promotes cellular adaptation under stress but its contribution 
to ER stress signaling remains elusive. In this study, we investigated the
ANG-mediated contribution to the signaling and biologic outcomes of ER stress in 
kidney injury. ANG expression was significantly higher in samples from injured
human kidneys than in samples from normal human kidneys, and in mouse and rat
kidneys, ANG expression was specifically induced under ER stress. In human renal 
epithelial cells, ER stress induced ANG expression in a manner dependent on the
activity of transcription factor XBP1, and ANG promoted cellular adaptation to ER
stress through induction of stress granules and inhibition of translation.
Moreover, the severity of renal lesions induced by ER stress was dramatically
greater in ANG knockout mice (Ang(-/-)) mice than in wild-type mice. These
results indicate that ANG is a critical mediator of tissue adaptation to kidney
injury and reveal a physiologically relevant ER stress-mediated adaptive
translational control mechanism.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4769205 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26195817  [PubMed - in process]


116. Nat Immunol. 2015 Aug;16(8):793-4. doi: 10.1038/ni.3214.

XBP1, a determinant of the eosinophil lineage.

Shen ZJ(1), Malter JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Aug;16(8):829-37.

PMCID: PMC4667729
PMID: 26194277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Invest. 2015 Aug 3;125(8):3269-79. doi: 10.1172/JCI76765. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

IRE1a/XBP1-mediated branch of the unfolded protein response regulates
osteoclastogenesis.

Tohmonda T, Yoda M, Iwawaki T, Matsumoto M, Nakamura M, Mikoshiba K, Toyama Y,
Horiuchi K.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular adaptive mechanism that is
activated in response to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic
reticulum. The inositol-requiring protein-1a/X-box-binding protein-mediated
(IRE1a/XBP1-mediated) branch of the UPR is highly conserved and has also been
shown to regulate various cell-fate decisions. Herein, we have demonstrated a
crucial role for the IREa/XBP1-mediated arm of the UPR in osteoclast
differentiation. Using murine models, we found that the conditional abrogation of
IRE1a in bone marrow cells increases bone mass as the result of defective
osteoclastic bone resorption. In osteoclast precursors, IRE1a was transiently
activated during osteoclastogenesis, and suppression of the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway in
these cells substantially inhibited the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts
in vitro. We determined that XBP1 directly binds the promoter and induces
transcription of the gene encoding the master regulator of osteoclastogenesis
nuclear factor of activated T cells cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1). Moreover, activation 
of IRE1a was partially dependent on Ca2+ oscillation mediated by inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors 2 and 3 (ITPR2 and ITPR3) in the endoplasmic
reticulum, as pharmacological inhibition or deletion of these receptors markedly 
decreased Xbp1 mRNA processing. The present study thus reveals an intracellular
pathway that integrates the UPR and osteoclast differentiation through activation
of the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC4563737
PMID: 26193638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 17;10(7):e0132761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132761.
eCollection 2015.

Polyunsaturated Branched-Chain Fatty Acid Geranylgeranoic Acid Induces Unfolded
Protein Response in Human Hepatoma Cells.

Iwao C(1), Shidoji Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology, Graduate School of Human Health Science,
University of Nagasaki, Nagasaki, Japan.

The acyclic diterpenoid acid geranylgeranoic acid (GGA) has been reported to
induce autophagic cell death in several human hepatoma-derived cell lines;
however, the molecular mechanism for this remains unknown. In the present study, 
several diterpenoids were examined for ability to induce XBP1 splicing and/or
lipotoxicity for human hepatoma cell lines. Here we show that three groups of
diterpenoids emerged: 1) GGA, 2,3-dihydro GGA and 9-cis retinoic acid induce cell
death and XBP1 splicing; 2) all-trans retinoic acid induces XBP1 splicing but
little cell death; and 3) phytanic acid, phytenic acid and geranylgeraniol induce
neither cell death nor XBP1 splicing. GGA-induced ER stress/ unfolded protein
response (UPR) and its lipotoxicity were both blocked by co-treatment with oleic 
acid. The blocking activity of oleic acid for GGA-induced XBP1 splicing was not
attenuated by methylation of oleic acid. These findings strongly suggest that GGA
at micromolar concentrations induces the so-called lipid-induced ER stress
response/UPR, which is oleate-suppressive, and shows its lipotoxicity in human
hepatoma cells.

PMCID: PMC4506074
PMID: 26186544  [PubMed - in process]


119. J Immunol Res. 2015;2015:747645. doi: 10.1155/2015/747645. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

IFI16 Expression Is Related to Selected Transcription Factors during B-Cell
Differentiation.

Piccaluga PP(1), Agostinelli C(1), Fuligni F(1), Righi S(1), Tripodo C(2), Re
MC(3), Clò A(3), Miserocchi A(3), Morini S(3), Gariglio M(4), Ferri GG(5),
Rinaldi-Ceroni A(5), Piccin O(5), De Andrea M(6), Pileri SA(1), Landolfo S(6),
Gibellini D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Hematopathology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (2)Department of Human Pathology, University of Palermo,
90127 Palermo, Italy. (3)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty
Medicine, Bologna University Medical School Unit of Microbiology, S. Orsola
Malpighi Hospital, 40138 Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, Medical School of Novara, 28100 Novara, Italy.
(5)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine, Bologna
University Medical School Unit of Otolaryngology, S. Orsola Malpighi Hospital,
40138 Bologna, Italy. (6)Department of Public Health and Microbiology, University
of Turin, 10126 Turin, Italy. (7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic,
University of Verona, 35124 Verona, Italy.

The interferon-inducible DNA sensor IFI16 is involved in the modulation of
cellular survival, proliferation, and differentiation. In the hematopoietic
system, IFI16 is consistently expressed in the CD34+ stem cells and in peripheral
blood lymphocytes; however, little is known regarding its regulation during
maturation of B- and T-cells. We explored the role of IFI16 in normal B-cell
subsets by analysing its expression and relationship with the major transcription
factors involved in germinal center (GC) development and plasma-cell (PC)
maturation. IFI16 mRNA was differentially expressed in B-cell subsets with
significant decrease in IFI16 mRNA in GC and PCs with respect to naïve and memory
subsets. IFI16 mRNA expression is inversely correlated with a few master
regulators of B-cell differentiation such as BCL6, XBP1, POU2AF1, and BLIMP1. In 
contrast, IFI16 expression positively correlated with STAT3, REL, SPIB, RELA,
RELB, IRF4, STAT5B, and STAT5A. ARACNE algorithm indicated a direct regulation of
IFI16 by BCL6, STAT5B, and RELB, whereas the relationship between IFI16 and the
other factors is modulated by intermediate factors. In addition, analysis of the 
CD40 signaling pathway showed that IFI16 gene expression directly correlated with
NF-<U+03BA>B activation, indicating that IFI16 could be considered an upstream modulator
of NF-<U+03BA>B in human B-cells.

PMCID: PMC4491573
PMID: 26185770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;117(2):361-9. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25278.

RU486 Induces Pro-Apoptotic Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Through the Induction of
CHOP Expression by Enhancing C/EBPd Expression in Human Renal Carcinoma Caki
Cells.

Jang JH(1), Min KJ(1), Kim S(1), Park JW(1), Kwon TK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 2800
Dalgubeoldaero, Dalseo-Gu, Daegu, 704-701, South Korea.

RU486 (Mifepristone) is known as an antagonist of the progesterone receptor and
glucocorticoid receptor. Here, we investigated the mechanism underlying
anti-tumor activity of RU486 in renal carcinoma Caki cells. Treatment of Caki
cells with RU486 was found to induce several signature ER stress markers;
including ER stress-specific XBP1 splicing, and the up-regulation of
glucose-regulated protein (GRP)-78 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous 
protein (CHOP) expression. RU486-induced expression of CHOP involves the putative
C/EBPd site within the CHOP promoter region. Using a combination of C/EBPd cDNA
transfection, the luciferase assay with a mutated C/EBPd binding site and
siRNA-mediated C/EBPd knockdown, we found that the C/EBPd site is required for
RU486-mediated activation of the CHOP promoter. In addition, RU486-induced CHOP
expression is down-regulated by inhibition of the p38 MAPK and JNK signaling
pathways at the post-translational levels. RU486 dose-dependently induced
apoptotic cell death in renal carcinoma cells. Suppression of CHOP expression by 
CHOP siRNA attenuated RU486-induced apoptosis. Taken together, RU486 induces
pro-apoptotic ER stress through the induction of CHOP expression. J. Cell.
Biochem. 117: 361-369, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26174226  [PubMed - in process]


121. Nat Immunol. 2015 Aug;16(8):829-37. doi: 10.1038/ni.3225. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

The transcription factor XBP1 is selectively required for eosinophil
differentiation.

Bettigole SE(1), Lis R(2), Adoro S(3), Lee AH(4), Spencer LA(5), Weller PF(5),
Glimcher LH(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
[2] Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, New York, USA. [3] Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York, USA. (2)1] Ansary Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Genetic Medicine, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. [2] Ronald O. Perelman and
Claudia Cohen Center for Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York, USA. (3)1] Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, New York, USA. [2] Sandra and Edward Meyer
Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, New York, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, 
Division of Allergy and Inflammation, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Aug;16(8):793-4.

The transcription factor XBP1 has been linked to the development of highly
secretory tissues such as plasma cells and Paneth cells, yet its function in
granulocyte maturation has remained unknown. Here we discovered an unexpectedly
selective and absolute requirement for XBP1 in eosinophil differentiation without
an effect on the survival of basophils or neutrophils. Progenitors of myeloid
cells and eosinophils selectively activated the endoribonuclease IRE1a and
spliced Xbp1 mRNA without inducing parallel endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
signaling pathways. Without XBP1, nascent eosinophils exhibited massive defects
in the post-translational maturation of key granule proteins required for
survival, and these unresolvable structural defects fed back to suppress critical
aspects of the transcriptional developmental program. Hence, we present evidence 
that granulocyte subsets can be distinguished by their differential reliance on
secretory-pathway homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4577297
PMID: 26147683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. EBioMedicine. 2015 Mar 28;2(5):406-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.03.021.
eCollection 2015.

MET Suppresses Epithelial VEGFR2 via Intracrine VEGF-induced Endoplasmic
Reticulum-associated Degradation.

Chen TT(1), Filvaroff E(1), Peng J(2), Marsters S(1), Jubb A(3), Koeppen H(3),
Merchant M(2), Ashkenazi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology, Genentech, Inc. 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 94080,
USA. (2)In Vivo Pharmacology, Genentech, Inc. 1 DNA Way, South San Francisco, CA 
94080, USA. (3)Research Pathology, Genentech, Inc. 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
drive cancer through their respective receptors, MET and VEGF receptor 2
(VEGFR2). VEGFR2 inhibits MET by promoting MET dephosphorylation. However,
whether MET conversely regulates VEGFR2 remains unknown. Here we show that MET
suppresses VEGFR2 protein by inducing its endoplasmic-reticulum-associated
degradation (ERAD), via intracrine VEGF action. HGF-MET signaling in epithelial
cancer cells promoted VEGF biosynthesis through PI3-kinase. In turn, VEGF and
VEGFR2 associated within the ER, activating inositol-requiring enzyme 1a, and
thereby facilitating ERAD-mediated depletion of VEGFR2. MET disruption
upregulated VEGFR2, inducing compensatory tumor growth via VEGFR2 and MEK.
However, concurrent disruption of MET and either VEGF or MEK circumvented this,
enabling more profound tumor inhibition. Our findings uncover unique
cross-regulation between MET and VEGFR2-two RTKs that play significant roles in
tumor malignancy. Furthermore, these results suggest rational combinatorial
strategies for targeting RTK signaling pathways more effectively, which has
potentially important implications for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4486192
PMID: 26137585  [PubMed]


123. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 15;413:189-201. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.06.025.
Epub 2015 Jun 30.

The balance between adaptive and apoptotic unfolded protein responses regulates
ß-cell death under ER stress conditions through XBP1, CHOP and JNK.

Chan JY(1), Luzuriaga J(1), Maxwell EL(1), West PK(1), Bensellam M(1), Laybutt
DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, UNSW Australia,
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (2)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's
Hospital, UNSW Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
r.laybutt@garvan.org.au.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and the subsequent unfolded protein response
(UPR) have been implicated in ß-cell death in type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
However, the UPR is also a fundamental mechanism required for ß-cell adaptation
and survival. The mechanisms regulating the transition from adaptive to apoptotic
UPR remain to be clarified. Here, we investigated the relationships between XBP1,
CHOP and JNK in the transition from adaptive to apoptotic UPR and ß-cell death in
models of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. XBP1 inhibition potentiated cell death
induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines or the saturated fatty acid palmitate in
MIN6 ß-cells. This response was prevented by CHOP inhibition. IRE1/XBP1
inhibition led to alterations in islets from diabetes-resistant ob/ob mice that
resemble those found in diabetes, including increases in cell death and
inflammation and antioxidant gene expression. Similarly, IRE1/XBP1 inhibition
increased cell death in islets from NOD mice. On the other hand, JNK inhibition: 
1) increased adaptive UPR and reduced cell death in islets from diabetic db/db
mice, and 2) restored adaptive UPR while protecting against apoptotic UPR gene
expression and ß-cell death and dysfunction following cytokine exposure. These
findings suggest that the balance between XBP1-mediated adaptive and
CHOP-dependent apoptotic UPR is critically important for ß-cell survival during
ER stress. JNK activation regulates the transition from adaptive to apoptotic
UPR, thus providing a mechanism for ß-cell propensity to cell death rather than
ER stress adaptation in type 1 and type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26135354  [PubMed - in process]


124. Oncol Rep. 2015 Sep;34(3):1279-88. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4083. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

RITA enhances irradiation-induced apoptosis in p53-defective cervical cancer
cells via upregulation of IRE1a/XBP1 signaling.

Zhu H(1), Abulimiti M(1), Liu H(1), Su XJ(1), Liu CH(1), Pei HP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan 410008, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

Radiation therapy is the most widely used treatment for patients with cervical
cancer. Recent studies have shown that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induces 
apoptosis and sensitizes tumor cells to radiotherapy, which reportedly induces ER
stress in cells. Classical key tumor suppressor p53 is involved in the response
to a variety of cellular stresses, including those incurred by ionizing
irradiation. A recent study demonstrated that small-molecule RITA (reactivation
of p53 and induction of tumor cell apoptosis) increased the radiosensitivity of
tumor cells expressing mutant p53 (mtp53). In the present study, we explored the 
effects and the underlying mechanisms of RITA in regards to the radiosensitivity 
and ER stress in mtp53-expressing human cervix cancer cells. Treatment with 1 µM 
of RITA for 24 h before irradiation markedly decreased survival and increased
apoptosis in C-33A and HT-3 cells; the effects were not significantly altered by 
knockdown of p53. In the irradiated C-33A and HT-3 cells, RITA significantly
increased the expression of IRE1a, the spliced XBP1 mRNA level, as well as
apoptosis; the effects were abolished by knockdown of IRE1a. Transcriptional
pulse-chase assays revealed that RITA significantly increased the stability of
IRE1a mRNA in the irradiated C-33A and HT-3 cells. In contrast, the same RITA
treatment did not show any significant effect on sham-irradiated cells. In
conclusion, the present study provides initial evidence that RITA upregulates the
expression level of IRE1a by increasing the stability of IRE1a mRNA in irradiated
mtp53-expressing cervical cancer cells; the effect leads to enhanced IRE1a/XBP1
ER stress signaling and increased apoptosis in the cells. The present study
offers novel insight into the pharmacological potential of RITA in the
radiotherapy for cervical cancer.

PMID: 26134873  [PubMed - in process]


125. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Nov;20(6):927-38. doi: 10.1007/s12192-015-0613-0.
Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Crocin and Quercetin protect HCT116 and HEK293 cells from Zearalenone-induced
apoptosis by reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Ben Salem I(1,)(2), Prola A(3), Boussabbeh M(1,)(2), Guilbert A(3), Bacha H(1),
Abid-Essefi S(4), Lemaire C(3,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds (LRSBC), Faculty 
of Dental Medicine, Rue Avicenne, 5019, Monastir, Tunisia. (2)Faculty of Sciences
of Bizerte, Carthage University, Bizerte, Tunisia. (3)INSERM UMR-S 1180, LabEx
LERMIT, Châtenay-Malabry, France. (4)Laboratory for Research on Biologically
Compatible Compounds (LRSBC), Faculty of Dental Medicine, Rue Avicenne, 5019,
Monastir, Tunisia. salwaabid@yahoo.fr. (5)Faculté de Pharmacie, Université
Paris-Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, France. (6)Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en
Yvelines, Versailles, France.

Mycotoxins are considered to be significant contaminants of food and animal feed.
Zearalenone (ZEN) is a non-steroidal estrogenic mycotoxin produced by several
species of Fusarium in cereals and agricultural products. ZEN has been shown to
be cytotoxic, genotoxic, and mutagenic in different cell types. In the present
study, we investigated the involvement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
ZEN-mediated toxicity in human intestine (HCT116) and kidney (HEK293) cells and
evaluated the effects of the two common dietary compounds Quercetin (QUER) and
Crocin (CRO). We show that ZEN treatment induces ER stress and activates the
unfolded protein response (UPR) as evidenced by XBP1 mRNA splicing and
upregulation of GRP78, ATF4, GADD34, PDIA6, and CHOP. Activation of the ER stress
response is associated with activation of the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis.
This apoptotic process is characterized by an increase in ROS generation and
lipid peroxidation, a loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), and an
activation of caspases and DNA damages. We also demonstrate that the antioxidant 
properties of QUER and CRO help to prevent ER stress and reduce ZEN-induced
apoptosis in HCT116 and HEK293 cells. Our results suggest that antioxidant
molecule might be helpful to prevent ZEN-induced ER stress and toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4595428 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26134454  [PubMed - in process]


126. EMBO Rep. 2015 Aug;16(8):955-64. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439979. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Parasite-induced ER stress response in hepatocytes facilitates Plasmodium liver
stage infection.

Inácio P(1), Zuzarte-Luís V(1), Ruivo MT(1), Falkard B(2), Nagaraj N(3), Rooijers
K(4), Mann M(3), Mair G(5), Fidock DA(6), Mota MM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Proteomics and
Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.
(4)Division of Gene Regulation, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (5)Department of Parasitology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. (6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. (7)Instituto de 
Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal mmota@medicina.ulisboa.pt.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2015 Aug;16(8):883-4.

Upon infection of a mammalian host, Plasmodium parasites first replicate inside
hepatocytes, generating thousands of new parasites. Although Plasmodium
intra-hepatic development represents a substantial metabolic challenge to the
host hepatocyte, how infected cells respond to and integrate this stress remains 
poorly understood. Here, we present proteomic and transcriptomic analyses,
revealing that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident unfolded protein response 
(UPR) is activated in host hepatocytes upon Plasmodium berghei infection. The
expression of XBP1s--the active form of the UPR mediator XBP1--and the
liver-specific UPR mediator CREBH is induced by P. berghei infection in vivo.
Furthermore, this UPR induction increases parasite liver burden. Altogether, our 
data suggest that ER stress is a central feature of P. berghei intra-hepatic
development, contributing to the success of infection.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4552488 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26113366  [PubMed - in process]


127. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 25;5:11555. doi: 10.1038/srep11555.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress impairment in the spinal dorsal horn of a
neuropathic pain model.

Zhang E(1), Yi MH(2), Shin N(2), Baek H(2), Kim S(2), Kim E(2), Kwon K(2), Lee
S(3), Kim HW(4), Chul Bae Y(5), Kim Y(6), Kwon OY(2), Lee WH(3), Kim DW(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Anatomy, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea [2] Department of
Anesthesiology, Yanbian University Hospital, Yanbian, 133000, China.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National University 
School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea. (3)Department of Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon 301-721, South
Korea. (4)Department of Physiology, Brain Research Institute, Chungnam National
University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-747, South Korea. (5)Department of
Oral Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu 700-412, South Korea. (6)Department of Chemical and Biological 
Engineering, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in neurodegenerative
diseases, but its role in neuropathic pain remains unclear. In this study, we
examined the ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) activation in a L5
spinal nerve ligation (SNL)-induced rat neuropathic pain model. SNL-induced
neuropathic pain was assessed behaviorally using the CatWalk system, and
histologically with microglial activation in the dorsal spinal horn. L5 SNL
induced BIP upregulation in the neuron of superficial laminae of dorsal spinal
horn. It also increased the level of ATF6 and intracellular localization into the
nuclei in the neurons. Moreover, spliced XBP1 was also markedly elevated in the
ipsilateral spinal dorsal horn. The PERK-elF2 pathway was activated in astrocytes
of the spinal dorsal horn in the SNL model. In addition, electron microscopy
revealed the presence of swollen cisternae in the dorsal spinal cord after SNL.
Additionally, inhibition of the ATF6 pathway by intrathecal treatment with ATF6
siRNA reduced pain behaviors and BIP expression in the dorsal horn. The results
suggest that ER stress might be involved in the induction and maintenance of
neuropathic pain. Furthermore, a disturbance in UPR signaling may render the
spinal neurons vulnerable to peripheral nerve injury or neuropathic pain stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4479804
PMID: 26109318  [PubMed - in process]


128. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Aug 15;26(16):2873-84. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-02-0074. Epub
2015 Jun 24.

Ire1-mediated decay in mammalian cells relies on mRNA sequence, structure, and
translational status.

Moore K(1), Hollien J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Cell and Genome Science, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. (2)Department of Biology and Center for Cell and 
Genome Science, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
hollien@biology.utah.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurs when misfolded proteins overwhelm the
capacity of the ER, resulting in activation of the unfolded protein response
(UPR). Ire1, an ER transmembrane nuclease and conserved transducer of the UPR,
cleaves the mRNA encoding the transcription factor Xbp1 at a dual stem-loop (SL) 
structure, leading to Xbp1 splicing and activation. Ire1 also cleaves other mRNAs
localized to the ER membrane through regulated Ire1-dependent decay (RIDD). We
find that during acute ER stress in mammalian cells, Xbp1-like SLs within the
target mRNAs are necessary for RIDD. Furthermore, depletion of Perk, a UPR
transducer that attenuates translation during ER stress, inhibits RIDD in a
substrate-specific manner. Artificially blocking translation of the SL region of 
target mRNAs fully restores RIDD in cells depleted of Perk, suggesting that
ribosomes disrupt SL formation and/or Ire1 binding. This coordination between
Perk and Ire1 may serve to spatially and temporally regulate RIDD.

© 2015 Moore and Hollien. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4571326
PMID: 26108623  [PubMed - in process]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 7;112(27):8451-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1502948112. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

RNA ligation in neurons by RtcB inhibits axon regeneration.

Kosmaczewski SG(1), Han SM(1), Han B(2), Irving Meyer B(1), Baig HS(1), Athar
W(1), Lin-Moore AT(1), Koelle MR(2), Hammarlund M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration
and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510;
(2)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510. (3)Department of Genetics and Program in Cellular 
Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06510; marc.hammarlund@yale.edu.

Activity of the RNA ligase RtcB has only two known functions: tRNA ligation after
intron removal and XBP1 mRNA ligation during activation of the unfolded protein
response. Here, we show that RtcB acts in neurons to inhibit axon regeneration
after nerve injury. This function of RtcB is independent of its basal activities 
in tRNA ligation and the unfolded protein response. Furthermore, inhibition of
axon regeneration is independent of the RtcB cofactor archease. Finally, RtcB is 
enriched at axon termini after nerve injury. Our data indicate that neurons have 
co-opted an ancient RNA modification mechanism to regulate specific and dynamic
functions and identify neuronal RtcB activity as a critical regulator of neuronal
growth potential.

PMCID: PMC4500288
PMID: 26100902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):e0130705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130705.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Unfolded Protein Response Pathway Activation in the Lenses of
Three Types of Cataracts.

Yang J(1), Zhou S(2), Gu J(1), Wang Y(1), Guo M(3), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, The First
People's Hospital of Foshan, Guangdong, China. (3)Department of Ophthalmology,
Huichang County People's Hospital, Jiangxi, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the activation of three unfolded protein response (UPR)
pathways in the lenses of age-related, high myopia-related and congenital
cataracts.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Lens specimens were collected from patients during small
incision cataract surgery. Lenses from young cadaver eyes were collected as
normal controls. Real-time PCR and Western blotting were performed to detect the 
expression of GRP78, p-eIF2a, spliced XBP1, ATF6, ATF4 and p-IRE1a in the lenses 
of normal human subjects and patients with age-related, myopia-related or
congenital cataracts.
RESULTS: In the lenses of the age-related and high myopia-related cataract
groups, the protein levels of ATF6, p-eIF2a and p-IRE1a and the gene expression
levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78, ATF6 and ATF4 were greatly increased.
Additionally, in the congenital cataract group, the protein levels of p-eIF2a and
p-IRE1a and the gene expression levels of spliced XBP1, GRP78 and ATF4 were
greatly increased. However, the protein and gene expression levels of ATF6 were
not up-regulated in the congenital cataract group compared with the normal
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The UPR is activated via different pathways in the lenses of
age-related, high myopia-related and congenital cataracts. UPR activation via
distinct pathways might play important roles in cataractogenesis mechanisms in
different types of cataracts.

PMCID: PMC4475046
PMID: 26091066  [PubMed - in process]


131. Cell. 2015 Jun 18;161(7):1492-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.006.

ER Stress in Dendritic Cells Promotes Cancer.

Garris CS(1), Pittet MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Research Institute 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Graduate Program in
Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Center for Systems 
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Research Institute and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address: mpittet@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment on
    Cell. 2015 Jun 18;161(7):1527-38.

XBP1 is part of the ER stress response, and when activated in cancer cells, it
fosters tumor growth. In this issue of Cell, Cubillos-Ruiz et al. demonstrate
that XBP1 in tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells blunts anti-tumor immunity. These
findings further imply XBP1 as a relevant target for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26091029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Dec;240(12):1664-71. doi: 10.1177/1535370215591829. 
Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Roxithromycin inhibits nuclear factor kappaB signaling and endoplasmic reticulum 
stress in intestinal epithelial cells and ameliorates experimental colitis in
mice.

Choi Y(1), Koh SJ(1), Lee HS(1), Kim JW(2), Gwan Kim B(1), Lee KL(1), Kim JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 156-707, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Boramae Hospital,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 156-707, Korea
giwkim@hanmail.net. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Liver Research Institute,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Korea.

Roxithromycin is known to have anti-inflammatory and immunoregulatory activity.
However, little information is available on the effect of roxithromycin in
intestinal inflammation. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of
roxithromycin on NF- <U+03BA>B signaling and ER stress in intestinal epithelial cells
(IECs) and the effect of roxithromycin on dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
acute colitis in a murine model. HCT116 cells and COLO205 cells were pretreated
with roxithromycin and then stimulated with tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a).
Interleukin (IL)-8 expression was determined by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B)
DNA-binding activity and I<U+03BA>B phosphorylation/degradation were evaluated by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Western blot analysis. The molecular
markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress, including p-JNK, phosphorylated
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (p-eIF2a), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) were evaluated using western blotting and PCR.
Mice were given 4% DSS for five days with or without roxithromycin. Primary IECs 
were isolated from mice with DSS-induced colitis. Roxithromycin significantly
inhibited the upregulated expression of IL-8. Pretreatment with roxithromycin
markedly attenuated NF-<U+03BA>B DNA-binding activity and I<U+03BA>B
phosphorylation/degradation. CHOP and XBP1 mRNA expression were enhanced in the
presence of TNF-a, and it was dampened by pretreatment of roxithromycin.
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation and the level of p-eIF2a were also 
downregulated by the pretreatment of roxithromycin. Roxithromycin significantly
reduced the severity of DSS-induced murine colitis, as assessed by the disease
activity index, colon length, and histology. In addition, the DSS-induced
phospho-I<U+03BA>B kinase activation was significantly decreased in
roxithromycin-pretreated mice. Finally, I<U+03BA>B degradation was reduced in primary
IECs from mice treated with roxithromycin. These results suggest that
roxithromycin may have potential usefulness in the treatment of inflammatory
bowel disease.

© 2015 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 26088864  [PubMed - in process]


133. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;29(8):1156-69. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1012. Epub 2015 Jun 
17.

COPII-Dependent ER Export: A Critical Component of Insulin Biogenesis and ß-Cell 
ER Homeostasis.

Fang J(1), Liu M(1), Zhang X(1), Sakamoto T(1), Taatjes DJ(1), Jena BP(1), Sun
F(1), Woods J(1), Bryson T(1), Kowluru A(1), Zhang K(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology (J.F., B.P.J., F.S., J.W., T.B., X.C.) and Center for
Molecular Medicine and Genetics (X.Z., K.Z.), School of Medicine, Department of
Physics and Astronomy (T.S.), College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences (A.K.), Eugene Applebaum College of
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, and John D. Dingell VA
Medical Center (A.K.), Detroit, Michigan 48201; Department of Internal Medicine
(M.L.), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; and Department of
Pathology (D.J.T.), Microscopy Imaging Center, University of Vermont College of
Medicine, Burlington, Vermont 05405.

Pancreatic ß-cells possess a highly active protein synthetic and export machinery
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to accommodate the massive production of
proinsulin. ER homeostasis is vital for ß-cell functions and is maintained by the
delicate balance between protein synthesis, folding, export, and degradation.
Disruption of ER homeostasis by diabetes-causing factors leads to ß-cell death.
Among the 4 components to maintain ER homeostasis in ß-cells, the role of ER
export in insulin biogenesis is the least understood. To address this knowledge
gap, the present study investigated the molecular mechanism of proinsulin ER
export in MIN6 cells and primary islets. Two inhibitory mutants of the
secretion-associated RAS-related protein (Sar)1 small GTPase, known to
specifically block coat protein complex II (COPII)-dependent ER export, were
overexpressed in ß-cells using recombinant adenoviruses. Results from this
approach, as well as small interfering RNA-mediated Sar1 knockdown, demonstrated 
that defective Sar1 function blocked proinsulin ER export and abolished its
conversion to mature insulin in MIN6 cells, isolated mouse, and human islets. It 
is further revealed, using an in vitro vesicle formation assay, that proinsulin
was packaged into COPII vesicles in a GTP- and Sar1-dependent manner. Blockage of
COPII-dependent ER exit by Sar1 mutants strongly induced ER morphology change, ER
stress response, and ß-cell apoptosis. These responses were mediated by the PKR
(double-stranded RNA-dependent kinase)-like ER kinase (PERK)/eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a (p-eIF2a) and inositol-requiring protein 1
(IRE1)/x-box binding protein 1 (Xbp1) pathways but not via activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6). Collectively, results from the study demonstrate
that COPII-dependent ER export plays a vital role in insulin biogenesis, ER
homeostasis, and ß-cell survival.

PMCID: PMC4517999 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26083833  [PubMed - in process]


134. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun 17;11(6):e1004946. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004946.
eCollection 2015.

Virulence Factors of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Induce Both the Unfolded Protein and 
Integrated Stress Responses in Airway Epithelial Cells.

van 't Wout EF(1), van Schadewijk A(2), van Boxtel R(3), Dalton LE(4), Clarke
HJ(4), Tommassen J(3), Marciniak SJ(4), Hiemstra PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the
Netherlands; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Leiden, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands. (4)Cambridge
Institute for Medical Research (CIMR), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection can be disastrous in chronic lung diseases such 
as cystic fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Its toxic effects
are largely mediated by secreted virulence factors including pyocyanin, elastase 
and alkaline protease (AprA). Efficient functioning of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) is crucial for cell survival and appropriate immune responses, while an
excess of unfolded proteins within the ER leads to "ER stress" and activation of 
the "unfolded protein response" (UPR). Bacterial infection and Toll-like receptor
activation trigger the UPR most likely due to the increased demand for protein
folding of inflammatory mediators. In this study, we show that cell-free
conditioned medium of the PAO1 strain of P. aeruginosa, containing secreted
virulence factors, induces ER stress in primary bronchial epithelial cells as
evidenced by splicing of XBP1 mRNA and induction of CHOP, GRP78 and GADD34
expression. Most aspects of the ER stress response were dependent on TAK1 and p38
MAPK, except for the induction of GADD34 mRNA. Using various mutant strains and
purified virulence factors, we identified pyocyanin and AprA as inducers of ER
stress. However, the induction of GADD34 was mediated by an ER stress-independent
integrated stress response (ISR) which was at least partly dependent on the
iron-sensing eIF2a kinase HRI. Our data strongly suggest that this increased
GADD34 expression served to protect against Pseudomonas-induced, iron-sensitive
cell cytotoxicity. In summary, virulence factors from P. aeruginosa induce ER
stress in airway epithelial cells and also trigger the ISR to improve cell
survival of the host.

PMCID: PMC4471080
PMID: 26083346  [PubMed - in process]


135. Mech Ageing Dev. 2015 Jul;149:65-74. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2015.05.008. Epub 2015
Jun 12.

Genome-wide expression analyses of the stationary phase model of ageing in yeast.

Wanichthanarak K(1), Wongtosrad N(2), Petranovic D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of
Technology, Göteborg, Sweden. (2)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers
University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden. (3)Department of Biology and
Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden.
Electronic address: dina.petranovic@chalmers.se.

Ageing processes involved in replicative lifespan (RLS) and chronological
lifespan (CLS) have been found to be conserved among many organisms, including in
unicellular Eukarya such as yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here we performed an 
integrated approach of genome wide expression profiles of yeast at different time
points, during growth and starvation. The aim of the study was to identify
transcriptional changes in those conditions by using several different
computational analyses in order to propose transcription factors, biological
networks and metabolic pathways that seem to be relevant during the process of
chronological ageing in yeast. Specifically, we performed differential gene
expression analysis, gene-set enrichment analysis and network-based analysis, and
we identified pathways affected in the stationary phase and specific
transcription factors driving transcriptional adaptations. The results indicate
signal propagation from G protein-coupled receptors through signaling pathway
components and other stress and nutrient-induced transcription factors resulting 
in adaptation of yeast cells to the lack of nutrients by activating metabolism
associated with aerobic metabolism of carbon sources such as ethanol, glycerol
and fatty acids. In addition, we found STE12, XBP1 and TOS8 as highly connected
nodes in the subnetworks of ageing yeast.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26079307  [PubMed - in process]


136. Cell. 2015 Jun 18;161(7):1527-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.025. Epub 2015 Jun 
11.

ER Stress Sensor XBP1 Controls Anti-tumor Immunity by Disrupting Dendritic Cell
Homeostasis.

Cubillos-Ruiz JR(1), Silberman PC(2), Rutkowski MR(3), Chopra S(2),
Perales-Puchalt A(3), Song M(2), Zhang S(4), Bettigole SE(5), Gupta D(6), Holcomb
K(6), Ellenson LH(7), Caputo T(6), Lee AH(7), Conejo-Garcia JR(3), Glimcher
LH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065,
USA; Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Tumor Microenvironment and Metastasis Program, The
Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (4)Institute of Biotechnology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer 
Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Harvard Graduate 
Program in Immunology, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, 
USA. (7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (8)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, 
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
lglimche@med.cornell.edu.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Jul 16;523(7560):294-5.
    Cell Res. 2015 Sep;25(9):989-90.
    Cell. 2015 Jun 18;161(7):1492-3.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Aug;15(8):465.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are required to initiate and sustain T cell-dependent
anti-cancer immunity. However, tumors often evade immune control by crippling
normal DC function. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response factor XBP1
promotes intrinsic tumor growth directly, but whether it also regulates the host 
anti-tumor immune response is not known. Here we show that constitutive
activation of XBP1 in tumor-associated DCs (tDCs) drives ovarian cancer (OvCa)
progression by blunting anti-tumor immunity. XBP1 activation, fueled by lipid
peroxidation byproducts, induced a triglyceride biosynthetic program in tDCs
leading to abnormal lipid accumulation and subsequent inhibition of tDC capacity 
to support anti-tumor T cells. Accordingly, DC-specific XBP1 deletion or
selective nanoparticle-mediated XBP1 silencing in tDCs restored their
immunostimulatory activity in situ and extended survival by evoking protective
type 1 anti-tumor responses. Targeting the ER stress response should
concomitantly inhibit tumor growth and enhance anti-cancer immunity, thus
offering a unique approach to cancer immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4580135 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26073941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jun 10;16(6):13302-21. doi: 10.3390/ijms160613302.

Acute Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Independent Unconventional Splicing of XBP1
mRNA in the Nucleus of Mammalian Cells.

Wang Y(1,)(2), Xing P(3), Cui W(4,)(5), Wang W(6,)(7), Cui Y(8), Ying G(9), Wang 
X(10), Li B(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China.
cristinaup@163.com. (2)The First Department of Breast Tumor, National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
300060, China. cristinaup@163.com. (3)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention 
and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
300060, China. xingpan1314@126.com. (4)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. zuiaisuxueer@126.com. (5)The First Department of Breast
Tumor, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China. zuiaisuxueer@126.com. (6)Laboratory of Cancer
Cell Biology, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China. wangwenwen.1988@163.com. (7)The
First Department of Breast Tumor, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, China.
wangwenwen.1988@163.com. (8)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National Clinical 
Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
300060, China. cuiyanfen@163.com. (9)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, National 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention 
and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin
300060, China. yingguoguang@163.com. (10)The First Department of Breast Tumor,
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. xinwangse@126.com. (11)Laboratory of Cancer Cell Biology, 
National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Tianjin 300060, China. binghuililab@163.com.

The regulation of expression of X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1), a transcriptional
factor, involves an unconventional mRNA splicing that removes the 26 nucleotides 
intron. In contrast to the conventional splicing that exclusively takes place in 
the nucleus, determining the location of unconventional splicing still remains
controversial. This study was designed to examine whether the unconventional
spicing of XBP1 mRNA could occur in the nucleus and its possible biological
relevance. We use RT-PCR reverse transcription system and the expand high
fidelity PCR system to detect spliced XBP1 mRNA, and fraction cells to determine 
the location of the unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA. We employ reporter
constructs to show the presence of unconventional splicing machinery in mammal
cells independently of acute endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Our results
reveal the presence of basal unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA in the nucleus 
that also requires inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase and endonuclease 1a
(IRE1a) and can occur independently of acute ER stress. Furthermore, we confirm
that acute ER stress induces the splicing of XBP1 mRNA predominantly occurring in
the cytoplasm, but it also promotes the splicing in the nucleus. The deletion of 
5'-nucleotides in XBP1 mRNA significantly increases its basal unconventional
splicing, suggesting that the secondary structure of XBP1 mRNA may determine the 
location of unconventional splicing. These results suggest that the
unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA can take place in the nucleus and/or
cytoplasm, which possibly depends on the elaborate regulation. The acute ER
stress-independent unconventional splicing in the nucleus is most likely required
for the maintaining of day-to-day folding protein homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4490496
PMID: 26068456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;65:230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.06.006.
Epub 2015 Jun 8.

Inositol-requiring protein 1 - X-box-binding protein 1 pathway promotes
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via mediating snail expression in pulmonary
fibrosis.

Mo XT(1), Zhou WC(2), Cui WH(2), Li DL(3), Li LC(4), Xu L(3), Zhao P(3), Gao
J(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. (2)School
of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, China. (3)School of Pharmacy,
Anhui University of Chinese Medicine, Hefei 230038, China. (4)School of Pharmacy,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; Department of Pharmacy, Sir Run
Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310016,
China. (5)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230022, China.
Electronic address: gaojianayfy@163.com.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a complex biological program during
which cells loss epithelial phenotype and acquire mesenchymal features. EMT is
thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of various fibrotic diseases including
pulmonary fibrosis (PF). Recent studies suggest that endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress is associated with EMT in the progression of PF. However, the exact
mechanism is unclear. Here, we developed a PF model with bleomycin (BLM)
administration in rats and conducted several simulation experiments in alveolar
epithelial cell (AECs) RLE-6TN to unravel the role of inositol-requiring protein 
1 (IRE1) - X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) signal pathway in ER stress-induced EMT
in PF. First, we observed that ER stress was occurred in type II AECs accompanied
by EMT in BLM-induced PF. Then we explored the role of IRE1-XBP1-snail pathway in
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1/tunicamycin (TM)-induced EMT. When TGF-ß1/TM 
was treated on AECs, IRE1 and XBP1 were overexpressed, meanwhile, snail
expression was upregulated accompanied with EMT. However, when IRE1 or XBP1 was
knockdown, TGF-ß1/TM-induced EMT were blocked while the expression of snail was
inhibited. Then we silenced snail and found that TGF-ß1/TM-induced EMT were also 
suppressed, but it had no effect on the up-regulated expression of IRE1 and XBP1.
Thus, we concluded that IRE1-XBP1 pathway promotes EMT via mediating snail
expression in PF.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26065400  [PubMed - in process]


139. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):881-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.132. Epub 2015 Jun 6.

A highly sensitive assay of IRE1 activity using the small luciferase NanoLuc:
Evaluation of ALS-related genetic and pathological factors.

Hikiji T(1), Norisada J(2), Hirata Y(2), Okuda K(3), Nagasawa H(3), Ishigaki
S(4), Sobue G(4), Kiuchi K(2), Oh-hashi K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering,
Japan. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Science, Faculty of
Engineering, Japan; United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and Medical
Information Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical & Medicinal Chemistry, Gifu Pharmaceutical
University, 1-25-4, Daigakunishi, Gifu 501-1196, Japan. (4)Department of
Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho,
Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. (5)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular
Science, Faculty of Engineering, Japan; United Graduate School of Drug Discovery 
and Medical Information Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan. Electronic address: oohashi@gifu-u.ac.jp.

Activation of inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) due to abnormal conditions of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is responsible for the cleavage of an unspliced
form of X-box binding protein 1 (uXBP1), producing its spliced form (sXBP1). To
estimate IRE1 activation, several analytical procedures using green fluorescence 
protein and firefly luciferase have been developed and applied to clarify the
roles of IRE1-XBP1 signaling pathways during development and disease progression.
In this study, we established a highly sensitive assay of IRE1 activity using a
small luciferase, NanoLuc, which has approximately 100-fold higher activity than 
firefly luciferase. The NanoLuc reporter, which contained a portion of the
spliced region of XBP1 upstream of NanoLuc, was highly sensitive and compatible
with several types of cell lines. We found that NanoLuc was secreted into the
extracellular space independent of the ER-Golgi pathway. The NanoLuc activity of 
an aliquot of culture medium from the neuroblastoma-spinal neuron hybrid cell
line NSC-34 reflected the toxic stimuli-induced elevation of intracellular
activity well. Using this technique, we evaluated the effects of several genetic 
and pathological factors associated with the onset and progression of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) on NanoLuc reporter activity. Under our experimental
conditions, inhibition of ER-Golgi transport by the overexpression of mutant Sar1
activated luciferase activity, whereas the co-expression of mutant SOD1 or the
C-terminal fragment of TDP-43 (TDP-25) did not. The addition of homocysteine
elevated the reporter activity; however, we did not observe any synergistic
effect due to the overexpression of the mutant genes described above. Taken
together, these data show that our analytical procedure is highly sensitive and
convenient for screening useful compounds that modulate IRE1-XBP1 signaling
pathways as well as for estimating IRE1 activation in several pathophysiological 
diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26056941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Aug 1;309(3):H459-70. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00056.2015. Epub 2015 Jun 8.

Attenuation of the unfolded protein response and endoplasmic reticulum stress
after mechanical unloading in dilated cardiomyopathy.

Castillero E(1), Akashi H(1), Pendrak K(2), Yerebakan H(1), Najjar M(1), Wang
C(1), Naka Y(1), Mancini D(3), Sweeney HL(2), D Armiento J(4), Ali ZA(3), Schulze
PC(3), George I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital - College
of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York;
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; (3)Division of Cardiology, New York Presbyterian Hospital - College
of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York; and.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology, Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York. (5)Division
of Cardiothoracic Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital - College of Physicians
and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York;
ig2006@cumc.columbia.edu.

Abnormal intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) handling can trigger endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, leading to activation of the unfolded protein response
(UPR) in an attempt to prevent cell death. Mechanical unloading with a left
ventricular assist device (LVAD) relieves pressure-volume overload and promotes
reverse remodeling of the failing myocardium. We hypothesized that mechanical
unloading would alter the UPR in patients with advanced heart failure (HF). UPR
was analyzed in paired myocardial tissue from 10 patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy obtained during LVAD implantation and explantation. Samples from
healthy hearts served as controls. Markers of UPR [binding immunoglobulin protein
(BiP), phosphorylated (P-) eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF2a), and X-box
binding protein (XBP1)] were significantly increased in HF, whereas LVAD support 
significantly decreased BiP, P-eIF2a, and XBP1s levels. Apoptosis as reflected by
C/EBP homologous protein and DNA damage were also significantly reduced after
LVAD support. Improvement in left ventricular dimensions positively correlated
with P-eIF2a/eIF2a and apoptosis level recovery. Furthermore, significant
dysregulation of calcium-handling proteins [P-ryanodine receptor, Ca(2+) storing 
protein calsequestrin, Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger, sarcoendoplasmic reticulum
Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA2a), ER chaperone protein calreticulin] was normalized after 
LVAD support. Reduced ER Ca(2+) content as a causative mechanism for UPR was
confirmed using AC16 cells treated with a calcium ionophore (A23187) and SERCA2a 
inhibitor (thapsigargin). UPR activation and apoptosis are reduced after
mechanical unloading, which may be mediated by the improvement of Ca(2+) handling
in patients with advanced HF. These changes may impact the potential for
myocardial recovery.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4525088 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26055788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;35(16):2761-70. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00215-15. Epub 2015 Jun 
1.

IRE1a-Dependent Decay of CReP/Ppp1r15b mRNA Increases Eukaryotic Initiation
Factor 2a Phosphorylation and Suppresses Protein Synthesis.

So JS(1), Cho S(2), Min SH(3), Kimball SR(4), Lee AH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, USA. (2)BCMB Allied Program, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, USA. (3)New Drug Development Center, Daegu-Gyeongbuk
Medical Innovation Foundation, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA BCMB Allied
Program, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA
anl2042@med.cornell.edu.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) regulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
homeostasis and protects cells from ER stress. IRE1a is a central regulator of
the UPR that activates the transcription factor XBP1s through an unconventional
splicing mechanism using its endoribonuclease activity. IRE1a also cleaves
certain mRNAs containing XBP1-like secondary structures to promote the
degradation of these mRNAs, a process known as regulated IRE1a-dependent decay
(RIDD). We show here that the mRNA of CReP/Ppp1r15b, a regulatory subunit of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphatase, is a RIDD
substrate. eIF2a plays a central role in the integrated stress response by
mediating the translational attenuation to decrease the stress level in the cell.
CReP expression was markedly suppressed in XBP1-deficient mice livers due to
hyperactivated IRE1a. Decreased CReP expression caused the induction of eIF2a
phosphorylation and the attenuation of protein synthesis in XBP1-deficient
livers. ER stress also suppressed CReP expression in an IRE1a-dependent manner,
which increased eIF2a phosphorylation and consequently attenuated protein
synthesis. Taken together, the results of our study reveal a novel function of
IRE1a in the regulation of eIF2a phosphorylation and the translational control.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4508316
PMID: 26031337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):518-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.061. Epub 2015 May 28.

Spliced XBP1 promotes macrophage survival and autophagy by interacting with
Beclin-1.

Tian PG(1), Jiang ZX(2), Li JH(3), Zhou Z(4), Zhang QH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China. (2)Centre
Laboratory, The 305th Hospital of the People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100017,
China. (3)Department of Geriatric Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hosptial,
Beijing 100853, China. (4)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: zhouzhe76@126.com.
(5)Department of Cardiology, The 305th Hospital of the People's Liberation Army, 
Beijing 100017, China. Electronic address: 1056055170@qq.com.

Macrophage autophagy plays an important role in the development of
atherosclerosis, but the precise mechanism mediating this process is unclear. The
potential role of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a crucial transduction
factor that is involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein 
response, in bone marrow-derived macrophage autophagy is unknown. This study
mainly explores the roles of XBP1 mRNA splicing in bone marrow-derived macrophage
autophagy. The present study shows that the transient overexpression of spliced
XBP1 via adenovirus-mediated gene transfer induces autophagy and promotes
proliferation in bone marrow-derived macrophages via the down-regulation of
Beclin-1, but that the sustained overexpression of spliced XBP1 leads to
apoptosis. When XBP1 is down-regulated in bone marrow-derived macrophages using
siRNA, rapamycin-induced autophagosome formation is ablated. Furthermore, we have
detected the overexpression of XBP1 in areas of atherosclerotic plaques in the
arteries of ApoE-/- mice. These results demonstrate that XBP1 mRNA splicing plays
an important role in maintaining the function of bone marrow-derived macrophages 
and provide new insight into the study and treatment of atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26026678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):975-94. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1049800.

RIPK1 regulates survival of human melanoma cells upon endoplasmic reticulum
stress through autophagy.

Luan Q(1), Jin L, Jiang CC, Tay KH, Lai F, Liu XY, Liu YL, Guo ST, Li CY, Yan XG,
Tseng HY, Zhang XD.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy; University of Newcastle ; NSW , 
Australia.

Although RIPK1 (receptor [TNFRSF]-interacting protein kinase 1) is emerging as a 
critical determinant of cell fate in response to cellular stress resulting from
activation of death receptors and DNA damage, its potential role in cell response
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress remains undefined. Here we report that RIPK1
functions as an important prosurvival mechanism in melanoma cells undergoing
pharmacological ER stress induced by tunicamycin (TM) or thapsigargin (TG)
through activation of autophagy. While treatment with TM or TG upregulated RIPK1 
and triggered autophagy in melanoma cells, knockdown of RIPK1 inhibited autophagy
and rendered the cells sensitive to killing by TM or TG, recapitulating the
effect of inhibition of autophagy. Consistently, overexpression of RIPK1 enhanced
induction of autophagy and conferred resistance of melanoma cells to TM- or
TG-induced cell death. Activation of MAPK8/JNK1 or MAPK9/JNK2, which
phosphorylated BCL2L11/BIM leading to its dissociation from BECN1/Beclin 1, was
involved in TM- or TG-induced, RIPK1-mediated activation of autophagy; whereas,
activation of the transcription factor HSF1 (heat shock factor protein 1)
downstream of the ERN1/IRE1-XBP1 axis of the unfolded protein response was
responsible for the increase in RIPK1 in melanoma cells undergoing
pharmacological ER stress. Collectively, these results identify upregulation of
RIPK1 as an important resistance mechanism of melanoma cells to TM- or TG-induced
ER stress by protecting against cell death through activation of autophagy, and
suggest that targeting the autophagy-activating mechanism of RIPK1 may be a
useful strategy to enhance sensitivity of melanoma cells to therapeutic agents
that induce ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4590596
PMID: 26018731  [PubMed - in process]


144. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Oct;29(7):1436-44. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2015.04.022. Epub
2015 May 18.

4-Nonylphenol reduces cell viability and induces apoptosis and ER-stress in a
human epithelial intestinal cell line.

Lepretti M(1), Paolella G(1), Giordano D(1), Marabotti A(2), Gay F(3), Capaldo
A(3), Esposito C(2), Caputo I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Chemistry and Biology, University of Salerno, via Giovanni Paolo II, 
132, 84084 Fisciano, SA, Italy. (2)Dept. of Chemistry and Biology, University of 
Salerno, via Giovanni Paolo II, 132, 84084 Fisciano, SA, Italy; European
Laboratory for the Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases (ELFID), University
Federico II, via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. (3)Dept. of Biology, University 
Federico II, via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy. (4)Dept. of Chemistry and
Biology, University of Salerno, via Giovanni Paolo II, 132, 84084 Fisciano, SA,
Italy; European Laboratory for the Investigation of Food-Induced Diseases
(ELFID), University Federico II, via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: icaputo@unisa.it.

4-Nonylphenol is a widely diffused and stable environmental contaminant,
originating from the degradation of alkyl phenol ethoxylates, common surfactants 
employed in several industrial applications. Due to its hydrophobic nature,
4-nonylphenol can easily accumulate in living organisms, including humans, where 
it displays a wide range of toxic effects. Since the gastrointestinal tract
represents the main route by which 4-nonylphenol enters the body, the intestine
may be one of the first organs to be damaged by chronic exposure to this
pollutant through the diet. In the present study, we investigated the effects of 
4-nonylphenol on a human intestinal epithelial cell line (Caco-2 cells). We
demonstrated that 4-nonylphenol was cytotoxic to cells, as revealed by a decrease
of the cell number and the decrement of mitochondrial functionality after 24 h of
treatment. 4-Nonylphenol also reduced the number of cells entering into S-phase
and interfered with epidermal growth factor signalling, with consequent negative 
effects on cell survival. In addition, 4-nonylphenol induced apoptosis, involving
the activation of caspase-3, and triggered an endoplasmic reticulum-stress
response, as revealed by over-expression of GRP78 (78 kDa glucose-regulated
protein) and activation of XBP1 (X-box binding protein-1). Together, these
findings support the hypothesis that prolonged exposure to 4-nonylphenol through 
the diet may lead to local damage at the level of intestinal mucosa, with
potentially negative consequences for intestinal homeostasis and functionality.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25998160  [PubMed - in process]


145. Semin Cancer Biol. 2015 Aug;33:48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2015.04.010. Epub 
2015 May 16.

Targeting the IRE1a-XBP1 branch of the unfolded protein response in human
diseases.

Jiang D(1), Niwa M(2), Koong AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic
address: akoong@stanford.edu.

Accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
leads to ER stress, which is characteristic of cells with high level of secretory
activity and implicated in a variety of disease conditions. In response to ER
stress, the cell elicits an adaptive process called the unfolded protein response
(UPR) to support cellular homeostasis and survival. However, prolonged and
unsolvable ER stress also induces apoptosis. As the most conserved signaling
branch of the UPR, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway plays important roles in both
physiological and pathological settings and its activity has profound effects on 
disease progression and prognosis. Recently, modulating this pathway with small
molecule compounds has been demonstrated as a promising approach for disease
therapy. In this review, we summarize a list of current investigational compounds
targeting this pathway and their therapeutic features for treating human
diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4523453 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25986851  [PubMed - in process]


146. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):812-32. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034402.

The GST-BHMT assay reveals a distinct mechanism underlying proteasome
inhibition-induced macroautophagy in mammalian cells.

Rui YN(1), Xu Z, Chen Z, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)a The Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine.

By monitoring the fragmentation of a GST-BHMT (a protein fusion of glutathionine 
S-transferase N-terminal to betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase) reporter in
lysosomes, the GST-BHMT assay has previously been established as an endpoint,
cargo-based assay for starvation-induced autophagy that is largely nonselective. 
Here, we demonstrate that under nutrient-rich conditions, proteasome inhibition
by either pharmaceutical or genetic manipulations induces similar
autophagy-dependent GST-BHMT processing. However, mechanistically this proteasome
inhibition-induced autophagy is different from that induced by starvation as it
does not rely on regulation by MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin
[serine/threonine kinase]) and PRKAA/AMPK (protein kinase, AMP-activated, a
catalytic subunit), the upstream central sensors of cellular nutrition and energy
status, but requires the presence of the cargo receptors SQSTM1/p62 (sequestosome
1) and NBR1 (neighbor of BRCA1 gene 1) that are normally involved in the
selective autophagy pathway. Further, it depends on ER (endoplasmic reticulum)
stress signaling, in particular ERN1/IRE1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus
signaling 1) and its main downstream effector MAPK8/JNK1 (mitogen-activated
protein kinase 8), but not XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1), by regulating the
phosphorylation-dependent disassociation of BCL2 (B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2) from
BECN1 (Beclin 1, autophagy related). Moreover, the multimerization domain of
GST-BHMT is required for its processing in response to proteasome inhibition, in 
contrast to its dispensable role in starvation-induced processing. Together,
these findings support a model in which under nutrient-rich conditions,
proteasome inactivation induces autophagy-dependent processing of the GST-BHMT
reporter through a distinct mechanism that bears notable similarity with the
yeast Cvt (cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting) pathway, and suggest the GST-BHMT
reporter might be employed as a convenient assay to study selective
macroautophagy in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC4509454 [Available on 2016-05-18]
PMID: 25984893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Sep;57(1):63-72. doi: 10.1007/s12031-015-0577-7. Epub 2015
May 15.

IRE1a-XBP1 Pathway Is Activated Upon Induction of Single-Prolonged Stress in Rat 
Neurons of the Medial Prefrontal Cortex.

Li X(1), Han F, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)PTSD Laboratory, Department of Histology and Embryology, Institute of
Pathology and Pathophysiology, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) is associated with many nervous system
diseases. IREla is considered as ERS sensor that, upon activation, initiates the 
nonconventional splicing of the precursor unspliced form of X-box binding protein
1 (XBP1u) messenger RNA (mRNA) to yield an active transcription factor-XBP1s. The
goal of this study is to detect whether there is activation of IRE1a-XBP1 pathway
in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
model rats. This study adopted single-prolonged stress (SPS) model. Behavioral
functions including anxiety-like behavior, exploration behavior, and spatial
memory were assessed by open field test and Morris water maze test. We detected
the IRE1a and XBP1 by using methods of double-labeling immunofluorescence,
Western blot, and quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). We 
also observed neuronal apoptosis by transferase-mediated dUTP Nick-end-labeling
(TUNEL) staining and the expression of caspase-12 by qRT-PCR. Our results showed 
that the expression of IRE1a, XBP1u, and total XBP1 significantly increased at
1 day after SPS and then decreased gradually. At the same time, XBP1s appeared
and peaked at 4 days after SPS, which indicated that IRE1a-XBP1 pathway was
activated upon induction of SPS stimulation. We also noted that the mRNA of
caspase-12 was upregulated after SPS. Our study preliminarily showed that ERS
mediated by IRE1a-XBP1 pathway was closely related to PTSD and it might be a
pathogenesis of PTSD.

PMID: 25976074  [PubMed - in process]


148. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Feb;50(2):207-10.

[Chemical constituents of the roots of Macleaya microcarpa and activation
efficacy of benzophenanthridine alkaloids for the transcription of xbp1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y, Deng AJ, Ma L, Zhang HJ, Zhang ZH, Wu LQ, Shen ZF, Wang WJ, Qin HL.

Ongoing study on the chemical constituents of the roots of Macleaya microcarpa
led to the isolation of eight compounds of derivatives of triterpenes and organic
acids in addition to some previously identified benzophenanthridines. The eight
compounds were identified by spectroscopic methods as well as comparison with
literature values as 1-oxo-2, 22 (30)-hopandien-29-oic acid (1),
3-oxo-12-oleanen-30-oic acid (2), 3a-hydroxy-12-oleanen-30-oic acid (3),
3ß-hydroxy-12-oleanen-30-oic acid (4), ferulic acid (5), ferulic acid
4-O-ß-D-glucoside (6), 3-O-feruloylquinic acid (7), and methyl
3-O-feruloylquinate (8). Of which, 1 is a new triterpenoid of hopanes and 2-8 are
isolated from M microcarpa for the first time. In order to discover natural
active compounds as potential agents of anti-ulcerative colitis (UC), an in vitro
drug high-throughput screening model targeted x-box-binding protein 1 (xbp1) was 
employed to evaluate the activity of the major chemical constituents of M
microcarpa. The result confirmed that two dihydrobenzophenanthridines,
dihydrosanguinarine (9) and dihydrochelerythrine (10), showed a certain activity 
on activating the transcription of xbpl, a transcription factor (TF) associated
with the occurrence, development, and potential treatment of UC, with their
relative activating ratios being 1.76 and 1.77 times, respectively, as compared
with control group.

PMID: 25975030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 14;6:e1763. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.108.

XBP1 mitigates aminoglycoside-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and neuronal
cell death.

Oishi N(1), Duscha S(2), Boukari H(2), Meyer M(2), Xie J(1), Wei G(1), Schrepfer 
T(3), Roschitzki B(4), Boettger EC(2), Schacht J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (2)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie,
Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. (3)1] Department of Otolaryngology,
Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA [2]
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, ETH Zürich, Universität Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cell Death Dis. 2015;6:e1762.

Here we study links between aminoglycoside-induced mistranslation, protein
misfolding and neuropathy. We demonstrate that aminoglycosides induce misreading 
in mammalian cells and assess endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathways. Genome-wide transcriptome and proteome analyses 
revealed upregulation of genes related to protein folding and degradation.
Quantitative PCR confirmed induction of UPR markers including C/EBP homologous
protein, glucose-regulated protein 94, binding immunoglobulin protein and X-box
binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing, which is crucial for UPR activation. We
studied the effect of a compromised UPR on aminoglycoside ototoxicity in
haploinsufficient XBP1 (XBP1(+/-)) mice. Intra-tympanic aminoglycoside treatment 
caused high-frequency hearing loss in XBP1(+/-) mice but not in wild-type
littermates. Densities of spiral ganglion cells and synaptic ribbons were
decreased in gentamicin-treated XBP1(+/-) mice, while sensory cells were
preserved. Co-injection of the chemical chaperone tauroursodeoxycholic acid
attenuated hearing loss. These results suggest that aminoglycoside-induced ER
stress and cell death in spiral ganglion neurons is mitigated by XBP1, masking
aminoglycoside neurotoxicity at the organismal level.

PMCID: PMC4669688
PMID: 25973683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5937-47. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500089. Epub 2015 
May 13.

Genetic vaccines to potentiate the effective CD103+ dendritic cell-mediated
cross-priming of antitumor immunity.

Zhang Y(1), Chen G(1), Liu Z(1), Tian S(1), Zhang J(1), Carey CD(1), Murphy
KM(2), Storkus WJ(3), Falo LD Jr(3), You Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213; (2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110;
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213. (4)Department of Dermatology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; Department of Immunology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 youz@upmc.edu.

The development of effective cancer vaccines remains an urgent, but as yet unmet,
clinical need. This deficiency is in part due to an incomplete understanding of
how to best invoke dendritic cells (DC) that are crucial for the induction of
tumor-specific CD8(+) T cells capable of mediating durable protective immunity.
In this regard, elevated expression of the transcription factor X box-binding
protein 1 (XBP1) in DC appears to play a decisive role in promoting the ability
of DC to cross-present Ags to CD8(+) T cells in the therapeutic setting. Delivery
of DNA vaccines encoding XBP1 and tumor Ag to skin DC resulted in increased IFN-a
production by plasmacytoid DC (pDC) from skin/tumor draining lymph nodes and the 
cross-priming of Ag-specific CD8(+) T cell responses associated with therapeutic 
benefit. Antitumor protection was dependent on cross-presenting Batf3(+) DC, pDC,
and CD8(+) T cells. CD103(+) DC from the skin/tumor draining lymph nodes of the
immunized mice appeared responsible for activation of Ag-specific naive CD8(+) T 
cells, but were dependent on pDC for optimal effectiveness. Similarly, human XBP1
improved the capacity of human blood- and skin-derived DC to activate human T
cells. These data support an important intrinsic role for XBP1 in DC for
effective cross-priming and orchestration of Batf3(+) DC-pDC interactions,
thereby enabling effective vaccine induction of protective antitumor immunity.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4458448 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25972487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13019-35.

Molecular mechanisms of human IRE1 activation through dimerization and ligand
binding.

Joshi A(1,)(2), Newbatt Y(3), McAndrew PC(3), Stubbs M(3), Burke R(3), Richards
MW(1,)(2), Bhatia C(1,)(2), Caldwell JJ(3), McHardy T(3), Collins I(3), Bayliss
R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, United
Kingdom. (2)Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre, University of Leicester,
Leicester, United Kingdom. (3)Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit,
Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom.

IRE1 transduces the unfolded protein response by splicing XBP1 through its
C-terminal cytoplasmic kinase-RNase region. IRE1 autophosphorylation is coupled
to RNase activity through formation of a back-to-back dimer, although the
conservation of the underlying molecular mechanism is not clear from existing
structures. We have crystallized human IRE1 in a back-to-back conformation only
previously seen for the yeast homologue. In our structure the kinase domain
appears primed for catalysis but the RNase domains are disengaged.
Structure-function analysis reveals that IRE1 is autoinhibited through a Tyr-down
mechanism related to that found in the unrelated Ser/Thr protein kinase Nek7. We 
have developed a compound that potently inhibits human IRE1 kinase activity while
stimulating XBP1 splicing. A crystal structure of the inhibitor bound to IRE1
shows an increased ordering of the kinase activation loop. The structures of hIRE
in apo and ligand-bound forms are consistent with a previously proposed model of 
IRE1 regulation in which formation of a back-to-back dimer coupled to adoption of
a kinase-active conformation drive RNase activation. The structures provide
opportunities for structure-guided design of IRE1 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4536996
PMID: 25968568  [PubMed - in process]


152. Gut. 2015 May 12. pii: gutjnl-2014-308506. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308506. [Epub
ahead of print]

PHLDA3 overexpression in hepatocytes by endoplasmic reticulum stress via
IRE1-Xbp1s pathway expedites liver injury.

Han CY(1), Lim SW(1), Koo JH(1), Kim W(2), Kim SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul
Metropolitan Government Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center, Seoul, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in liver injury, but
molecular determinants are largely unknown. This study investigated the role of
pleckstrin homology-like domain, family A, member-3 (PHLDA3), in hepatocyte death
caused by ER stress and the regulatory basis.
DESIGN: Hepatic PHLDA3 expression was assessed in HCV patients with hepatitis and
in several animal models with ER stress. Immunoblottings, PCR, reporter gene,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and mutation analyses were done to explore
gene regulation. The functional effect of PHLDA3 on liver injury was validated
using lentiviral delivery of shRNA.
RESULTS: PHLDA3 was overexpressed in relation to hepatocyte injury in patients
with acute liver failure or liver cirrhosis or in toxicant-treated mice. In HCV
patients with liver injury, PHLDA3 was upregulated in parallel with the induction
of ER stress marker. Treatment of mice with tunicamycin (Tm) (an ER stress
inducer) increased PHLDA3 expression in the liver. X box-binding protein-1 (Xbp1)
was newly identified as a transcription factor responsible for PHLDA3 expression.
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) (an upstream regulator of Xbp1) was required
for PHLDA3 induction by Tm, whereas other pathways (c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK), protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) and activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6)) were not. PHLDA3 overexpression correlated with
the severity of hepatocyte injury in animal or cell model of ER stress. In
p53-deficient cells, ER stress inducers transactivated PHLDA3 with a decrease in 
cell viability. ER stress-induced hepatocyte death depended on serine/threonine
protein kinase B (Akt) inhibition by PHLDA3. Lentiviral delivery of PHLDA3 shRNA 
to mice abrogated p-Akt inhibition in the liver by Tm, attenuating hepatocyte
injury.
CONCLUSIONS: ER stress in hepatocytes induces PHLDA3 via IRE1-Xbp1s pathway,
which facilitates liver injury by inhibiting Akt.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25966993  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


153. Nat Neurosci. 2015 Jun;18(6):817-25. doi: 10.1038/nn.4019. Epub 2015 May 11.

Regulation of axon regeneration by the RNA repair and splicing pathway.

Song Y(1), Sretavan D(2), Salegio EA(3), Berg J(1), Huang X(1), Cheng T(1), Xiong
X(4), Meltzer S(1), Han C(1), Nguyen TT(2), Bresnahan JC(3), Beattie MS(3), Jan
LY(1), Jan YN(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. [2] Department of Physiology, University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (3)Brain and Spinal
Injury Center, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Jul;16(7):374-5.

Mechanisms governing a neuron's regenerative ability are important but not well
understood. We identify Rtca (RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase) as an inhibitor 
of axon regeneration. Removal of Rtca cell-autonomously enhanced axon regrowth in
the Drosophila CNS, whereas its overexpression reduced axon regeneration in the
periphery. Rtca along with the RNA ligase Rtcb and its catalyst Archease operate 
in the RNA repair and splicing pathway important for stress-induced mRNA
splicing, including that of Xbp1, a cellular stress sensor. Drosophila Rtca and
Archease had opposing effects on Xbp1 splicing, and deficiency of Archease or
Xbp1 impeded axon regeneration in Drosophila. Moreover, overexpressing mammalian 
Rtca in cultured rodent neurons reduced axonal complexity in vitro, whereas
reducing its function promoted retinal ganglion cell axon regeneration after
optic nerve crush in mice. Our study thus links axon regeneration to cellular
stress and RNA metabolism, revealing new potential therapeutic targets for
treating nervous system trauma.

PMCID: PMC4446171
PMID: 25961792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Pineal Res. 2015 Sep;59(2):151-62. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12247. Epub 2015 May 26.

Melatonin inhibits autophagy and endoplasmic reticulum stress in mice with carbon
tetrachloride-induced fibrosis.

San-Miguel B(1), Crespo I(1,)(2), Sánchez DI(1), González-Fernández B(1), Ortiz
de Urbina JJ(1), Tuñón MJ(1,)(2), González-Gallego J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED), University of León, León, Spain. (2)Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas
(CIBERehd), León, Spain.

This study aimed to investigate whether inhibition of autophagy and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER stress) associates with the antifibrogenic effect of melatonin in
mice treated with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4 ). Mice received CCl4 5 µL/g body wt
i.p. twice a week for 4 wk or 6 wk. Melatonin was given at 5 or 10 mg/kg/day i.p,
beginning 2 wk after the start of CCl4 administration. Treatment with CCl4
resulted in fibrosis evidenced by the staining of a-smooth muscle actin
(a-SMA)-positive cells. CCl4 induced an autophagic response measured as the
presence of autophagic vesicles, protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) staining,
conversion of LC3-I to autophagosome-associated LC3-II, changes in expression of 
beclin-1, UV radiation resistance-associated gene (UVRAG), ubiquitin-like
autophagy-related (Atg5), Atg12, Atg16L1, sequestosome 1 (p62/SQSTM1), and
lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP)-2, and increased phosphorylation of
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). There was an increase in the expression
of the ER stress chaperones CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein
(CHOP), immunoglobulin-heavy-chain-binding protein (BiP/GRP78), and 94-kDa
glucose-regulated protein (GRP94), and in the mRNA levels of pancreatic ER kinase
(PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), ATF4, inositol-requiring enzyme
1 (IRE1), and spliced X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1). Phospho-IRE1, ATF6, and
phospho-PERK protein concentration also increased significantly.
Immunohistochemical staining of a-SMA indicated an abrogation of hepatic stellate
cells activation by melatonin. Furthermore, treatment with the indole resulted in
significant inhibition of the autophagic flux and the unfolded protein response. 
Findings from this study give new insight into molecular pathways accounting for 
the protective effect of melatonin in fibrogenesis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25958928  [PubMed - in process]


155. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;843:77-128. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2480-6_4.

Molecular biology of the stress response in the early embryo and its stem cells.

Puscheck EE(1), Awonuga AO, Yang Y, Jiang Z, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn, REI Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Stress is normal during early embryogenesis and transient, elevated stress is
commonplace. Stress in the milieu of the peri-implantation embryo is a summation 
of maternal hormones, and other elements of the maternal milieu, that signal
preparedness for development and implantation. Examples discussed here are
leptin, adrenaline, cortisol, and progesterone. These hormones signal maternal
nutritional status and provide energy, but also signal stress that diverts
maternal and embryonic energy from an optimal embryonic developmental trajectory.
These hormones communicate endocrine maternal effects and local embryonic effects
although signaling mechanisms are not well understood. Other in vivo stresses
affect the embryo such as local infection and inflammation, hypoxia,
environmental toxins such as benzopyrene, dioxin, or metals, heat shock, and
hyperosmotic stress due to dehydration or diabetes. In vitro, stresses include
shear during handling, improper culture media and oxygen levels,
cryopreservation, and manipulations of the embryo to introduce sperm or
mitochondria. We define stress as any stimulus that slows stem cell accumulation 
or diminishes the ability of cells to produce normal and sufficient parenchymal
products upon differentiation. Thus stress deflects downwards the normal
trajectories of development, growth and differentiation. Typically stress is
inversely proportional to embryonic developmental and proliferative rates, but
can be proportional to induction of differentiation of stem cells in the
peri-implantation embryo. When modeling stress it is most interesting to produce 
a 'runting model' where stress exposures slow accumulation but do not create
excessive apoptosis or morbidity. Windows of stress sensitivity may occur when
major new embryonic developmental programs require large amounts of energy and
are exacerbated if nutritional flow decreases and removes energy from the normal 
developmental programs and stress responses. These windows correspond to zygotic 
genome activation, the large mRNA program initiated at compaction, ion pumping
required for cavitation, the differentiation of the first lineages, integration
with the uterine environment at implantation, rapid proliferation of stem cells, 
and production of certain lineages which require the highest energy and are most 
sensitive to mitochondrial inhibition. Stress response mechanisms insure that
stem cells for the early embryo and placenta survive at lower stress exposures,
and that the organism survives through compensatory and prioritized stem cell
differentiation, at higher stress exposures. These servomechanisms include a
small set of stress enzymes from the 500 protein kinases in the kinome; the part 
of the genome coding for protein kinases that hierarchically regulate the
activity of other proteins and enzymes. Important protein kinases that mediate
the stress response of embryos and their stem cells are SAPK, p38MAPK, AMPK,
PI3K, Akt, MEK1/2, MEKK4, PKA, IRE1 and PERK. These stress enzymes have cytosolic
function in cell survival at low stress exposures and nuclear function in
modifying transcription factor activity at higher stress exposures. Some of the
transcription factors (TFs) that are most important in the stress response are
JunC, JunB, MAPKAPs, ATF4, XBP1, Oct1, Oct4, HIFs, Nrf2/KEAP, NFKB, MT1, Nfat5,
HSF1/2 and potency-maintaining factors Id2, Cdx2, Eomes, Sox2, Nanog, Rex1, and
Oct4. Clearly the stress enzymes have a large number of cytosolic and nuclear
substrates and the TFs regulate large numbers of genes. The interaction of stress
enzymes and TFs in the early embryo and its stem cells are a continuing central
focus of research. In vitro regulation of TFs by stress enzymes leads to
reprogramming of the stem cell when stress diminishes stem cell accumulation.
Since more differentiated product is produced by fewer cells, the process
compensates for fewer cells. Coupled with stress-induced compensatory
differentiation of stem cells is a tendency to prioritize differentiation by
increasing the first essential lineage and decreasing later lineages. These
mechanisms include stress enzymes that regulate TFs and provide stress-specific, 
shared homeostatic cellular and organismal responses of prioritized
differentiation.

PMID: 25956296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biomolecules. 2015 May 6;5(2):793-807. doi: 10.3390/biom5020793.

The effect of alcohol and hydrogen peroxide on liver hepcidin gene expression in 
mice lacking antioxidant enzymes, glutathione peroxidase-1 or catalase.

Harrison-Findik DD(1), Lu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology/Hepatology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
dharrisonfindik@unmc.edu. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. sizhao.lu@unmc.edu.

This study investigates the regulation of hepcidin, the key iron-regulatory
molecule, by alcohol and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in glutathione peroxidase-1
(gpx-1(-/-)) and catalase (catalase(-/-)) knockout mice. For alcohol studies, 10%
ethanol was administered in the drinking water for 7 days. Gpx-1(-/-) displayed
significantly higher hepatic H2O2 levels than catalase(-/-) compared to wild-type
mice, as measured by 2'-7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA). The
basal level of liver hepcidin expression was attenuated in gpx-1(-/-) mice.
Alcohol increased H2O2 production in catalase(-/-) and wild-type, but not
gpx-1(-/-), mice. Hepcidin expression was inhibited in alcohol-fed catalase(-/-) 
and wild-type mice. In contrast, alcohol elevated hepcidin expression in
gpx-1(-/-) mice. Gpx-1(-/-) mice also displayed higher level of basal liver CHOP 
protein expression than catalase(-/-) mice. Alcohol induced CHOP and to a lesser 
extent GRP78/BiP expression, but not XBP1 splicing or binding of CREBH to
hepcidin gene promoter, in gpx-1(-/-) mice. The up-regulation of hepatic ATF4
mRNA levels, which was observed in gpx-1(-/-) mice, was attenuated by alcohol. In
conclusion, our findings strongly suggest that H2O2 inhibits hepcidin expression 
in vivo. Synergistic induction of CHOP by alcohol and H2O2, in the absence of
gpx-1, stimulates liver hepcidin gene expression by ER stress independent of
CREBH.

PMCID: PMC4496697
PMID: 25955433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 13;3(9):e955691. eCollection 2014.

Consensus guidelines for the detection of immunogenic cell death.

Kepp O(1), Senovilla L(2), Vitale I(3), Vacchelli E(4), Adjemian S(5), Agostinis 
P(6), Apetoh L(7), Aranda F(4), Barnaba V(8), Bloy N(4), Bracci L(9), Breckpot
K(10), Brough D(11), Buqué A(4), Castro MG(12), Cirone M(13), Colombo MI(14),
Cremer I(15), Demaria S(16), Dini L(17), Eliopoulos AG(18), Faggioni A(13),
Formenti SC(19), Fucíková J(20), Gabriele L(9), Gaipl US(21), Galon J(22), Garg
A(6), Ghiringhelli F(7), Giese NA(23), Guo ZS(24), Hemminki A(25), Herrmann
M(26), Hodge JW(27), Holdenrieder S(28), Honeychurch J(29), Hu HM(30), Huang
X(1), Illidge TM(29), Kono K(31), Korbelik M(32), Krysko DV(33), Loi S(34),
Lowenstein PR(12), Lugli E(35), Ma Y(4), Madeo F(36), Manfredi AA(37), Martins
I(38), Mavilio D(35), Menger L(39), Merendino N(40), Michaud M(4), Mignot G(41), 
Mossman KL(42), Multhoff G(43), Oehler R(44), Palombo F(8), Panaretakis T(45),
Pol J(4), Proietti E(9), Ricci JE(46), Riganti C(47), Rovere-Querini P(37),
Rubartelli A(48), Sistigu A(3), Smyth MJ(49), Sonnemann J(50), Spisek R(20),
Stagg J(51), Sukkurwala AQ(52), Tartour E(53), Thorburn A(54), Thorne SH(24),
Vandenabeele P(55), Velotti F(40), Workenhe ST(42), Yang H(56), Zong WX(57),
Zitvogel L(58), Kroemer G(59), Galluzzi L(60).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer; Center de
Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris, France ; INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ;
Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ;
Villejuif, France. (2)INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ; Metabolomics and Cell
Biology Platforms; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ; Villejuif, France ; INSERM;
U1015 ; Villejuif, France. (3)Regina Elena National Cancer Institute ; Rome,
Italy. (4)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer; Center de
Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris, France ; INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ;
Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ; Villejuif, France. (5)Equipe 11 labellisée par la 
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris,
France ; INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ;
Villejuif, France ; Molecular Cell Biology Laboratory; Department of Immunology; 
Institute of Biomedical Sciences; University of São Paulo ; São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Cell Death Research and Therapy (CDRT) Laboratory; Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine; University of Leuven ; Leuven, Belgium. (7)INSERM; UMR866 ;
Dijon, France ; Centre Georges François Leclerc ; Dijon, France ; Université de
Bourgogne ; Dijon, France. (8)Departement of Internal Medicine and Medical
Sciences; University of Rome La Sapienza ; Rome, Italy ; Istituto Pasteur;
Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti ; Rome, Italy. (9)Department of Hematology; Oncology 
and Molecular Medicine; Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS) ; Rome, Italy.
(10)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Therapy (LMCT); Department of Biomedical
Sciences Medical School of the Free University of Brussels (VUB) ; Jette,
Belgium. (11)Faculty of Life Sciences; University of Manchester ; Manchester, UK.
(12)Department of Neurosurgery and Cell and Developmental Biology; University of 
Michigan School of Medicine ; Ann Arbor, MI USA. (13)Department of Experimental
Medicine; University of Rome La Sapienza ; Rome, Italy. (14)Laboratorio de
Biología Celular y Molecular; Instituto de Histología y Embriología (IHEM);
Facultad de Ciencias Médicas; Universidad Nacional de Cuyo; CONICET ; Mendoza,
Argentina. (15)INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ; Université Pierre et Marie
Curie/Paris VI ; Paris, France ; Equipe 13; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; 
Paris, France. (16)Department of Pathology; New York University School of
Medicine ; New York, NY USA. (17)Department of Biological and Environmental
Science and Technology (DiSTeBA); University of Salento ; Lecce, Italy.
(18)Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory; Division of Basic Sciences;
University of Crete Medical School ; Heraklion, Greece ; Institute of Molecular
Biology and Biotechnology; Foundation of Research and Technology - Hellas ;
Heraklion, Greece. (19)Department of Radiation Oncology; NewYork University
School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center ; New York, NY USA. (20)Department 
of Immunology; 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Charles
University ; Prague, Czech Republic ; Sotio ; Prague, Czech Republic.
(21)Department of Radiation Oncology; University Hospital Erlangen; University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg ; Erlangen, Germany. (22)INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ;
Université Pierre et Marie Curie/Paris VI ; Paris, France ; Université Paris
Descartes/Paris V; Sorbonne Paris Cité ; Paris, France ; Laboratory of
Integrative Cancer Immunology; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris,
France. (23)European Pancreas Center; Department of Surgery; University Hospital 
Heidelberg ; Heidelberg, Germany. (24)Department of Surgery; University of
Pittsburgh ; Pittsburgh, PA USA. (25)Cancer Gene Therapy Group; Transplantation
laboratory; Haartman Institute; University of Helsinki ; Helsinki, Finland.
(26)Department of Internal Medicine 3; University of Erlangen-Nuremberg ;
Erlangen, Germany. (27)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology; Center for
Cancer Research; National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health
(NIH) ; Bethesda, MD USA. (28)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical
Pharmacology; University Hospital Bonn ; Bonn, Germany. (29)Faculty of Medical
and Human Sciences, Institute of Cancer Studies; Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Center; University of Manchester ; Manchester, UK. (30)Cancer Research
and Biotherapy Center; Second Affiliated Hospital of Southeast University ;
Nanjing, China ; Laboratory of Cancer Immunobiology; Earle A. Chiles Research
Institute; Providence Portland Medical Center ; Portland, OR USA. (31)Department 
of Surgery; National University of Singapore ; Singapore, Singapore ; Cancer
Science Institute of Singapore; National University of Singapore ; Singapore,
Singapore. (32)British Columbia Cancer Agency ; Vancouver, Canada. (33)VIB
Inflammation Research Center ; Ghent, Belgium ; Department of Biomedical
Molecular Biology; Ghent University ; Ghent, Belgium. (34)Division of Cancer
Medicine and Division of Research; Peter MacCallum Cancer Center; East Melbourne 
; Victoria, Australia. (35)Unit of Clinical and Experimental Immunology;
Humanitas Clinical and Research Center ; Milan, Italy ; Department of Medical
Biotechnologies and Translational Medicine, University of Milan ; Rozzano, Italy.
(36)Institute of Molecular Biosciences; University of Graz ; Graz, Austria.
(37)University Vita-Salute San Raffaele ; Milano, Italy ; San Raffaele Scientific
Institute ; Milano, Italy. (38)Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ; Villejuif, France ;
INSERM, U1030 ; Villejuif, France ; Faculté de Médecine; Université
Paris-Sud/Paris XI ; Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (39)Equipe 11 labellisée par la
Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris,
France ; INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ;
Villejuif, France ; Cancer Immunology Unit, Research Department of Haematology;
University College London (UCL) Cancer Institute ; London, UK. (40)Department of 
Ecological and Biological Sciences (DEB), Tuscia University ; Viterbo, Italy.
(41)Cellular and Molecular Immunology and Endocrinology , Oniris; Nantes, France.
(42)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine; McMaster Immunology Research 
Center ; Hamilton, Canada ; Institute for Infectious Disease Research; McMaster
University ; Hamilton, Canada. (43)Department of Radiation Oncology; Klinikum
rechts der Isar; Technical University of Munich ; Munich, Germany.
(44)Comprehensive Cancer Center; Medical University of Vienna ; Vienna, Austria. 
(45)Department of Oncology-Pathology; Karolinska Institute ; Stockholm, Sweden.
(46)INSERM; U1065 ; Nice, France ; Equipe "Contrôle Métabolique des Morts
Cellulaires," Center Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire (C3M) ; Nice, France ;
Faculté de Médecine; Université de Nice Sophia Antipolis ; Nice, France ; Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Nice ; Nice, France. (47)Department of Oncology and 
Subalpine Center for Research and Experimental Medicine (CeRMS); University of
Turin ; Turin, Italy. (48)Cell Biology Unit; Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
San Martino ; Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro ; Genova, Italy.
(49)Immunology in Cancer and Infection Laboratory; QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute ; Herston, Australia ; School of Medicine, University of
Queensland ; Herston, Australia. (50)Department of Pediatric Haematology and
Oncology; Jena University Hospital, Children's Clinic ; Jena, Germany. (51)Centre
de Recherche du Center Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal; Faculté de
Pharmacie, Université de Montréal ; Montréal, Canada. (52)Equipe 11 labellisée
par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ;
Paris, France ; INSERM; U1138 ; Paris, France ; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ;
Villejuif, France ; Department of Pathology, Dow International Medical College;
Dow University of Health Sciences ; Karachi, Pakistan. (53)INSERM; U970 ; Paris, 
France ; Pôle de Biologie; Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou; AP-HP ; Paris,
France. (54)Department of Pharmacology; University of Colorado School of Medicine
; Aurora, CO USA. (55)VIB Inflammation Research Center ; Ghent, Belgium ;
Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology; Ghent University ; Ghent, Belgium ;
Methusalem Program; Ghent University ; Ghent, Belgium. (56)University of Hawaii
Cancer Center ; Honolulu, HI USA. (57)Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology; Stony Brook University ; Stony Brook, NY USA. (58)INSERM; U1015 ;
Villejuif, France ; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ; Villejuif, France ; Centre
d'Investigation Clinique Biothérapie 507 (CICBT507); Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus
; Villejuif, France. (59)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris, France ; INSERM; U1138 ;
Paris, France ; Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms; Gustave Roussy Cancer
Campus ; Villejuif, France ; Université Paris Descartes/Paris V; Sorbonne Paris
Cité ; Paris, France ; Pôle de Biologie; Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou; AP-HP
; Paris, France. (60)Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le
Cancer; Center de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Paris, France ; INSERM; U1138 ;
Paris, France ; Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus ; Villejuif, France ; Université
Paris Descartes/Paris V; Sorbonne Paris Cité ; Paris, France.

Apoptotic cells have long been considered as intrinsically tolerogenic or unable 
to elicit immune responses specific for dead cell-associated antigens. However,
multiple stimuli can trigger a functionally peculiar type of apoptotic demise
that does not go unnoticed by the adaptive arm of the immune system, which we
named "immunogenic cell death" (ICD). ICD is preceded or accompanied by the
emission of a series of immunostimulatory damage-associated molecular patterns
(DAMPs) in a precise spatiotemporal configuration. Several anticancer agents that
have been successfully employed in the clinic for decades, including various
chemotherapeutics and radiotherapy, can elicit ICD. Moreover, defects in the
components that underlie the capacity of the immune system to perceive cell death
as immunogenic negatively influence disease outcome among cancer patients treated
with ICD inducers. Thus, ICD has profound clinical and therapeutic implications. 
Unfortunately, the gold-standard approach to detect ICD relies on vaccination
experiments involving immunocompetent murine models and syngeneic cancer cells,
an approach that is incompatible with large screening campaigns. Here, we outline
strategies conceived to detect surrogate markers of ICD in vitro and to screen
large chemical libraries for putative ICD inducers, based on a high-content,
high-throughput platform that we recently developed. Such a platform allows for
the detection of multiple DAMPs, like cell surface-exposed calreticulin,
extracellular ATP and high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), and/or the processes
that underlie their emission, such as endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy and
necrotic plasma membrane permeabilization. We surmise that this technology will
facilitate the development of next-generation anticancer regimens, which kill
malignant cells and simultaneously convert them into a cancer-specific
therapeutic vaccine.

PMCID: PMC4292729
PMID: 25941621  [PubMed]


158. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 30;10(4):e0125153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125153.
eCollection 2015.

A systems biology approach identifies a regulatory network in parotid acinar cell
terminal differentiation.

Metzler MA(1), Venkatesh SG(2), Lakshmanan J(3), Carenbauer AL(3), Perez SM(3),
Andres SA(4), Appana S(5), Brock GN(5), Wittliff JL(4), Darling DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America; Department of
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky,
United States of America; Institute for Molecular Diversity and Drug Design,
University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America and.
(2)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America; Institute for
Molecular Diversity and Drug Design, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky, United States of America and. (3)Department of Oral Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United
States of America. (4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University 
of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America; Institute for
Molecular Diversity and Drug Design, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky, United States of America and. (5)Department of Bioinformatics and
Biostatistics, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, United States of
America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0131853.

OBJECTIVE: The transcription factor networks that drive parotid salivary gland
progenitor cells to terminally differentiate, remain largely unknown and are
vital to understanding the regeneration process.
METHODOLOGY: A systems biology approach was taken to measure mRNA and microRNA
expression in vivo across acinar cell terminal differentiation in the rat parotid
salivary gland. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) was used to specifically
isolate acinar cell RNA at times spanning the month-long period of parotid
differentiation.
RESULTS: Clustering of microarray measurements suggests that expression occurs in
four stages. mRNA expression patterns suggest a novel role for Pparg which is
transiently increased during mid postnatal differentiation in concert with
several target gene mRNAs. 79 microRNAs are significantly differentially
expressed across time. Profiles of statistically significant changes of mRNA
expression, combined with reciprocal correlations of microRNAs and their target
mRNAs, suggest a putative network involving Klf4, a differentiation inhibiting
transcription factor, which decreases as several targeting microRNAs increase
late in differentiation. The network suggests a molecular switch (involving
Prdm1, Sox11, Pax5, miR-200a, and miR-30a) progressively decreases repression of 
Xbp1 gene transcription, in concert with decreased translational repression by
miR-214. The transcription factor Xbp1 mRNA is initially low, increases
progressively, and may be maintained by a positive feedback loop with Atf6.
Transfection studies show that Xbp1 activates the Mist1 promoter [corrected]. In 
addition, Xbp1 and Mist1 each activate the parotid secretory protein (Psp) gene, 
which encodes an abundant salivary protein, and is a marker of terminal
differentiation.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies novel expression patterns of Pparg, Klf4, and
Sox11 during parotid acinar cell differentiation, as well as numerous
differentially expressed microRNAs. Network analysis identifies a novel stemness 
arm, a genetic switch involving transcription factors and microRNAs, and
transition to an Xbp1 driven differentiation network. This proposed network
suggests key regulatory interactions in parotid gland terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4416001
PMID: 25928148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2015 Jul;407(18):5343-51. doi: 10.1007/s00216-015-8694-2. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Identification of known drugs targeting the endoplasmic reticulum stress
response.

Bi K(1), Nishihara K, Machleidt T, Hermanson S, Wang J, Sakamuru S, Huang R, Xia 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Solutions Group, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, 61105,
USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a multifunctional organelle, plays a central role
in cellular signaling, development, and stress response. Dysregulation of ER
homeostasis has been associated with human diseases, such as cancer,
inflammation, and diabetes. A broad spectrum of stressful stimuli including
hypoxia as well as a variety of pharmacological agents can lead to the ER stress 
response. In this study, we have developed a stable ER stress reporter cell line 
that stably expresses a ß-lactamase reporter gene under the control of the ER
stress response element (ESRE) present in the glucose-regulated protein, 78 kDa
(GRP78) gene promoter. This assay has been optimized and miniaturized into a
1536-well plate format. In order to identify clinically used drugs that induce ER
stress response, we screened approximately 2800 drugs from the NIH Chemical
Genomics Center Pharmaceutical Collection (NPC library) using a quantitative
high-throughput screening (qHTS) platform. From this study, we have identified
several known ER stress inducers, such as 17-AAG (via HSP90 inhibition), as well 
as several novel ER stress inducers such as AMI-193 and spiperone. The confirmed 
drugs were further studied for their effects on the phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), the X-box-binding protein (XBP1) splicing, and
GRP78 gene expression. These results suggest that the ER stress inducers
identified from the NPC library using the qHTS approach could shed new lights on 
the potential therapeutic targets of these drugs.

PMID: 25925857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 27;10(4):e0124956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124956.
eCollection 2015.

Transcription Factor CREB3L1 Regulates Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Response
Genes in the Osmotically Challenged Rat Hypothalamus.

Greenwood M(1), Greenwood MP(1), Paton JF(2), Murphy D(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, England.
(2)School of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Bristol, Bristol,
England. (3)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, England;
Department of Physiology, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Arginine vasopressin (AVP) is synthesised in magnocellular neurons (MCNs) of
supraoptic nucleus (SON) and paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus.
In response to the hyperosmotic stressors of dehydration (complete fluid
deprivation, DH) or salt loading (drinking 2% salt solution, SL), AVP synthesis
increases in MCNs, which over-burdens the protein folding machinery in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). ER stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) are
signaling pathways that improve ER function in response to the accumulation of
misfold/unfold protein. We asked whether an ER stress response was activated in
the SON and PVN of DH and SL rats. We observed increased mRNA expression for the 
immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP), activating transcription factor
4 (Atf4), C/EBP-homologous protein (Chop), and cAMP responsive element binding
protein 3 like 1 (Creb3l1) in both SON and PVN of DH and SL rats. Although we
found no changes in the splicing pattern of X box-binding protein 1 (Xbp1), an
increase in the level of the unspliced form of Xbp1 (Xbp1U) was observed in DH
and SL rats. CREB3L1, a novel ER stress inducer, has been shown to be activated
by ER stress to regulate the expression of target genes. We have previously shown
that CREB3L1 is a transcriptional regulator of the AVP gene; however, a role for 
CREB3L1 in the response to ER stress has yet to be investigated in MCNs. Here, we
used lentiviral vectors to introduce a dominant negative form of CREB3L1
(CREB3L1DN) in the rat SON. Expression of CREB3L1DN in the SON decreased Chop and
Xbp1U mRNA levels, but not BiP and Atf4 transcript expression. CREB3L1 is thus
implicated as a transcriptional mediator of the ER stress response in the
osmotically stimulated SON.

PMCID: PMC4411032
PMID: 25915053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Autophagy. 2015 Apr 3;11(4):585-94. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1017187.

ATG16L1: A multifunctional susceptibility factor in Crohn disease.

Salem M(1), Ammitzboell M, Nys K, Seidelin JB, Nielsen OH.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Gastroenterology ; Medical Section; Herlev Hospital;
University of Copenhagen ; Copenhagen , Denmark.

Genetic variations in the autophagic pathway influence genetic predispositions to
Crohn disease. Autophagy, the major lysosomal pathway for degrading and recycling
cytoplasmic material, constitutes an important homeostatic cellular process. Of
interest, single-nucleotide polymorphisms in ATG16L1 (autophagy-related 16-like 1
[S. cerevisiae]), a key component in the autophagic response to invading
pathogens, have been associated with an increased risk of developing Crohn
disease. The most common and well-studied genetic variant of ATG16L1 (rs2241880; 
leading to a T300A conversion) exhibits a strong association with risk for
developing Crohn disease. The rs2241880 variant plays a crucial role in pathogen 
clearance, resulting in imbalanced cytokine production, and is linked to other
biological processes, such as the endoplasmic reticulum stress/unfolded protein
response. In this review, we focus on the importance of ATG16L1 and its genetic
variant (T300A) within the elementary biological processes linked to Crohn
disease.

PMCID: PMC4502774 [Available on 2016-04-23]
PMID: 25906181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 23;16:338. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1518-0.

The pathogenic human Torsin A in Drosophila activates the unfolded protein
response and increases susceptibility to oxidative stress.

Kim AY(1,)(2), Seo JB(3), Kim WT(4), Choi HJ(5,)(6), Kim SY(7), Morrow G(8),
Tanguay RM(9), Steller H(10), Koh YH(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)ILSONG Institute of Life Science, Hallym University, 1605-4 Gwanyangdong,
Dongan-gu, Anyang, Gyeonggido, 431-060, Republic of Korea. kilenay@daum.net.
(2)Department of Biomedical Gerontology, Graduate School of Hallym University,
Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, 200-702, Republic of Korea. kilenay@daum.net. (3)Korea
Basic Science Institute, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-713, Republic of Korea.
sjb@kbsi.re.kr. (4)National Academy of Agricultural Science, Rural Development
Administration, Suwon, 441-707, Republic of Korea. wtkim@korea.kr. (5)ILSONG
Institute of Life Science, Hallym University, 1605-4 Gwanyangdong, Dongan-gu,
Anyang, Gyeonggido, 431-060, Republic of Korea. chj52@snu.ac.kr. (6)Department of
Biomedical Gerontology, Graduate School of Hallym University, Chuncheon,
Gangwon-do, 200-702, Republic of Korea. chj52@snu.ac.kr. (7)Korea Basic Science
Institute, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-713, Republic of Korea. hl96022@daum.net.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry & Pathology, Université 
Laval, Québec, Qc, G1V 0A6, Canada. Genevieve.Morrow@fmed.ulaval.ca.
(9)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry & Pathology, Université 
Laval, Québec, Qc, G1V 0A6, Canada. robert.tanguay@ibis.ulaval.ca. (10)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
Hermann.Steller@rockefeller.edu. (11)ILSONG Institute of Life Science, Hallym
University, 1605-4 Gwanyangdong, Dongan-gu, Anyang, Gyeonggido, 431-060, Republic
of Korea. kohyh@hallym.ac.kr. (12)Department of Biomedical Gerontology, Graduate 
School of Hallym University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, 200-702, Republic of Korea.
kohyh@hallym.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Dystonia1 (DYT1) dystonia is caused by a glutamic acid deletion (<U+0394>E) 
mutation in the gene encoding Torsin A in humans (HTorA). To investigate the
unknown molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying DYT1 dystonia, we performed 
an unbiased proteomic analysis.
RESULTS: We found that the amount of proteins and transcripts of an Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) resident chaperone Heat shock protein cognate 3 (HSC3) and a
mitochondria chaperone Heat Shock Protein 22 (HSP22) were significantly increased
in the HTorA(<U+0394>E)- expressing brains compared to the normal HTorA (HTorA(WT))
expressing brains. The physiological consequences included an increased
susceptibility to oxidative and ER stress compared to normal HTorA(WT) flies. The
alteration of transcripts of Inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1)-dependent spliced
X box binding protein 1(Xbp1), several ER chaperones, a nucleotide exchange
factor, Autophagy related protein 8b (ATG8b) and components of the ER associated 
degradation (ERAD) pathway and increased expression of the Xbp1-enhanced Green
Fluorescence Protein (eGFP) in HTorA(<U+0394>E) brains strongly indicated the activation
of the unfolded protein response (UPR). In addition, perturbed expression of the 
UPR sensors and inducers in the HTorA(<U+0394>E) Drosophila brains resulted in a
significantly reduced life span of the flies. Furthermore, the types and
quantities of proteins present in the anti-HSC3 positive microsomes in the
HTorA(<U+0394>E) brains were different from those of the HTorA(WT) brains.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data show that HTorA(<U+0394>E) in Drosophila brains
may activate the UPR and increase the expression of HSP22 to compensate for the
toxic effects caused by HTorA(<U+0394>E) in the brains.

PMCID: PMC4415242
PMID: 25903460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jun;33(6):3006-14. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3920. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

RACK1 modulates apoptosis induced by sorafenib in HCC cells by interfering with
the IRE1/XBP1 axis.

Zhou T(1), Lv X(1), Guo X(1), Ruan B(1), Liu D(1), Ding R(1), Gao Y(1), Ding
J(2), Dou K(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Xi'an
Central Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China.

Sorafenib is one of the preferred drugs for the treatment of advanced primary
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, its side-effects and acquired resistance
limit its use. The unfolded protein response (UPR) induced by chemotherapeutics
has been demonstrated to be required for tumor cells to maintain malignancy and
therapy resistance. Activation of the IRE1/XBP1 pathway during the UPR is
important for tumor survival under pathophysiological conditions. In the present 
study, we found that the UPR was activated and RACK1 was overexpressed in three
human HCC cell lines and in HCC samples. Activation of the IRE1/XBP1 signaling
pathway plays a protective role when HCC cells encounter endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress due to in vitro sorafenib treatment. We then found that the
interaction between IRE1 and RACK1 was essential for the activation of IRE1
signaling in sorafenib-treated cells. Exogenous overexpression of RACK1 enhanced 
the phosphorylation level of IRE1 and increased XBP1 mRNA splicing activity,
which protected the HCC cells from sorafenib-induced apoptosis. However, the
re-expression of RACK1 led HCC cells to regain susceptibility to
sorafenib-induced apoptosis. Taken together, the present study suggests that the 
RACK1/IRE1 complex may contribute to activation of the UPR in HCC cells.
Targeting RACK1 in combination with sorafenib administration is a potential
strategy for clinical trials of advanced HCC treatment.

PMID: 25901709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Pharmacology. 2015;95(3-4):173-80. doi: 10.1159/000380952. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

Fenofibrate treatment attenuated chronic endoplasmic reticulum stress in the
liver of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease mice.

Zhang N(1), Lu Y, Shen X, Bao Y, Cheng J, Chen L, Li B, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.

Fenofibrate is widely used in clinical practice, but its influence on chronic
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress induced by feeding a high-calorie and
high-cholesterol diet (HCD) has still not been studied. We thus investigated its 
effects on the liver of the nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) mouse model.
Male C57BL/6 mice fed an HCD for 3 months were treated with fenofibrate (HCD +
FF, 40 mg/kg, once daily) via gavage for 4 weeks. Insulin sensitivity, serum
lipid and inflammatory cytokines were measured. Liver tissues were procured for
histological examination as well as analysis of hepatic triglyceride levels,
distribution of inflammatory cytokines and genes involved in ER stress. Our
results showed that chronic feeding of an HCD successfully induced an NAFLD model
accompanied by inflammatory activation, apoptosis and severe ER stress in the
liver. Fenofibrate administration significantly improved symptoms of NAFLD and
decreased apoptosis, expression of inflammatory cytokines and genes involved in
ER stress, such as inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a), X-box binding protein 1 
(XBP1) and JNK phosphorylation. Thus, our study suggests that fenofibrate
protected against inflammatory injury and apoptosis, maybe alleviating ER stress 
through the IRE1a-XBP1-JNK pathway in the liver of NAFLD mice.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 25896720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mech Dev. 2015 Aug;137:33-44. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.04.001. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

A transgenic zebrafish model for monitoring xbp1 splicing and endoplasmic
reticulum stress in vivo.

Li J(1), Chen Z(2), Gao LY(3), Colorni A(4), Ucko M(4), Fang S(5), Du SJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA; Shandong Medicinal and Biotechnology Center, Shandong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Jinan 250062, Shandong Province, China. (2)Institute of Marine 
and Environmental Technology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Center for
Biomedical Engineering and Technology, Department of Physiology, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (3)Department of cell
Biology and Molecular genetics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742,
USA. (4)Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, National Center for
Mariculture, Eilat 88112, Israel. (5)Center for Biomedical Engineering and
Technology, Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address: sfang@umaryland.edu. (6)Institute
of Marine and Environmental Technology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
Electronic address: sdu@som.umaryland.edu.

Accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
triggers ER stress that initiates unfolded protein response (UPR). XBP1 is a
transcription factor that mediates one of the key signaling pathways of UPR to
cope with ER stress through regulating gene expression. Activation of XBP1
involves an unconventional mRNA splicing catalyzed by IRE1 endonuclease that
removes an internal 26 nucleotides from xbp1 mRNA transcripts in the cytoplasm.
Researchers have taken advantage of this unique activation mechanism to monitor
XBP1 activation, thereby UPR, in cell culture and transgenic models. Here we
report a Tg(ef1a:xbp1d-gfp) transgenic zebrafish line to monitor XBP1 activation 
using GFP as a reporter especially in zebrafish oocytes and developing embryos.
The Tg(ef1a:xbp1d-gfp) transgene was constructed using part of the zebrafish xbp1
cDNA containing the splicing element. ER stress induced splicing results in the
cDNA encoding a GFP-tagged partial XBP1 without the transactivation activation
domain (XBP1<U+0394>-GFP). The results showed that xbp1 transcripts mainly exist as the 
spliced active isoform in unfertilized oocytes and zebrafish embryos prior to
zygotic gene activation at 3 hours post fertilization. A strong GFP expression
was observed in unfertilized oocytes, eyes, brain and skeletal muscle in addition
to a weak expression in the hatching gland. Incubation of transgenic zebrafish
embryos with (dithiothreitol) DTT significantly induced XBP1<U+0394>-GFP expression.
Collectively, these studies unveil the presence of maternal xbp1 splicing in
zebrafish oocytes, fertilized eggs and early stage embryos. The
Tg(ef1a:xbp1d-gfp) transgenic zebrafish provides a useful model for in vivo
monitoring xbp1 splicing during development and under ER stress conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25892297  [PubMed - in process]


166. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2015 Feb 15;15:26. doi: 10.1186/s12906-015-0544-4.

Apoptosis induction associated with the ER stress response through up-regulation 
of JNK in HeLa cells by gambogic acid.

Krajarng A(1,)(2), Imoto M(3), Tashiro E(4), Fujimaki T(5), Shinjo S(6),
Watanapokasin R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Chulabhorn International College of Medicine, Thammasart University,
Pratumthani, Thailand. krajarng@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty
of Medicine, Srinakharinwirot University, Bangkok, Thailand. krajarng@yahoo.com. 
(3)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan. imoto@bio.keio.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, 
Yokohama, Japan. tashiro@bio.keio.ac.jp. (5)Department of Biosciences and
Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.
Kamesan2hiki@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty
of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.
st_0619_shinjo@hotmail.com. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine,
Srinakharinwirot University, Bangkok, Thailand. ramida.swu@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Gambogic acid (GA) was extracted from the dried yellow resin of
gamboge (Garcinia hanburyi) which is traditionally used as a coloring material
for painting and cloth dying. Gamboge has been also used as a folk medicine for
an internal purgative and externally infected wound. We focused on the mechanisms
of apoptosis induction by GA through the unfold protein response (ER stress) in
HeLa cells.
METHODS: The cytotoxic effect of GA against HeLa cells was determined by trypan
blue exclusion assay. Markers of ER stress such as XBP-1, GRP78, CHOP, GADD34 and
ERdj4 were analyzed by RT-PCR and Real-time RT-PCR. Cell morphological changes
and apoptotic proteins were performed by Hoechst33342 staining and Western
blotting technique.
RESULTS: Our results indicated a time- and dose-dependent decrease of cell
viability by GA. The ER stress induction is determined by the up-regulation of
spliced XBP1 mRNA and activated GRP78, CHOP, GADD34 and ERdj4 expression. GA also
induced cell morphological changes such as nuclear condensation, membrane
blebbing and apoptotic body in Hela cells. Apoptosis cell death detected by
increased DR5, caspase-8, -9, and -3 expression as well as increased
cleaved-PARP, while decreased Bcl-2 upon GA treatment. In addition,
phosphorylated JNK was up-regulated but phosphorylated ERK was down-regulated
after exposure to GA.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that GA induce apoptosis associated with the
ER stress response through up-regulation of p-JNK and down-regulation of p-ERK in
HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC4340837
PMID: 25887496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 15;11(4):e1005164. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005164.
eCollection 2015.

The UPR branch IRE1-bZIP60 in plants plays an essential role in viral infection
and is complementary to the only UPR pathway in yeast.

Zhang L(1), Chen H(1), Brandizzi F(2), Verchot J(3), Wang A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Crop Protection and Food Research, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
London, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory and
Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
USA. (3)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, Oklahoma, United States of America.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling network encompasses two pathways in
plants, one mediated by inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1)-bZIP60 mRNA and the
other by site-1/site-2 proteases (S1P/S2P)-bZIP17/bZIP28. As the major sensor of 
UPR in eukaryotes, IRE1, in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress,
catalyzes the unconventional splicing of HAC1 in yeast, bZIP60 in plants and XBP1
in metazoans. Recent studies suggest that IRE1p and HAC1 mRNA, the only UPR
pathway found in yeast, evolves as a cognate system responsible for the robust
UPR induction. However, the functional connectivity of IRE1 and its splicing
target in multicellular eukaryotes as well as the degree of conservation of IRE1 
downstream signaling effectors across eukaryotes remains to be established. Here,
we report that IRE1 and its substrate bZIP60 function as a strictly cognate
enzyme-substrate pair to control viral pathogenesis in plants. Moreover, we show 
that the S1P/S2P-bZIP17/bZIP28 pathway, the other known branch of UPR in plants, 
does not play a detectable role in virus infection, demonstrating the distinct
function of the IRE1-bZIP60 pathway in plants. Furthermore, we provide evidence
that bZIP60 and HAC1, products of the enzyme-substrate duet, rather than IRE1,
are functionally replaceable to cope with ER stress in yeast. Taken together, we 
conclude that the downstream signaling of the IRE1-mediated splicing is
evolutionarily conserved in yeast and plants, and that the IRE1-bZIP60 UPR
pathway not only confers overlapping functions with the other UPR branch in
fundamental biology but also may exert a unique role in certain biological
processes such as virus-plant interactions.

PMCID: PMC4398384
PMID: 25875739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2015 Mar;42(1):1-7. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2015.42.1.1. Epub 2015
Mar 31.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in periimplantation embryos.

Michalak M(1), Gye MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Life Science and Institute of Natural Sciences, College of
Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.

Stress coping mechanisms are critical to minimize or overcome damage caused by
ever changing environmental conditions. They are designed to promote cell
survival. The unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway is mobilized in response to
the accumulation of unfolded proteins, ultimately in order to regain endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) homeostasis. Various elements of coping responses to ER stress
including Perk, Ask1, Bip, Chop, Gadd34, Ire1, Atf4, Atf6, and Xbp1 have been
identified and were found to be inducible in oocytes and preimplantation embryos,
suggesting that, as a normal part of the cellular adaptive mechanism, these
coping responses, including the UPR, play a pivotal role in the development of
preimplantation embryos. As such, the UPR-associated molecules and pathways may
become useful markers for the potential diagnosis of stress conditions for
preimplantation embryos. After implantation, ER stress-induced coping responses
become physiologically important for a normal decidual response, placentation,
and early organogenesis. Attenuation of ER stress coping responses by
tauroursodeoxycholate and salubrinal was effective for prevention of cell death
of cultured embryos. Further elucidation of new and relevant ER stress coping
responses in periimplantation embryos might contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the regulation of normal development of embryonic development
and potentiation of embryonic development in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4390675
PMID: 25874167  [PubMed]


169. Surgery. 2015 Jul;158(1):255-65. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2015.01.024. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

CRH knockout inhibits the murine innate immune responses in association with
endoplasmic reticulum stress after thermal injury.

Yang C(1), Gao W(1), Yang X(1), Wang H(1), Du J(1), Zhong H(1), Zhou L(1), Zhou
J(1), Zhang Y(2), Jiang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Institute of
Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Changjiang 
Zhilu, Daping, Chongqing, P. R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute
of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Changjiang Zhilu, Daping, Chongqing, P. R. China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Changjiang Zhilu, Daping, Chongqing,
P. R. China. Electronic address: hellojjx@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated the hypothalamus
destruction and adrenalectomy could blunt the innate immunity while boosting the 
excessive inflammation after injury. We aimed to investigate the effects of
corticotrophin-releasing hormone knockout (CRH KO) on the innate immune responses
in macrophages as well as to elucidate the underlying mechanism.
METHODS: The chemotaxis and phagocytosis activities of macrophages, bacteria
translocation, plasma tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a secretion, and intestinal
injury were observed in the presence of the endoplasmic reticulum stress after
thermal injury in CRH KO mice. Meanwhile, the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein
expression of glucose response protein 78 (GRP78), X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) in macrophages was also
determined.
RESULTS: After thermal injury, the chemotaxis and phagocytosis of peritoneal
macrophages were increased, which were both reversed by CRH gene deficiency. The 
gut-derived bacteria translocation to liver tissues, lung tissues and mesenteric 
lymph nodes was significantly strengthened in CRH KO mice compared with CRH
wild-type littermates. Circulating TNF-a level was increased markedly in response
to thermal injury and CRH KO further increased its secretion. Furthermore, the
mRNA and protein levels of GRP78, XBP1, and ATF6 in peritoneal macrophages
increased, while their expressions in CRH KO mice all decreased significantly.
CRH KO mice showed enhancement of inflammatory responses and severe tissue
injuries after thermal injury.
CONCLUSION: CRH exerted immune defensive actions on immune cells and organs in
the early phase of injury, suggesting that the underlying mechanisms are related 
to endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25873533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jul;146(1):116-26. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv075. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Store-Operated Calcium Entry Contribute to Usnic
Acid-Induced Toxicity in Hepatic Cells.

Chen S(1), Zhang Z(2), Wu Y(1), Shi Q(1), Yan H(1), Mei N(1), Tolleson WH(1), Guo
L(3).

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Biochemical Toxicology, Division of Genetic and Molecular
Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR
72079, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China and
Division of Systems Biology, National Center for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA,
Jefferson, AR 72079. (2)*Division of Biochemical Toxicology, Division of Genetic 
and Molecular Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA,
Jefferson, AR 72079, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052,
China and Division of Systems Biology, National Center for Toxicological
Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079 *Division of Biochemical Toxicology,
Division of Genetic and Molecular Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China and Division of Systems Biology, National Center 
for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079. (3)*Division of
Biochemical Toxicology, Division of Genetic and Molecular Toxicology, National
Center for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079, Tianjin Medical 
University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China and Division of Systems
Biology, National Center for Toxicological Research/U.S. FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079
lei.guo@fda.hhs.gov.

The use of usnic acid as a weight loss agent is a safety concern due to reports
of acute liver failure in humans. Previously we demonstrated that usnic acid
induces apoptosis and cytotoxicity in hepatic HepG2 cells. We also demonstrated
that usnic acid induces autophagy as a survival mechanism against its
cytotoxicity. In this study, we investigated and characterized further molecular 
mechanisms underlying the toxicity of usnic acid in HepG2 cells. We found that
usnic acid causes endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress demonstrated by the increased
expression of typical ER stress markers, including CHOP, ATF-4, p-eIF2a, and
spliced XBP1. Usnic acid inhibited the secretion of Gaussia luciferase measured
by an ER stress reporter assay. An ER stress inhibitor 4-phenylbutyrate
attenuated usnic acid-induced apoptosis. Moreover, usnic acid significantly
increased the cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration. Usnic acid increased the
expression of calcium release-activated calcium channel protein 1 (CRAM1 or
ORAI1) and stromal interaction molecule 1, two key components of store-operated
calcium entry (SOCE), which is the major Ca(2+) influx pathway in non-excitable
cells, this finding was also confirmed in primary rat hepatocytes. Furthermore,
knockdown of ORAI1 prevented ER stress and ATP depletion in response to usnic
acid. In contrast, overexpression of ORAI1 increased ER stress and ATP depletion 
caused by usnic acid. Taken together, our results suggest that usnic acid
disturbs calcium homeostasis, induces ER stress, and that usnic acid-induced
cellular damage occurs at least partially via activation of the Ca(2+) channel of
SOCE.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology 2015.
This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in
the US.

PMID: 25870318  [PubMed - in process]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2186-202. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00013-15. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

Cleavage of BLOC1S1 mRNA by IRE1 Is Sequence Specific, Temporally Separate from
XBP1 Splicing, and Dispensable for Cell Viability under Acute Endoplasmic
Reticulum Stress.

Bright MD(1), Itzhak DN(2), Wardell CP(2), Morgan GJ(2), Davies FE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cancer Therapeutics and Molecular Pathology, The Institute of
Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom michael.bright@icr.ac.uk. (2)Divisions of
Cancer Therapeutics and Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research,
London, United Kingdom.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) remediates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
IRE1, a component of the UPR, senses misfolded protein and cleaves XBP1 mRNA,
which is ligated to code for the prosurvival transcription factor. IRE1 also
cleaves other mRNAs preceding their degradation, termed regulated IRE1-dependent 
mRNA decay (RIDD). It has been reported that RIDD may be involved in cell
viability under stress and therefore may contribute to cancer cell viability. To 
investigate RIDD targets that may have functional relevance in cell survival, we 
identified conserved RIDD targets containing stringent IRE1 RNase target
sequences. Using a systematic bioinformatics approach with quantitative-PCR
(qPCR) validation, we show that only BLOC1S1 is consistently a RIDD target in all
systems tested. Using cancer cell lines, we show that BLOC1S1 is specifically
cleaved by IRE1 at guanine 444, but only under conditions of IRE1
hyperactivation. BLOC1S1 cleavage is temporally separate from XBP1 splicing,
occurring after depletion of unspliced XBP1. Expression of an uncleavable BLOC1S1
mutant or inhibition of RIDD using an IRE1 RNase inhibitor did not affect
cellular recovery from acute ER stress. These data demonstrate that although
hyperactivated IRE1 specifically cleaves BLOC1S1, this cleavage event and RIDD as
a whole are dispensable for cell viability under acute stress.

Copyright © 2015, Bright et al.

PMCID: PMC4438243
PMID: 25870107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1852(7):1372-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.04.002.
Epub 2015 Apr 7.

A novel mutation in PNLIP causes pancreatic triglyceride lipase deficiency
through protein misfolding.

Szabó A(1), Xiao X(2), Haughney M(2), Spector A(2), Sahin-Tóth M(1), Lowe ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Henry M. Goldman School of Dental
Medicine, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Electronic address: Loweme2@upmc.edu.

Congenital pancreatic triglyceride lipase (PNLIP) deficiency is a rare disorder
with uncertain genetic background as most cases were described before gene
sequencing was readily available. Recently, two brothers with PNLIP deficiency
were found to carry a homozygous missense mutation, c.662C>T (p.T221M) in the
PNLIP gene (J. Lipid Res. 2014. 55:307-312). Molecular modeling suggested the
substitution would change the orientation of residues in the catalytic site and
disrupt the function of p.T221M PNLIP. To test the effect of the p.T221M mutation
on PNLIP function, we expressed wild-type and p.T221M PNLIP in human embryonic
kidney (HEK) 293A cells and dexamethasone-differentiated AR42J rat acinar cells. 
In both cellular models, wild-type PNLIP was secreted into the conditioned medium
where it was readily detectable by protein staining, immunoblot or lipase
activity assays. In contrast, mutant p.T221M was not secreted into the medium,
but it was present in cell lysates where it accumulated in the insoluble
fraction. Intracellular retention of mutant p.T221M resulted in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress as measured by elevated XBP1 splicing and increased levels 
of ER chaperones. Our results demonstrate that the presence of methionine at
position 221 in the PNLIP protein sequence causes misfolding and aggregation of
the p.T221M mutant inside the cell. The consequent loss of enzyme secretion
adequately explains the clinical phenotype of PNLIP deficiency reported for
homozygous carriers of p.T221M. Furthermore, the ability of mutant p.T221M to
induce ER stress suggests that this form of PNLIP deficiency might cause acinar
cell damage as well.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645278 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25862608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nutr Res Pract. 2015 Apr;9(2):117-22. doi: 10.4162/nrp.2015.9.2.117. Epub 2015
Mar 6.

Curcumin utilizes the anti-inflammatory response pathway to protect the intestine
against bacterial invasion.

Cho JA(1), Park E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of GI Cell Biology, Boston Children's Hospital, USA. (2)Department of
Food and Nutrition, Hannam University, 461-6 Jeonmin-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon
305-811, Korea.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Curcumin, a major component of the Curcuma species,
contains antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Although it was found to
induce apoptosis in cancer cells, the functional role of curcumin as well as its 
molecular mechanism in anti-inflammatory response, particularly in intestinal
cells, has been less investigated. The intestine epithelial barrier is the first 
barrier and the most important location for the substrate coming from the lumen
of the gut.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: We administered curcumin treatment in the human intestinal
epithelial cell lines, T84 and Caco-2. We examined endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response by thapsigargin, qPCR of XBP1 and BiP, electrophysiology by
wild-type cholera toxin in the cells.
RESULTS: In this study, we showed that curcumin treatment reduces ER stress and
thereby decreases inflammatory response in human intestinal epithelial cells. In 
addition, curcumin confers protection without damaging the membrane tight
junction or actin skeleton change in intestine epithelial cells. Therefore,
curcumin treatment protects the gut from bacterial invasion via reduction of ER
stress and anti-inflammatory response in intestinal epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrate the important role of curcumin 
in protecting the intestine by modulating ER stress and inflammatory response
post intoxication.

PMCID: PMC4388941
PMID: 25861416  [PubMed]


174. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015 Jul 5;758:89-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2015.03.069. Epub
2015 Apr 6.

CHOP mediates XBP1S-induced renal mesangial cell necrosis following high glucose 
treatment.

Shao D(1), Ni J(2), Shen Y(2), Liu J(2), Zhou L(2), Xue H(2), Huang Y(3), Zhang
W(4), Lu L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200032, China; The Cell Electrophysiology Laboratory, Wannan
Medical College, Wuhu 241002, China. (2)Department of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Institute of Vascular Medicine,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)Department of Physiology
and Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. Electronic address: wzhang@shmu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. Electronic address: lulimin@shmu.edu.cn.

High glucose (HG)-induced apoptosis in mesangial cells (MCs) is a critical
determinant during the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. The signaling
cascade inducing MCs apoptosis by HG involves overproduction of reactive oxygen
species. Our previous studies have demonstrated that HG-induced oxidative stress 
is mediated by suppression of spliced/active X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1S),
suggesting the importance of XBP1S in HG-induced MCs apoptosis. CHOP, an
endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated proapoptotic signal, is involved in
downstream of XBP1S. In the present study, we explored the effect of XBP1S in
modulating HG-induced apoptosis in renal MCs and then identified the role of CHOP
in these processes. Apoptosis and necrosis were quantified by flow cytometry;
protein levels of XBP1S, caspase3, Bax, Bcl2, BNIP3, and CHOP were analyzed by
Western blotting. The cellular localization of XBP1S was determined by
immunofluorescence histochemistry. The binding of XBP1 to CHOP promoter was
determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. In addition, adenoviruses
harboring XBP1S gene (Ad-XBP1S) were used to overexpress XBP1S, whereas the
knockdown of CHOP was achieved by small interference RNA. HG suppressed nuclear
distribution of XBP1S and induced apoptosis and necrosis in MCs. Ad-XBP1S
infection enhanced the nuclear translocation of XBP1S and reduced MCs apoptosis
and necrosis. XBP1S bound to the promoter region of CHOP and upregulated CHOP
expression. Conversely, CHOP expression was reduced upon HG exposure and
knockdown of CHOP increased necrosis but not apoptosis in MCs. These results
suggest that XBP1S protected MCs from HG-induced apoptosis and necrosis, and CHOP
participates in XBP1S-regulated necrosis but not apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25857226  [PubMed - in process]


175. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 22;17:25. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0527-x.

Inhibition of iNOS as a novel effective targeted therapy against triple-negative 
breast cancer.

Granados-Principal S, Liu Y, Guevara ML, Blanco E, Choi DS, Qian W, Patel T,
Rodriguez AA, Cusimano J, Weiss HL, Zhao H, Landis MD, Dave B, Gross SS, Chang
JC.

INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive form of
breast cancer with no effective targeted therapy. Inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) is associated with poor survival in patients with breast cancer by
increasing tumor aggressiveness. This work aimed to investigate the potential of 
iNOS inhibitors as a targeted therapy for TNBC. We hypothesized that inhibition
of endogenous iNOS would decrease TNBC aggressiveness by reducing tumor
initiation and metastasis through modulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)-inducing factors.
METHODS: iNOS protein levels were determined in 83 human TNBC tissues and
correlated with clinical outcome. Proliferation, mammosphere-forming efficiency, 
migration, and EMT transcription factors were assessed in vitro after iNOS
inhibition. Endogenous iNOS targeting was evaluated as a potential therapy in
TNBC mouse models.
RESULTS: High endogenous iNOS expression was associated with worse prognosis in
patients with TNBC by gene expression as well as immunohistochemical analysis.
Selective iNOS (1400 W) and pan-NOS (L-NMMA and L-NAME) inhibitors diminished
cell proliferation, cancer stem cell self-renewal, and cell migration in vitro,
together with inhibition of EMT transcription factors (Snail, Slug, Twist1, and
Zeb1). Impairment of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a, endoplasmic reticulum stress
(IRE1a/XBP1), and the crosstalk between activating transcription factor
3/activating transcription factor 4 and transforming growth factor ß was
observed. iNOS inhibition significantly reduced tumor growth, the number of lung 
metastases, tumor initiation, and self-renewal.
CONCLUSIONS: Considering the effectiveness of L-NMMA in decreasing tumor growth
and enhancing survival rate in TNBC, we propose a targeted therapeutic clinical
trial by re-purposing the pan-NOS inhibitor L-NMMA, which has been extensively
investigated for cardiogenic shock as an anti-cancer therapeutic.

PMCID: PMC4384389
PMID: 25849745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Clin Invest. 2015 May;125(5):1955-67. doi: 10.1172/JCI78863. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Sec63 and Xbp1 regulate IRE1a activity and polycystic disease severity.

Fedeles SV, So JS, Shrikhande A, Lee SH, Gallagher AR, Barkauskas CE, Somlo S,
Lee AH.

The HSP40 cochaperone SEC63 is associated with the SEC61 translocon complex in
the ER. Mutations in the gene encoding SEC63 cause polycystic liver disease in
humans; however, it is not clear how altered SEC63 influences disease
manifestations. In mice, loss of SEC63 induces cyst formation both in liver and
kidney as the result of reduced polycystin-1 (PC1). Here we report that
inactivation of SEC63 induces an unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway that is 
protective against cyst formation. Specifically, using murine genetic models, we 
determined that SEC63 deficiency selectively activates the IRE1a-XBP1 branch of
UPR and that SEC63 exists in a complex with PC1. Concomitant inactivation of both
SEC63 and XBP1 exacerbated the polycystic kidney phenotype in mice by markedly
suppressing cleavage at the G protein-coupled receptor proteolysis site (GPS) in 
PC1. Enforced expression of spliced XBP1 (XBP1s) enhanced GPS cleavage of PC1 in 
SEC63-deficient cells, and XBP1 overexpression in vivo ameliorated cystic disease
in a murine model with reduced PC1 function that is unrelated to SEC63
inactivation. Collectively, the findings show that SEC63 function regulates
IRE1a/XBP1 activation, SEC63 and XBP1 are required for GPS cleavage and
maturation of PC1, and activation of XBP1 can protect against polycystic disease 
in the setting of impaired biogenesis of PC1.

PMCID: PMC4463201
PMID: 25844898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Food Funct. 2015 May;6(5):1547-56. doi: 10.1039/c4fo01153h.

Fucosylated chondroitin sulphate from Cusumaria frondosa mitigates hepatic
endoplasmic reticulum stress and inflammation in insulin resistant mice.

Li S(1), Jiang W, Hu S, Song W, Ji L, Wang Y, Cai L.

Author information: 
(1)Innovation Application Institute, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan,
Zhejiang Province 316022, China. hushiweihai@163.com.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-associated inflammation positively contributes 
to insulin resistance. It is also known that fucosylated chondroitin sulphate
from Cusumaria frondosa (Cf-CHS) can mitigate insulin resistance; however, its
effects on ER stress and inflammation are not well understood. Therefore, we
investigated whether Cf-CHS-influenced ER stress, inflammatory response and
signaling in insulin-resistant mice. Our results showed that Cf-CHS lowered serum
and hepatic ROS, NO, and FFA levels. Furthermore, Cf-CHS decreased serum
proinflammatory cytokines TNF-a, CRP, MIP-1, IL-1ß and IL-6 concentrations as
well as their hepatic mRNA expression, and increased the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 levels. Moreover, Cf-CHS reduced the ER stress markers Bip, ATF6, 
PERK, and XBP1 mRNA or protein expression, and PERK, eIF2a, and IRE1a
phosphorylation. These reductions were accompanied by a reduced activation of
JNK1 and IKKß, NF<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation, and IR/IRS-2 serine phosphorylation in
Cf-CHS-treated mice. These findings suggested that the Cf-CHS
supplementary-induced alleviation of RE stress-associated inflammation could be
the mechanism responsible for its beneficial effects against insulin resistance.

PMID: 25825143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 May;20(3):431-40. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0568-6.
Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Low-pH-induced apoptosis: role of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced calcium
permeability and mitochondria-dependent signaling.

Sharma V(1), Kaur R, Bhatnagar A, Kaur J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India,
Sharmavishal_biotech@yahoo.com.

The acidic microenvironment around tumor cells is a major determinant in cancer
growth, metabolism, and metastasis. However, its role in cancer physiology is
still not clearly understood. In the present investigation, an attempt has been
made to explore the effect of acidic environment on physiology of cancer cells.
Exposure of Raji cells to extracellular acidic environment was associated with
enhanced cytosolic calcium level and endoplasmic reticulum stress response. X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous
protein (CHOP), and glucose-regulated protein 78 kDa (GRP78) upregulation
suggested endoplasmic reticulum stress generation. On the other hand,
real-time-based upregulation of Bax gene expression and flow cytometric analysis 
of cytochrome c release as well as enhanced active caspase-3 further confirmed
mitochondrion-mediated events leading to induction of apoptosis. The expression
of TP53 and p21 was upregulated. These observations collectively strongly suggest
that both endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated calcium release and Bax targeting
might be altering mitochondrion membrane potential which in turn could induce
secondary apoptotic signals; subsequently, endoplasmic reticulum stress can also 
lead to nuclear localization of Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) which in turn favors
p53 mediated apoptotic signals.

PMCID: PMC4406939
PMID: 25823563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Front Biol (Beijing). 2015 Feb 1;10(1):28-51.

Transcriptional regulation of secretory capacity by bZip transcription factors.

Fox RM(1), Andrew DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Cells of specialized secretory organs expand their secretory pathways to
accommodate the increased protein load necessary for their function. The
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi apparatus and the secretory vesicles,
expand not only the membrane components but also the protein machinery required
for increased protein production and transport. Increased protein load causes an 
ER stress response akin to the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). Recent work has
implicated several bZip transcription factors in the regulation of protein
components of the early secretory pathway necessary to alleviate this stress.
Here, we highlight eight bZip transcription factors in regulating secretory
pathway component genes. These include components of the three canonical branches
of the UPR-ATF4, XBP1, and ATF6, as well as the five members of the Creb3 family 
of transcription factors. We review findings from both invertebrate and
vertebrate model systems suggesting that all of these proteins increase secretory
capacity in response to increased protein load. Finally, we propose that the
Creb3 family of factors may have a dual role in secretory cell differentiation by
also regulating the pathways necessary for cell cycle exit during terminal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4374484
PMID: 25821458  [PubMed]


180. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 May;11(5):256. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2015.35. Epub 2015 Mar
24.

Diabetic nephropathy: Defective podocyte XBP1 signalling in diabetic nephropathy.

Allison SJ.

Comment on
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:6496.

PMID: 25802075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nature. 2015 Mar 26;519(7544):491-4. doi: 10.1038/nature14280. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

hiCLIP reveals the in vivo atlas of mRNA secondary structures recognized by
Staufen 1.

Sugimoto Y(1), Vigilante A(2), Darbo E(3), Zirra A(4), Militti C(4), D'Ambrogio
A(5), Luscombe NM(6), Ule J(5).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. (2)1] Cancer Research UK London
Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK [2] UCL Genetics
Institute, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College 
London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (3)Cancer Research UK London Research 
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK. (4)Department of
Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N
3BG, UK. (5)1] MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue,
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK [2] Department of Molecular
Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(6)1] Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields,
London WC2A 3LY, UK [2] UCL Genetics Institute, Department of Genetics, Evolution
and Environment, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK [3]
Okinawa Institute of Science &Technology, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami-gun, 
Okinawa 904-0495, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2015 May;16(5):255.

The structure of messenger RNA is important for post-transcriptional regulation, 
mainly because it affects binding of trans-acting factors. However, little is
known about the in vivo structure of full-length mRNAs. Here we present hiCLIP, a
biochemical technique for transcriptome-wide identification of RNA secondary
structures interacting with RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Using this technique to 
investigate RNA structures bound by Staufen 1 (STAU1) in human cells, we uncover 
a dominance of intra-molecular RNA duplexes, a depletion of duplexes from coding 
regions of highly translated mRNAs, an unexpected prevalence of long-range
duplexes in 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), and a decreased incidence of single
nucleotide polymorphisms in duplex-forming regions. We also discover a duplex
spanning 858 nucleotides in the 3' UTR of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA
that regulates its cytoplasmic splicing and stability. Our study reveals the
fundamental role of mRNA secondary structures in gene expression and introduces
hiCLIP as a widely applicable method for discovering new, especially long-range, 
RNA duplexes.

PMCID: PMC4376666
PMID: 25799984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 14;35(2):158-72. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.69. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

miR-200 promotes the mesenchymal to epithelial transition by suppressing multiple
members of the Zeb2 and Snail1 transcriptional repressor complexes.

Perdigão-Henriques R(1,)(2,)(3), Petrocca F(1), Altschuler G(4), Thomas MP(1), Le
MT(1), Tan SM(1), Hide W(4,)(5), Lieberman J(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Medicine Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA. (2)Animal Cell Technology Unit, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica (ITQB), Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal. (3)Instituto de 
Biologia Experimental e Tecnológica (IBET), Oeiras, Portugal. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Sheffield
Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, University 
of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

The miR-200 family promotes the epithelial state by suppressing the Zeb1/Zeb2
epithelial gene transcriptional repressors. To identify other miR-200-regulated
genes, we isolated mRNAs bound to transfected biotinylated miR-200c in mouse
breast cancer cells. In all, 520 mRNAs were significantly enriched in miR-200c
binding at least twofold. Putative miR-200-regulated genes included Zeb2,
enriched 3.5-fold in the pull down. However, Zeb2 knockdown does not fully
recapitulate miR-200c overexpression, suggesting that regulating other miR-200
targets contributes to miR-200's enhancement of epithelial gene expression.
Candidate genes were highly enriched for miR-200c seed pairing in their 3'UTR and
coding sequence and for genes that were downregulated by miR-200c overexpression.
Epidermal growth factor receptor and downstream MAPK signaling pathways were the 
most enriched pathways. Genes whose products mediate transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß signaling were also significantly overrepresented, and miR-200
counteracted the suppressive effects of TGF-ß and bone morphogenic protein 2
(BMP-2) on epithelial gene expression. miR-200c regulated the 3'UTRs of 12 of 14 
putative miR-200c-binding mRNAs tested. The extent of mRNA binding to miR-200c
strongly correlated with gene suppression. Twelve targets of miR-200c (Crtap,
Fhod1, Smad2, Map3k1, Tob1, Ywhag/14-3-3<U+03B3>, Ywhab/14-3-3ß, Smad5, Zfp36, Xbp1,
Mapk12, Snail1) were experimentally validated by identifying their 3'UTR miR-200 
recognition elements. Smad2 and Smad5 form a complex with Zeb2 and Ywhab/14-3-3ß 
and Ywhag/14-3-3<U+03B3> form a complex with Snail1. These complexes that repress
transcription assemble on epithelial gene promoters. miR-200 overexpression
induced RNA polymerase II localization and reduced Zeb2 and Snail1 binding to
epithelial gene promoters. Expression of miR-200-resistant Smad5 modestly, but
significantly, reduced epithelial gene induction by miR-200. miR-200 expression
and Zeb2 knockdown are known to inhibit cell invasion in in vitro assays.
Knockdown of each of three novel miR-200 target genes identified here, Smad5,
Ywhag and Crtap, also profoundly suppressed cell invasion. Thus, miR-200
suppresses TGF-ß/BMP signaling, promotes epithelial gene expression and
suppresses cell invasion by regulating a network of genes.

PMID: 25798844  [PubMed - in process]


183. Semin Cancer Biol. 2015 Aug;33:25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2015.02.003. Epub 
2015 Mar 18.

Endoplasmic reticulum quality control in cancer: Friend or foe.

Kim H(1), Bhattacharya A(2), Qi L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, United
States. (2)Graduate Program in Genetics Genomics and Development, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, United States. (3)Division of Nutritional Sciences,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, United States; Graduate Program in Genetics
Genomics and Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, United States.
Electronic address: lq35@cornell.edu.

Quality control systems in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) mediated by unfolded
protein response (UPR) and endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation (ERAD)
ensure cellular function and organismal survival. Recent studies have suggested
that ER quality-control systems in cancer cells may serve as a double-edged sword
that aids progression as well as prevention of tumor growth in a
context-dependent manner. Here we review recent advances in our understanding of 
the complex relationship between ER proteostasis and cancer pathology, with a
focus on the two most conserved ER quality-control mechanisms--the IRE1a-XBP1
pathway of the UPR and SEL1L-HRD1 complex of the ERAD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4523434 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25794824  [PubMed - in process]


184. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 10;6:6496. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7496.

Defective podocyte insulin signalling through p85-XBP1 promotes ATF6-dependent
maladaptive ER-stress response in diabetic nephropathy.

Madhusudhan T(1), Wang H(2), Dong W(1), Ghosh S(1), Bock F(1), Thangapandi VR(3),
Ranjan S(1), Wolter J(1), Kohli S(1), Shahzad K(4), Heidel F(3), Krueger M(5),
Schwenger V(6), Moeller MJ(7), Kalinski T(8), Reiser J(9), Chavakis T(10),
Isermann B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Medical Faculty,
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39120, Germany. (2)1] Institute
of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke
University Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39120, Germany [2] Department of Cardiology,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, 430030 Wuhan, China. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology
and Oncology, Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg 
39120, Germany. (4)1] Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry,
Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39120, Germany
[2] University of Health Sciences, Khayaban-e-Jamia Punjab, Lahore 54600,
Pakistan. (5)Institute of Anatomy, University Leipzig, Liebigstrasse 13, 04103
Leipzig, Germany. (6)Internal Medicine I and Division of Nephrology, University
of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (7)Division of Nephrology and
Immunology, University Hospital of the RWTH Aachen University of Technology,
Aachen 52074, Germany. (8)Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty,
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg 39120, Germany. (9)Division of 
Medicine, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. (10)Department of
Clinical Pathobiochemistry and Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory
Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden 01307, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 May;11(5):256.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is associated with diabetic nephropathy (DN),
but its pathophysiological relevance and the mechanisms that compromise adaptive 
ER signalling in podocytes remain unknown. Here we show that nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor spliced X-box binding protein-1 (sXBP1)
is selectively impaired in DN, inducing activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) 
and C/EBP homology protein (CHOP). Podocyte-specific genetic ablation of XBP1 or 
inducible expression of ATF6 in mice aggravates DN. sXBP1 lies downstream of
insulin signalling and attenuating podocyte insulin signalling by genetic
ablation of the insulin receptor or the regulatory subunits phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K) p85a or p85ß impairs sXBP1 nuclear translocation and exacerbates 
DN. Corroborating our findings from murine DN, the interaction of sXBP1 with p85a
and p85ß is markedly impaired in the glomerular compartment of human DN. Thus,
signalling via the insulin receptor, p85, and XBP1 maintains podocyte
homeostasis, while disruption of this pathway impairs podocyte function in DN.

PMCID: PMC4366504
PMID: 25754093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Ann Hematol. 2015 Jul;94(7):1205-11. doi: 10.1007/s00277-015-2344-9. Epub 2015
Mar 7.

Longitudinal analysis of 25 sequential sample-pairs using a custom multiple
myeloma mutation sequencing panel (M(3)P).

Kortüm KM(1), Langer C, Monge J, Bruins L, Zhu YX, Shi CX, Jedlowski P, Egan JB, 
Ojha J, Bullinger L, Kull M, Ahmann G, Rasche L, Knop S, Fonseca R, Einsele H,
Stewart AK, Braggio E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology - Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Recent advances in genomic sequencing technologies now allow results from deep
next-generation sequencing to be obtained within clinically meaningful
timeframes, making this an attractive approach to better guide personalized
treatment strategies. No multiple myeloma-specific gene panel has been
established so far; we therefore designed a 47-gene-targeting gene panel,
containing 39 genes known to be mutated in =3 % of multiple myeloma cases and
eight genes in pathways therapeutically targeted in multiple myeloma (MM). We
performed targeted sequencing on tumor/germline DNA of 25 MM patients in which we
also had a sequential sample post treatment. Mutation analysis revealed KRAS as
the most commonly mutated gene (36 % in each time point), followed by NRAS (20
and 16 %), TP53 (16 and 16 %), DIS3 (16 and 16 %), FAM46C (12 and 16 %), and
SP140 (12 and 12 %). We successfully tracked clonal evolution and identified
mutation acquisition and/or loss in FAM46C, FAT1, KRAS, NRAS, SPEN, PRDM1, NEB,
and TP53 as well as two mutations in XBP1, a gene associated with bortezomib
resistance. Thus, we present the first longitudinal analysis of a MM-specific
targeted sequencing gene panel that can be used for individual tumor
characterization and for tracking clonal evolution over time.

PMCID: PMC4655812 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25743686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 5;10(3):e0119386. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119386.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of excessive endoplasmic reticulum stress in the Drosophila male
accessory gland results in infertility.

Chow CY(1), Avila FW(1), Clark AG(1), Wolfner MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, United States of America.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurs when misfolded proteins accumulate in
the lumen of the ER. A cell responds to ER stress with the unfolded protein
response (UPR), a complex program of transcriptional and translational changes
aimed at clearing misfolded proteins. Secretory tissues and cells are
particularly well adapted to respond to ER stress because their function requires
high protein production and secretory load. The insect male accessory gland (AG) 
is a secretory tissue involved in male fertility. The AG secretes many seminal
fluid proteins (SFPs) essential for male reproduction. Among adult Drosophila
tissues, we find that genes upregulated by ER stress are most highly expressed in
the AG, suggesting that the AG is already undergoing high levels of ER stress due
to its normal secretory functions. We hypothesized that induction of excessive ER
stress in the AG above basal levels, would perturb normal function and provide a 
genetic tool for studying AG and SFP biology. To test this, we genetically
induced excessive ER stress in the AG by conditional 1) expression of a misfolded
protein or 2) knockdown of the UPR regulatory protein, BiP. Both genetic
manipulations induced excessive ER stress in the AG, as indicated by the increase
in Xbp1 splicing, a marker of ER stress. Both models resulted in a large decrease
in or loss of SFP production and male infertility. Sperm production, motility,
and transfer appeared unaffected. The induction of strong ER stress in the insect
male AG may provide a simple way for studying or manipulating male fertility, as 
it eliminates AG function while preserving sperm production.

PMCID: PMC4350844
PMID: 25742606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Apr;76:112-25. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.02.005. Epub 2015 Feb 
26.

a-Synuclein-mediated inhibition of ATF6 processing into COPII vesicles disrupts
UPR signaling in Parkinson's disease.

Credle JJ(1), Forcelli PA(2), Delannoy M(3), Oaks AW(1), Permaul E(4), Berry
DL(4), Duka V(1), Wills J(1), Sidhu A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC 20007, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology and Interdisciplinary
Program in Neuroscience, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20007, USA. (3)SOM Microscope Facility, Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (4)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA. (5)Department of
Biochemistry, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
Electronic address: sidhua@georgetown.edu.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) monitors the folding environment within the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Accumulation of misfolded proteins within the ER
activates the UPR resulting in the execution of adaptive or non-adaptive
signaling pathways. a-Synuclein (a-syn) whose accumulation and aggregation define
the pathobiology of Parkinson's disease (PD) has been shown to inhibit ER-Golgi
transit of COPII vesicles. ATF6, a protective branch of the UPR, is processed via
COPII mediated ER-Golgi transit following its activation via ER stress. Using
cellular PD models together with biochemical reconstitution assays, we showed
that a-syn inhibited processing of ATF6 directly through physical interactions
and indirectly through restricted incorporation into COPII vesicles. Impaired
ATF6 signaling was accompanied by decreased ER-associated degradation (ERAD)
function and increased pro-apoptotic signaling. The mechanism by which a-syn
inhibits ATF6 signaling expands our understanding of the role ER stress and the
UPR play in neurodegenerative diseases such as PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25725420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(9):1543-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00136-15. Epub 2015 Feb
23.

Epithelial Xbp1 is required for cellular proliferation and differentiation during
mammary gland development.

Hasegawa D(1), Calvo V(2), Avivar-Valderas A(2), Lade A(3), Chou HI(3), Lee
YA(3), Farias EF(2), Aguirre-Ghiso JA(2), Friedman SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St. Marianna
University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan. (2)Division of Hematology and
Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, and Department of Otolaryngology, Tisch
Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York,
USA. (3)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA. (4)Division of Liver Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA scott.friedman@mssm.edu.

Xbp1, a key mediator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), is activated by
IRE1a-mediated splicing, which results in a frameshift to encode a protein with
transcriptional activity. However, the direct function of Xbp1 in epithelial
cells during mammary gland development is unknown. Here we report that the loss
of Xbp1 in the mammary epithelium through targeted deletion leads to poor
branching morphogenesis, impaired terminal end bud formation, and spontaneous
stromal fibrosis during the adult virgin period. Additionally, epithelial Xbp1
deletion induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the epithelium and
dramatically inhibits epithelial proliferation and differentiation during
lactation. The synthesis of milk and its major components, a/ß-casein and whey
acidic protein (WAP), is significantly reduced due to decreased prolactin
receptor (Prlr) and ErbB4 expression in Xbp1-deficient mammary epithelium.
Reduction of Prlr and ErbB4 expression and their diminished availability at the
cell surface lead to reduced phosphorylated Stat5, an essential regulator of cell
proliferation and differentiation during lactation. As a result, lactating
mammary glands in these mice produce less milk protein, leading to poor pup
growth and postnatal death. These findings suggest that the loss of Xbp1 induces 
a terminal UPR which blocks proliferation and differentiation during mammary
gland development.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4387219
PMID: 25713103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Feb 19;11(2):e1004046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004046. 
eCollection 2015.

Data-driven prediction and design of bZIP coiled-coil interactions.

Potapov V(1), Kaplan JB(1), Keating AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1004243.

Selective dimerization of the basic-region leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription
factors presents a vivid example of how a high degree of interaction specificity 
can be achieved within a family of structurally similar proteins. The coiled-coil
motif that mediates homo- or hetero-dimerization of the bZIP proteins has been
intensively studied, and a variety of methods have been proposed to predict these
interactions from sequence data. In this work, we used a large quantitative set
of 4,549 bZIP coiled-coil interactions to develop a predictive model that
exploits knowledge of structurally conserved residue-residue interactions in the 
coiled-coil motif. Our model, which expresses interaction energies as a sum of
interpretable residue-pair and triplet terms, achieves a correlation with
experimental binding free energies of R = 0.68 and significantly out-performs
other scoring functions. To use our model in protein design applications, we
devised a strategy in which synthetic peptides are built by assembling 7-residue 
native-protein heptad modules into new combinations. An integer linear program
was used to find the optimal combination of heptads to bind selectively to a
target human bZIP coiled coil, but not to target paralogs. Using this approach,
we designed peptides to interact with the bZIP domains from human JUN, XBP1, ATF4
and ATF5. Testing more than 132 candidate protein complexes using a fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer assay confirmed the formation of tight and selective
heterodimers between the designed peptides and their targets. This approach can
be used to make inhibitors of native proteins, or to develop novel peptides for
applications in synthetic biology or nanotechnology.

PMCID: PMC4335062
PMID: 25695764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 18;10(2):e0117016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117016.
eCollection 2015.

Increased classical endoplasmic reticulum stress is sufficient to reduce
chondrocyte proliferation rate in the growth plate and decrease bone growth.

Kung LH(1), Rajpar MH(1), Preziosi R(2), Briggs MD(3), Boot-Handford RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. (2)Environment, Ecology and
Evolution Research Group, Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, United Kingdom. (3)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, International Centre for Life, Central Parkway, Newcastle Upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom.

Mutations in genes encoding cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and matrilin-3
cause a spectrum of chondrodysplasias called multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) 
and pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH). The majority of these diseases feature
classical endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) as a result of misfolding of the mutant protein. However, 
the importance and the pathological contribution of ER stress in the disease
pathogenesis are unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the generic
role of ER stress and the UPR in the pathogenesis of these diseases. A transgenic
mouse line (ColIITgcog) was generated using the collagen II promoter to drive
expression of an ER stress-inducing protein (Tgcog) in chondrocytes. The skeletal
and histological phenotypes of these ColIITgcog mice were characterised. The
expression and intracellular retention of Tgcog induced ER stress and activated
the UPR as characterised by increased BiP expression, phosphorylation of eIF2a
and spliced Xbp1. ColIITgcog mice exhibited decreased long bone growth and
decreased chondrocyte proliferation rate. However, there was no disruption of
chondrocyte morphology or growth plate architecture and perturbations in
apoptosis were not apparent. Our data demonstrate that the targeted induction of 
ER stress in chondrocytes was sufficient to reduce the rate of bone growth, a key
clinical feature associated with MED and PSACH, in the absence of any growth
plate dysplasia. This study establishes that classical ER stress is a pathogenic 
factor that contributes to the disease mechanism of MED and PSACH. However, not
all the pathological features of MED and PSACH were recapitulated, suggesting
that a combination of intra- and extra-cellular factors are likely to be
responsible for the disease pathology as a whole.

PMCID: PMC4334961
PMID: 25693198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 20;458(4):796-801. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.028. Epub 2015 Feb 14.

Berberine improves endothelial function by inhibiting endoplasmic reticulum
stress in the carotid arteries of spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Liu L(1), Liu J(2), Huang Z(3), Yu X(3), Zhang X(3), Dou D(3), Huang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Peking, China. Electronic address: liu_limei@126.com. (2)Institute of
Vascular Medicine and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (3)Department of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Peking University Health Science Center, Peking, China.
(4)Institute of Vascular Medicine and Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences,
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
yu-huang@cuhk.edu.hk.

Activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in endothelial cells leads to
increased oxidative stress and often results in cell death, which has been
implicated in hypertension. The present study investigated the effects of
berberine, a botanical alkaloid purified from Coptidis rhizoma, on ER stress in
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and the underling mechanism. Isolated
carotid arteries from normotensive WKYs and SHRs were suspended in myograph for
isometric force measurement. Protein phosphorylations and expressions were
determined by Western blotting. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) level was measured 
by DHE staining. SHR carotid arteries exhibited exaggerated
acetylcholine-triggered endothelium-dependent contractions (EDCs) and elevated
ROS accumulation compared with WKY arteries. Moreover, Western blot analysis
revealed the reduced AMPK phosphorylation, increased eIF2a phosphorylation, and
elevated levels of ATF3, ATF6, XBP1 and COX-2 in SHR carotid arteries while these
pathological alterations were reversed by 12 h-incubation with berberine.
Furthermore, AMPK inhibitor compound C or dominant negative AMPK adenovirus
inhibited the effects of berberine on above-mentioned marker proteins and EDCs.
More importantly, ROS scavengers, tempol and tiron plus DETCA, or ER stress
inhibitors, 4-PBA and TUCDA normalized the elevated levels of ROS and COX-2
expression, and attenuated EDCs in SHR arteries. Taken together, the present
results suggest that berberine reduces EDCs likely through activating AMPK, thus 
inhibiting ER stress and subsequently scavenging ROS leading to COX-2
down-regulation in SHR carotid arteries. The present study thus provides
additional insights into the vascular beneficial effects of berberine in
hypertension.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25686503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Drug Resist Updat. 2015 Jan;18:18-35. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 10.

Molecular basis of resistance to proteasome inhibitors in hematological
malignancies.

Niewerth D(1), Jansen G(2), Assaraf YG(3), Zweegman S(4), Kaspers GJ(1), Cloos
J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Rheumatology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Lab,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (4)Hematology, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Hematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: j.cloos@vumc.nl.

Over the past decade, the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (Velcade) has not only 
gained a cornerstone position in the treatment of hematological malignancies,
particularly multiple myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma, but also in experimental 
therapeutics of acute leukemia. However, the therapeutic efficacy of bortezomib
is hampered by the emergence of acquired resistance, for which multifactorial
mechanisms have been identified. This review summarizes the current status of the
molecular mechanisms underlying resistance to proteasome inhibitors that emerged 
in preclinical therapeutic studies, and discusses these findings in the clinical 
perspective of novel therapeutic modalities of hematological malignancies. The
specific topics that will be addressed in the current review include the recently
established mechanisms of resistance to proteasome inhibitors: the role of
constitutive and immunoproteasomes, mutations in proteasome subunits, unfolded
protein response, XBP1 and MARCKS proteins, multidrug efflux transporters,
aggresomes and autophagy, as well as the impact of pro-survival signaling
pathways and bone marrow microenvironment. The growing knowledge of the
determinants that confer bortezomib resistance and/or toxicity has provided the
basis for the rational development of second generation proteasome inhibitors,
some of which were recently approved or that are undergoing clinical evaluation
as novel strategies to overcome bortezomib resistance as well as to enhance
clinical therapeutic efficacy along with minimal side effects. Collectively,
these combined approaches should enhance therapeutic efficacy and outcome in
patients with hematological malignancies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25670156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Aug;230(8):1964-73. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24942.

MicroRNA-214 Is Upregulated in Heart Failure Patients and Suppresses
XBP1-Mediated Endothelial Cells Angiogenesis.

Duan Q(1), Yang L, Gong W, Chaugai S, Wang F, Chen C, Wang P, Zou MH, Wang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department Internal Medicine and the Institute of Hypertension, Tongji
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, PR China.

More and more miRNAs have been shown to regulate gene expression in the heart and
dysregulation of their expression has been linked to cardiovascular diseases
including the miR-199a/214 cluster. However, the signature of circulating miR-214
expression and its possible roles during the development of heart failure has
been less well studied. In this study, we elucidated the biological and clinical 
significance of miR-214 dysregulation in heart failure. Firstly, circulating
miR-214 was measured by quantitative PCR, and we found that miR-214 was
upregulated in the serum of chronic heart failure patients, as well as in
hypertrophic and failing hearts of humans and mice. Adeno-associated virus
serotype 9 (AAV9)-mediated miR-214 silencing attenuates isoproterenol (ISO)
infusion-induced cardiac dysfunction and impairment of cardiac angiogenesis in
mice. Mechanistically, miR-214 overexpression reduces angiogenesis of HUVECs by
targeting XBP1, an important transcription factor of unfolded protein response,
and XBP1 silencing decreases HUVECs proliferation and angiogenesis similar to
miR-214 overexpression. Furthermore, ectopic expression of XBP1 enhances
endothelial cells proliferation and tube formation, and reverses anti-angiogenic 
effect of miR-214 over expression. All these findings suggest that miR-214 is an 
important regulator of angiogenesis in heart in vitro and in vivo, likely via
regulating the expression of XBP1, and demonstrate that miR-214 plays an
essential role in the control/inhibition of cardiac angiogenesis.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular Physiology published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25656649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. EMBO Rep. 2015 Mar;16(3):332-40. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439123. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Genome-wide screen identifies a novel p97/CDC-48-dependent pathway regulating
ER-stress-induced gene transcription.

Marza E(1), Taouji S(2), Barroso K(2), Raymond AA(3), Guignard L(4), Bonneu M(5),
Pallares-Lupon N(2), Dupuy JW(5), Fernandez-Zapico ME(6), Rosenbaum J(3),
Palladino F(7), Dupuy D(4), Chevet E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Team "Endoplasmic Reticulum stress and cancer", INSERM, UMR1053, Bordeaux,
France University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France ARNA laboratory, INSERM U869,
Bordeaux, France. (2)Team "Endoplasmic Reticulum stress and cancer", INSERM,
UMR1053, Bordeaux, France University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (3)University
of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France "REPTeam", INSERM, UMR1053, Bordeaux, France.
(4)University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France ARNA laboratory, INSERM U869,
Bordeaux, France. (5)University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France Plateforme
Proteome, Bordeaux, France. (6)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Division of
Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (7)Laboratory of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS UMR5239 Université de Lyon, 
Lyon Cedex 07, France. (8)Team "Endoplasmic Reticulum stress and cancer", INSERM,
UMR1053, Bordeaux, France University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France Centre
Régional de Lutte Contre le Cancer Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France
eric.chevet@inserm.fr.

The accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
activates the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR(ER)) to restore ER homeostasis. The 
AAA(+) ATPase p97/CDC-48 plays key roles in ER stress by promoting both ER
protein degradation and transcription of UPR(ER) genes. Although the mechanisms
associated with protein degradation are now well established, the molecular
events involved in the regulation of gene transcription by p97/CDC-48 remain
unclear. Using a reporter-based genome-wide RNAi screen in combination with
quantitative proteomic analysis in Caenorhabditis elegans, we have identified
RUVB-2, a AAA(+) ATPase, as a novel repressor of a subset of UPR(ER) genes. We
show that degradation of RUVB-2 by CDC-48 enhances expression of ER stress
response genes through an XBP1-dependent mechanism. The functional interplay
between CDC-48 and RUVB-2 in controlling transcription of select UPR(ER) genes
appears conserved in human cells. Together, these results describe a novel role
for p97/CDC-48, whereby its role in protein degradation is integrated with its
role in regulating expression of ER stress response genes.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4364872
PMID: 25652260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 30;5:8134. doi: 10.1038/srep08134.

The short-chain fatty acid receptor GPR43 is transcriptionally regulated by XBP1 
in human monocytes.

Ang Z(1), Er JZ(1), Ding JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117543 [2] NUS graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543.

G-protein coupled receptor 43 (GPR43) recognizes short chain fatty acids and is
implicated in obesity, colitis, asthma and arthritis. Here, we present the first 
full characterization of the GPR43 promoter and 5'-UTR. 5'-RACE of the GPR43
transcript identified the transcription start site (TSS) and a 124 bp 5'-UTR
followed by a 1335 bp intron upstream of the ATG start codon. The sequence
spanning -4560 to +68 bp relative to the GPR43 TSS was found to contain strong
promoter activity, increasing luciferase reporter expression by >100-fold in U937
monocytes. Stepwise deletions further narrowed the putative GPR43 promoter (-451 
to +68). Site-directed mutagenesis identified XBP1 as a core cis element, the
mutation of which abrogated transcriptional activity. Mutations of predicted
CREB, CHOP, NFAT and STAT5 binding sites, partially reduced promoter activity.
ChIP assays confirmed the binding of XBP1 to the endogenous GPR43 promoter.
Consistently, GPR43 expression is reduced in monocytes upon siRNA-knockdown of
XBP1, while A549 cells overexpressing XBP1 displayed elevated GPR43 levels. Based
on its ability to activate XBP1, we predicted and confirmed that TNFa induces
GPR43 expression in human monocytes. Altogether, our findings form the basis for 
strategic modulation of GPR43 expression, with a view to regulate
GPR43-associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC4311239
PMID: 25633224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Sep;22(9):1502-16. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.241. Epub 2015
Jan 30.

Imaging of single cell responses to ER stress indicates that the relative
dynamics of IRE1/XBP1 and PERK/ATF4 signalling rather than a switch between
signalling branches determine cell survival.

Walter F(1), Schmid J(1), Düssmann H(1), Concannon CG(1), Prehn JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Systems Medicine and Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, 
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.

An accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers 
the unfolded protein response (UPR) mediated via the activation of three
transmembrane proteins IRE1, PERK and ATF6. Signalling through these proteins is 
aimed at enhancing the ER folding capacity and reducing the folding load. If
these processes fail to re-establish protein homeostasis within the ER, then cell
death prevails via apoptosis. How the shift from pro-survival to pro-apoptotic
signalling is regulated remains unclear with both IRE1 and PERK signalling
associated with pro-survival as well as pro-apoptotic signalling. To investigate 
the temporal activation of IRE1 and PERK in live cells and their relationship to 
cellular fate, we devised single cell reporters for both ER stress signalling
branches. SH-SY5Y neural cells stably expressing these fluorescent protein
reporter constructs to monitor IRE1-splicing activity and PERK-mediated
ATF4-translation were imaged using single cell and high content time lapse live
cell microscopy. We could correlate an early onset and attenuation of XBP1
splicing in the IRE1-reporter cells as cytoprotective. Indeed, silencing of IRE1 
expression using shRNA inhibited splicing of XBP1 resulting in an early onset of 
cell death. In contrast, in the PERK-reporter cells, we observed that a slow rate
of ATF4-translation and late re-initiation of general translation coincided with 
cells which were resistant to ER stress-induced cell death. Interestingly,
whereas silencing of PERK did not affect overall levels of cell death in response
to ER stress, it did increase sensitivity to ER stressors at early time points
following treatment. Our results suggest that apoptosis activation in response to
ER stress is not caused by a preferential activation of a single UPR branch, or
by a switch from one branch to the other. Rather, our data indicated that the
relative timing of IRE1 and PERK signalling determines the shift from cell
survival to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4532775 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25633195  [PubMed - in process]


197. Blood. 2015 Mar 12;125(11):1749-58. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-575845. Epub 2015 
Jan 28.

Differential induction of plasma cells by isoforms of human TACI.

Garcia-Carmona Y(1), Cols M(1), Ting AT(1), Radigan L(1), Yuk FJ(2), Zhang L(1), 
Cerutti A(3), Cunningham-Rundles C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute, and. (2)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Kastor
Neurobiology of Aging Laboratories, Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; (3)Immunology Institute, and Department of
Immunology, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain; and.
(4)Immunology Institute, and Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.

Subjects with common variable immune deficiency may have mutations in
transmembrane activator calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor
(TACI). Unlike the murine gene, human TACI undergoes alternative messenger (m)RNA
splicing to produce isoforms with 1 or 2 ligand-binding domains. Because both
isoforms are found in human B cells, we compared their functions in transduced
murine B and human pre-B cells. Although murine cells and pre-B cells transduced 
with the long TACI isoform retained surface CD19 and immunoglobulin G, cells
transduced with the short TACI isoform completely lost these B-cell
characteristics. Expression of the short TACI isoform produced intense nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B activation, nuclear p65 translocation, and colocalization with myeloid 
differentiation factor 88 and calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand. The short
TACI-transduced cells became larger and CD138 positive, demonstrated upregulated 
BLIMP1 and XBP1 mRNA, and acquired the morphology of plasma cells. In contrast,
cells bearing the long isoform had significantly less BLIMP1 and XBP1 mRNA and,
for human pre-B cells, remained CD138 negative. Although human B cells express
both isoforms, the short isoform predominates in CD27(+) B cells, toll-like
receptor 9-activated peripheral B cells, and splenic marginal zone B cells.
Although the transcriptional controls for alternative splicing of isoforms remain
unknown, differential signals via isoforms may control plasma-cell generation in 
humans.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4357582
PMID: 25631768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Ther. 2015 Jan 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Beta Blockers Suppress Dextrose-Induced Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress, Oxidative
Stress, and Apoptosis in Human Coronary Artery Endothelial Cells.

Haas MJ(1), Kurban W, Shah H, Onstead-Haas L, Mooradian AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Jacksonville, FL.

Beta blockers are known to have favorable effects on endothelial function partly 
because of their capacity to reduce oxidative stress. To determine whether beta
blockers can also prevent dextrose-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
addition to their antioxidative effects, human coronary artery endothelial cells 
and hepatocyte-derived HepG2 cells were treated with 27.5 mM dextrose for 24
hours in the presence of carvedilol (a lipophilic beta blockers with alpha
blocking activity), propranolol (a lipophilic nonselective beta blockers), and
atenolol (a water-soluble selective beta blockers), and ER stress, oxidative,
stress and cell death were measured. ER stress was measured using the placental
alkaline phosphatase assay and Western blot analysis of glucose regulated protein
78, c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK), phospho-JNK, eukaryotic initiating factor 2a
(eIF2a), and phospho-eIF2a and measurement of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA
splicing using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Superoxide (SO)
generation was measured using the superoxide-reactive probe
2-methyl-6-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3,7-dihydroimidazo[1,2-A]pyrazin-3-one hydrochloride
(MCLA) chemiluminescence. Cell viability was measured by propidium iodide
staining method. The ER stress, SO production, and cell death induced by 27.5 mM 
dextrose were inhibited by all 3 beta blockers tested. The antioxidative and ER
stress reducing effects of beta blockers were also observed in HepG2 cells. The
salutary effects of beta blockers on endothelial cells in reducing both ER stress
and oxidative stress may contribute to the cardioprotective effects of these
agents.

PMID: 25629351  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


199. G3 (Bethesda). 2015 Jan 23;5(4):487-96. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.016626.

Identification of eQTLs for hepatic Xbp1s and Socs3 gene expression in mice fed a
high-fat, high-caloric diet.

Pasricha S(1), Kenney-Hunt J(2), Anderson K(3), Jafari N(4), Hall RA(5), Lammert 
F(5), Cheverud J(6), Green RM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois
Department of Internal Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina. (2)Department of Biology and Environmental Science, Westminster
College, Fulton, Missouri. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. (4)Center for Genetic Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois. (5)Department of Medicine II, Saarland University 
Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (6)Department of Biology, Loyola University,
Chicago, Illinois. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois r-green2@northwestern.edu.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a highly prevalent form of human
hepatic disease and feeding mice a high-fat, high-caloric (HFHC) diet is a
standard model of NAFLD. To better understand the genetic basis of NAFLD, we
conducted an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analysis of mice fed a
HFHC diet. Two-hundred sixty-five (A/J × C57BL/6J) F2 male mice were fed a HFHC
diet for 8 wk. eQTL analysis was utilized to identify genomic regions that
regulate hepatic gene expression of Xbp1s and Socs3. We identified two
overlapping loci for Xbp1s and Socs3 on Chr 1 (164.0-185.4 Mb and 174.4-190.5 Mb,
respectively) and Chr 11 (41.1-73.1 Mb and 44.0-68.6 Mb, respectively), and an
additional locus for Socs3 on Chr 12 (109.9-117.4 Mb). C57BL/6J-Chr 11(A/J)/ NaJ 
mice fed a HFHC diet manifested the A/J phenotype of increased Xbp1s and Socs3
gene expression (P < 0.05), whereas C57BL/6J-Chr 1(A/J)/ NaJ mice retained the
C57BL/6J phenotype. In addition, we replicated the eQTLs on Chr 1 and Chr 12 (LOD
scores =3.5) using mice from the BXD murine reference panel challenged with CCl4 
to induce chronic liver injury and fibrosis. We have identified overlapping eQTLs
for Xbp1 and Socs3 on Chr 1 and Chr 11, and consomic mice confirmed that
replacing the C57BL/6J Chr 11 with the A/J Chr 11 resulted in an A/J phenotype
for Xbp1 and Socs3 gene expression. Identification of the genes for these eQTLs
will lead to a better understanding of the genetic factors responsible for NAFLD 
and potentially other hepatic diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Pasricha et al.

PMCID: PMC4390565
PMID: 25617409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Toxins (Basel). 2015 Jan 20;7(1):170-86. doi: 10.3390/toxins7010170.

Shiga toxin 2-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress is minimized by activated
protein C but does not correlate with lethal kidney injury.

Parello CS(1), Mayer CL(2), Lee BC(3), Motomochi A(4), Kurosawa S(5),
Stearns-Kurosawa DJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. csleibow@bu.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. cmayer@bu.edu. (3)Department 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 670
Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA. bclee@bu.edu. (4)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 670 Albany Street,
Boston, MA 02118, USA. amoto@bu.edu. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA
02118, USA. kurosawa@bu.edu. (6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Boston University School of Medicine, 670 Albany Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
dstearns@bu.edu.

Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli produce ribotoxic Shiga toxins (Stx), which
are responsible for kidney injury and development of hemolytic uremic syndrome.
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response is hypothesized to induce
apoptosis contributing to organ injury; however, this process has been described 
only in vitro. ER stress marker transcripts of spliced XBP1 (1.78-fold), HSP40
(4.45-fold) and CHOP (7.69-fold) were up-regulated early in kidneys of Stx2
challenged mice compared to saline controls. Anti-apoptotic Bcl2 decreased
(-2.41-fold vs. saline) and pro-apoptotic DR5 increased (6.38-fold vs. saline) at
later time points. Cytoprotective activated protein C (APC) reduced early CHOP
expression (-3.3-fold vs. untreated), increased later Bcl2 expression (5.8-fold
vs. untreated), and had early effects on survival but did not alter DR5
expression. Changes in kidney ER stress and apoptotic marker transcripts were
observed in Stx2-producing C. rodentium challenged mice compared to mice infected
with a non-toxigenic control strain. CHOP (4.14-fold) and DR5 (2.81-fold) were
increased and Bcl2 (-1.65-fold) was decreased. APC reduced CHOP expression and
increased Bcl2 expression, but did not alter mortality. These data indicate that 
Stx2 induces renal ER stress and apoptosis in murine models of Stx2-induced
kidney injury, but decreasing these processes alone was not sufficient to alter
survival outcome.

PMCID: PMC4303821
PMID: 25609181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Gut. 2016 Apr;65(4):595-606. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307030. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Methyl-deficient diet promotes colitis and SIRT1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Melhem H(1), Hansmannel F(1), Bressenot A(1), Battaglia-Hsu SF(1), Billioud V(1),
Alberto JM(1), Gueant JL(1), Peyrin-Biroulet L(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Nutrition Génétique et exposition aux
risques environnementaux, Université de Lorraine 54 511, Vanduvre-Lès-Nancy
cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Methyl donor deficiency (MDD) aggravates experimental colitis in rats
and increases endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress through decreased sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) in neuronal cells and myocardium. ER stress plays a key role in IBD
pathogenesis.
AIM: We investigated whether the influence of MDD on colitis resulted from an ER 
stress response triggered by decreased SIRT1 expression.
DESIGN: The unfolded protein response (UPR), chaperones proteins, heat shock
factor protein 1 (HSF1) and SIRT1 were examined in rats with MDD and dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in a Caco-2 cell model with stable
expression of transcobalamin-oleosin (TO) chimera, which impairs cellular
availability of vitamin B12, and in IBD. The effects of SIRT1 activation were
studied both in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: MDD aggravated DSS-induced colitis clinically, endoscopically and
histologically. MDD activated ER stress pathways, with increased
phosphorylate-PKR-like ER kinase, P-eiF-2a, P-IRE-1a, activating transcription
factor (ATF)6, XBP1-S protein and ATF4 mRNA expression levels in rats. This was
accompanied by reduced SIRT1 expression level and greater acetylation of HSF1, in
relation with a dramatic decrease of chaperones (binding immunoglobulin protein
(BIP), heat shock protein (HSP)27 and HSP90). Adding either vitamin B12,
S-adenosylmethionine or an SIRT1 activator (SRT1720) reduced the UPR in vitro. In
rats, SIRT1 activation by SRT1720 prevented colitis by reducing HSF1 acetylation 
and increasing expression of BIP, HSP27 and HSP90. Immunohistochemistry showed
impaired expression of SIRT1 in the colonic epithelium of patients with IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: SIRT1 is a master regulator of ER stress and severity of
experimental colitis in case of MDD. It could deserve further interest as a
therapeutic target of IBD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25608526  [PubMed - in process]


202. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 15;194(4):1480-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401127. Epub 2015
Jan 19.

JNK regulatory molecule G5PR induces IgG autoantibody-producing plasmablasts from
peritoneal B1a cells.

Kitabatake M(1), Soma M(1), Zhang T(1), Kuwahara K(1), Fukushima Y(1), Nojima
T(2), Kitamura D(2), Sakaguchi N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan; (2)Division of Molecular Biology, Research 
Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba 278-0022,
Japan; and. (3)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan; nobusaka@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Peritoneal B1a cells expressing CD5 and CD11b generate autoantibody-producing
precursors in autoimmune-prone mice. Previous studies show reduced JNK signaling 
in peritoneal B1a cells of female New Zealand Black mice and an abnormal increase
of protein phosphatase 2A subunit G5PR that regulates BCR-mediated JNK signaling 
as a cause of autoimmunity. To investigate the mechanism regulating B1a
differentiation into autoantibody-secreting plasmablasts (PBs), we applied an in 
vitro culture system that supports long-term growth of germinal center (GC) B
cells (iGB) with IL-4, CD40L, and BAFF. Compared with spleen B2 cells, B1a cells 
differentiated into GC-like B cells, but more markedly into PBs, and underwent
class switching toward IgG1. During iGB culture, B1a cells expressed
GC-associated aicda, g5pr, and bcl6, and markedly PB-associated prdm1, irf4, and 
xbp1. B1a-derived iGB cells from New Zealand Black × New Zealand White F1 mice
highly differentiated into autoantibody-secreting PBs in vitro and localized to
the GC area in vivo. In iGB culture, JNK inhibitor SP600125 augmented the
differentiation of C57BL/6 B1a cells into PBs. Furthermore, B1a cells from G5PR
transgenic mice markedly differentiated into IgM and IgG autoantibody-secreting
PBs. In conclusion, JNK regulation is critical to suppress autoantibody-secreting
PBs from peritoneal B1a cells.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25601926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015 Apr;23(4):661-70. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2015.01.001.
Epub 2015 Jan 17.

Cartilage-specific ablation of XBP1 signaling in mouse results in a
chondrodysplasia characterized by reduced chondrocyte proliferation and delayed
cartilage maturation and mineralization.

Cameron TL(1), Gresshoff IL(2), Bell KM(3), Piróg KA(4), Sampurno L(5), Hartley
CL(6), Sanford EM(7), Wilson R(8), Ermann J(9), Boot-Handford RP(10), Glimcher
LH(11), Briggs MD(12), Bateman JF(13).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: trevor.cameron@mcri.edu.au. (2)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
irma.gresshoff@unimelb.edu.au. (3)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: katrina.bell@mcri.edu.au.
(4)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, International Centre for 
Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Electronic address:
katarzyna.pirog@newcastle.ac.uk. (5)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: lisa.sampurno@mcri.edu.au.
(6)Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, St Mary's
Hospital, Manchester, UK. Electronic address: claire.burgoyne@cmft.nhs.uk.
(7)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: emma.sanford@mcri.edu.au. (8)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
richard.wilson@utas.edu.au. (9)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA. Electronic address: jermann@partners.org. (10)Wellcome Trust Centre for 
Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: ray.boot-handford@manchester.ac.uk. (11)Weill
Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic
address: lglimche@med.cornell.edu. (12)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Electronic
address: michael.briggs@newcastle.ac.uk. (13)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: john.bateman@mcri.edu.au.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the in vivo role of the IRE1/XBP1 unfolded protein
response (UPR) signaling pathway in cartilage.
DESIGN: Xbp1(flox/flox).Col2a1-Cre mice (Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2)), in which XBP1 activity 
is ablated specifically from cartilage, were analyzed histomorphometrically by
Alizarin red/Alcian blue skeletal preparations and X-rays to examine overall bone
growth, histological stains to measure growth plate zone length, chondrocyte
organization, and mineralization, and immunofluorescence for collagen II,
collagen X, and IHH. Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) analyses were used to measure
chondrocyte proliferation and cell death, respectively. Chondrocyte cultures and 
microdissected growth plate zones were analyzed for expression profiling of
chondrocyte proliferation or endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers by
Quantitative PCR (qPCR), and of Xbp1 mRNA splicing by RT-PCR to monitor IRE1
activation.
RESULTS: Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2) displayed a chondrodysplasia involving dysregulated
chondrocyte proliferation, growth plate hypertrophic zone shortening, and IRE1
hyperactivation in chondrocytes. Deposition of collagens II and X in the
Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2) growth plate cartilage indicated that XBP1 is not required for
matrix protein deposition or chondrocyte hypertrophy. Analyses of mid-gestation
long bones revealed delayed ossification in Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2) embryos. The rate of
chondrocyte cell death was not significantly altered, and only minimal
alterations in the expression of key markers of chondrocyte proliferation were
observed in the Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2) growth plate. IRE1 hyperactivation occurred in
Xbp1(Cart<U+0394>Ex2) chondrocytes but was not sufficient to induce regulated
IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD) or a classical UPR.
CONCLUSION: Our work suggests roles for XBP1 in regulating chondrocyte
proliferation and the timing of mineralization during endochondral ossification, 
findings which have implications for both skeletal development and disease.

Copyright © 2015 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25600960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Dec 25;30(1 Pt A):7-18. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.12.011.
Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Transcriptomics hit the target: Monitoring of ligand-activated and stress
response pathways for chemical testing.

Limonciel A(1), Moenks K(2), Stanzel S(3), Truisi GL(4), Parmentier C(5),
Aschauer L(6), Wilmes A(6), Richert L(7), Hewitt P(8), Mueller SO(4), Lukas A(2),
Kopp-Schneider A(3), Leonard MO(9), Jennings P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
Electronic address: alice.limonciel@i-med.ac.at. (2)Emergentec Biodevelopment
GmbH, Vienna, Austria. (3)Division of Biostatistics (C060) Medical Biostatistics,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Non-Clinical
Safety, Merck Serono, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; Institut für Angewandte
Biowissenschaften, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany.
(5)KaLy-Cell, Plobsheim, France. (6)Department of Physiology, Medical University 
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (7)KaLy-Cell, Plobsheim, France; EA4267,
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France. (8)Non-Clinical Safety, Merck
Serono, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. (9)Centre for Radiation, Chemical and
Environmental Hazards, Public Health England, Chilton, Didcot OX11 0RQ, UK.

High content omic methods provide a deep insight into cellular events occurring
upon chemical exposure of a cell population or tissue. However, this improvement 
in analytic precision is not yet matched by a thorough understanding of molecular
mechanisms that would allow an optimal interpretation of these biological
changes. For transcriptomics (TCX), one type of molecular effects that can be
assessed already is the modulation of the transcriptional activity of a
transcription factor (TF). As more ChIP-seq datasets reporting genes specifically
bound by a TF become publicly available for mining, the generation of target gene
lists of TFs of toxicological relevance becomes possible, based on actual
protein-DNA interaction and modulation of gene expression. In this study, we
generated target gene signatures for Nrf2, ATF4, XBP1, p53, HIF1a, AhR and PPAR
gamma and tracked TF modulation in a large collection of in vitro TCX datasets
from renal and hepatic cell models exposed to clinical nephro- and hepato-toxins.
The result is a global monitoring of TF modulation with great promise as a
mechanistically based tool for chemical hazard identification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25596134  [PubMed - in process]


205. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Apr;144(2):328-37. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu319. Epub 2015 Jan 9.

Patulin induces apoptosis through ROS-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress
pathway.

Boussabbeh M(1), Ben Salem I(1), Prola A(1), Guilbert A(1), Bacha H(1),
Abid-Essefi S(2), Lemaire C(3).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds, Faculty of
Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia, INSERM UMR-S 1180, LabEx LERMIT,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, 92296
Châtenay-Malabry, France and Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, 
78035 Versailles, France. (2)*Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible 
Compounds, Faculty of Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia, INSERM
UMR-S 1180, LabEx LERMIT, Faculty of Pharmacy, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de
Pharmacie, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France and Université de Versailles Saint
Quentin en Yvelines, 78035 Versailles, France salwaabid@yahoo.fr. (3)*Laboratory 
for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds, Faculty of Dentistry, Rue
Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia, INSERM UMR-S 1180, LabEx LERMIT, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry,
France and Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, 78035 Versailles, 
France *Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible Compounds, Faculty of 
Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia, INSERM UMR-S 1180, LabEx LERMIT,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, 92296
Châtenay-Malabry, France and Université de Versailles Saint Quentin en Yvelines, 
78035 Versailles, France *Laboratory for Research on Biologically Compatible
Compounds, Faculty of Dentistry, Rue Avicenne, 5019 Monastir, Tunisia, INSERM
UMR-S 1180, LabEx LERMIT, Faculty of Pharmacy, Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de
Pharmacie, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France and Université de Versailles Saint
Quentin en Yvelines, 78035 Versailles, France.

Patulin (PAT) is a toxic metabolite produced by several filamentous fungi of the 
genera of Penicillium, Aspergillus, and Byssochlamys. PAT is the most common
mycotoxin found in apples and apple-based products including juice, compotes,
cider, and baby food. Exposure to this mycotoxin has been reported to induce
intestinal and kidney injuries. This study investigated the mechanism of
PAT-induced toxicity in human colon carcinoma (HCT116) and embryonic kidney cells
(HEK293). We demonstrated that PAT activated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
unfolded protein response as evidenced by up-regulation of GRP78 and GADD34,
splicing of XBP1 mRNA, and expression of the proapoptotic factor CHOP. This ER
stress response was accompanied by the induction of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway. Apoptosis occurred with ROS production, drop in mitochondrial membrane
potential and caspase activation. Further, we showed that deficiency of the
proapoptotic protein Bax or Bak protected cells against PAT-induced apoptosis.
The treatment of cells with the ROS scavenger N-acetyl cysteine inhibits the ER
stress response and prevents mitochondrial apoptosis. Collectively, our data
provide new mechanistic insights in the signaling pathways of the cell death
induced by PAT and demonstrate that PAT induces cytotoxicity through a
ROS-dependent mechanism involving ER stress and activation of mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway in human intestinal and kidney cells.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology.All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25577197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5367-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.603738. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Activation of the UPR protects against cigarette smoke-induced RPE apoptosis
through up-regulation of Nrf2.

Huang C(1), Wang JJ(2), Ma JH(1), Jin C(3), Yu Q(3), Zhang SX(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Ophthalmology/Ross Eye Institute, School of Medicine
and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215, SUNY Eye Institute, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215, State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060 China, and. (2)From 
the Department of Ophthalmology/Ross Eye Institute, School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215, SUNY Eye Institute, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215. (3)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510060 China, and. (4)From 
the Department of Ophthalmology/Ross Eye Institute, School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215, SUNY Eye Institute, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York,
Buffalo, New York 14215 xzhang38@buffalo.edu.

Recent studies have revealed a role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced 
unfolded protein response (UPR) in the regulation of RPE cell activity and
survival. Herein, we examined the mechanisms by which the UPR modulates apoptotic
signaling in human RPE cells challenged with cigarette smoking extract (CSE). Our
results show that CSE exposure induced a dose- and time-dependent increase in ER 
stress markers, enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial
fragmentation, and apoptosis of RPE cells. These changes were prevented by the
anti-oxidant NAC or chemical chaperone TMAO, suggesting a close interaction
between oxidative and ER stress in CSE-induced apoptosis. To decipher the role of
the UPR, overexpression or down-regulation of XBP1 and CHOP genes was manipulated
by adenovirus or siRNA. Overexpressing XBP1 protected against CSE-induced
apoptosis by reducing CHOP, p-p38, and caspase-3 activation. In contrast, XBP1
knockdown sensitized the cells to CSE-induced apoptosis, which is likely through 
a CHOP-independent pathway. Surprisingly, knockdown of CHOP reduced p-eIF2a and
Nrf2 resulting in a marked increase in caspase-3 activation and apoptosis.
Furthermore, Nrf2 inhibition increased ER stress and exacerbated cell apoptosis, 
while Nrf2 overexpression reduced CHOP and protected RPE cells. Our data suggest 
that although CHOP may function as a pro-apoptotic gene during ER stress, it is
also required for Nrf2 up-regulation and RPE cell survival. In addition,
enhancing Nrf2 and XBP1 activity may help reduce oxidative and ER stress and
protect RPE cells from cigarette smoke-induced damage.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342454
PMID: 25568320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Mar;80:71-80. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.12.018. Epub
2014 Dec 30.

Dissociation of mitochondrial from sarcoplasmic reticular stress in Drosophila
cardiomyopathy induced by molecularly distinct mitochondrial fusion defects.

Bhandari P(1), Song M(1), Dorn GW 2nd(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pharmacogenomics, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. (2)Center for
Pharmacogenomics, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. Electronic address: gdorn@dom.wustl.edu.

Mitochondrial dynamism (fusion and fission) is responsible for remodeling
interconnected mitochondrial networks in some cell types. Adult cardiac myocytes 
lack mitochondrial networks, and their mitochondria are inherently "fragmented". 
Mitochondrial fusion/fission is so infrequent in cardiomyocytes as to not be
observable under normal conditions, suggesting that mitochondrial dynamism may be
dispensable in this cell type. However, we previously observed that
cardiomyocyte-specific genetic suppression of mitochondrial fusion factors optic 
atrophy 1 (Opa1) and mitofusin/MARF evokes cardiomyopathy in Drosophila hearts.
We posited that fusion-mediated remodeling of mitochondria may be critical for
cardiac homeostasis, although never directly observed. Alternately, we considered
that inner membrane Opa1 and outer membrane mitofusin/MARF might have other
as-yet poorly described roles that affect mitochondrial and cardiac function.
Here we compared heart tube function in three models of mitochondrial
fragmentation in Drosophila cardiomyocytes: Drp1 expression, Opa1 RNAi, and
mitofusin MARF RNA1. Mitochondrial fragmentation evoked by enhanced Drp1-mediated
fission did not adversely impact heart tube function. In contrast, RNAi-mediated 
suppression of either Opa1 or mitofusin/MARF induced cardiac dysfunction
associated with mitochondrial depolarization and ROS production. Inhibiting ROS
by overexpressing superoxide dismutase (SOD) or suppressing ROMO1 prevented
mitochondrial and heart tube dysfunction provoked by Opa1 RNAi, but not by
mitofusin/MARF RNAi. In contrast, enhancing the ability of
endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum to handle stress by expressing Xbp1 rescued
the cardiomyopathy of mitofusin/MARF insufficiency without improving that caused 
by Opa1 deficiency. We conclude that decreased mitochondrial size is not
inherently detrimental to cardiomyocytes. Rather, preservation of mitochondrial
function by Opa1 located on the inner mitochondrial membrane, and prevention of
ER stress by mitofusin/MARF located on the outer mitochondrial membrane, are
central functions of these "mitochondrial fusion proteins".

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4346473
PMID: 25555803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Physiol Rep. 2014 Dec 23;2(12). pii: e12195. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12195. Print 2014
Dec 1.

Reversal of glucose intolerance in rat offspring exposed to ethanol before birth 
through reduction of nuclear skeletal muscle HDAC expression by the bile acid
TUDCA.

Yao XH(1), Nguyen KH(1), Nyomba BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Prenatal ethanol exposure causes cellular stress, insulin resistance, and glucose
intolerance in adult offspring, with increased gluconeogenesis and reduced muscle
glucose transporter-4 (glut4) expression. Impaired insulin activation of Akt and 
nuclear translocation of histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the liver partly explain
increased gluconeogenesis. The mechanism for the reduced glut4 is unknown.
Pregnant rats were gavaged with ethanol over the last week of gestation and adult
female offspring were studied. Some ethanol exposed offspring was treated with
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) for 3 weeks. All these rats underwent
intraperitoneal glucose tolerance and insulin tolerance tests. The expression of 
glut4, HDACs, and markers of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein response
(XBP1, CHOP, ATF6) was examined in the gastrocnemius muscle fractions, and in
C2C12 muscle cells cultured with ethanol, TUDCA, and HDAC inhibitors.
Non-TUDCA-treated rats exposed to prenatal ethanol were insulin resistant and
glucose intolerant with reduced muscle glut4 expression, increased ER marker
expression, and increased nuclear HDACs, whereas TUDCA-treated rats had normal
insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance with normal glut4 expression, ER marker
expression, and HDAC levels. In C2C12 cells, ethanol reduced glut4 expression,
but increased ER makers. While TUDCA restored glut4 and ER markers to control
levels and HDAC inhibition rescued glut4 expression, HDAC inhibition had no
effect on ER markers. The increase in nuclear HDAC levels consequent to prenatal 
ethanol exposure reduces glut4 expression in adult rat offspring, and this HDAC
effect is independent of ER unfolded protein response. HDAC inhibition by TUDCA
restores glut4 expression, with improvement in insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance.

© 2014 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4332199
PMID: 25538147  [PubMed]


209. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:160140. doi: 10.1155/2014/160140. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

The unfolded protein response and diabetic retinopathy.

Ma JH(1), Wang JJ(2), Zhang SX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry (Ira G. Ross Eye Institute),
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, 308 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; SUNY Eye
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology and Biochemistry (Ira G. Ross Eye Institute),
School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, 308 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA ; SUNY Eye
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

Diabetic retinopathy, a common complication of diabetes, is the leading cause of 
blindness in adults. Diabetes chronically damages retinal blood vessels and
neurons likely through multiple pathogenic pathways such as oxidative stress,
inflammation, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. To relieve ER stress, the
cell activates an adaptive mechanism known as the unfolded protein response
(UPR). The UPR coordinates the processes of protein synthesis, protein folding,
and degradation to ensure proteostasis, which is vital for cell survival and
activity. Emerging evidence suggests that diabetes can activate all three UPR
branches in retinal cells, among which the PERK/ATF4 pathway is the most
extensively studied in the development of diabetic retinopathy. X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) is a major transcription factor in the core UPR pathway and also
regulates a variety of genes involved in cellular metabolism, redox state,
autophagy, inflammation, cell survival, and vascular function. The exact function
and implication of XBP1 in the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy remain
elusive. Focusing on this less studied pathway, we summarize recent progress in
studies of the UPR pertaining to diabetic changes in retinal vasculature and
neurons, highlighting the perspective of XBP1 as a potential therapeutic target
in diabetic retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC4229964
PMID: 25530974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Oct 29;5(12):1278-1283. eCollection 2014.

Discovery of Sulfonamidebenzamides as Selective Apoptotic CHOP Pathway Activators
of the Unfolded Protein Response.

Flaherty DP(1), Miller JR(2), Garshott DM(2), Hedrick M(3), Gosalia P(3), Li
Y(3), Milewski M(3), Sugarman E(4), Vasile S(4), Salaniwal S(3), Su Y(3), Smith
LH(4), Chung TD(3), Pinkerton AB(3), Aubé J(1), Callaghan MU(2), Golden JE(1),
Fribley AM(2), Kaufman RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Delbert M. Shankel Structural Biology Center, University of Kansas Specialized
Chemistry Center , 2034 Becker Drive, Lawrence, Kansas 66047, United States.
(2)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology and
Oncology, and the Karmanos Cancer Institute Molecular Therapeutics Group, Wayne
State University , 2228 Elliman Building, 421 East Canfield, Detroit, Michigan
48201, United States. (3)Conrad Prebys Center for Chemical Genomics,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute , La Jolla, California 92037, United
States. (4)Conrad Prebys Center for Chemical Genomics, Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute at Lake Nona , Orlando, Florida 32827, United States.
(5)Program in Degenerative Disease Research, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute , 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, United
States.

Cellular proteins that fail to fold properly result in inactive or disfunctional 
proteins that can have toxic functions. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a 
two-tiered cellular mechanism initiated by eukaryotic cells that have accumulated
misfolded proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). An adaptive pathway
facilitates the clearance of the undesired proteins; however, if overwhelmed,
cells trigger apoptosis by upregulating transcription factors such as
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP). A high throughput screen was performed directed 
at identifying compounds that selectively upregulate the apoptotic CHOP pathway
while avoiding adaptive signaling cascades, resulting in a sulfonamidebenzamide
chemotype that was optimized. These efforts produced a potent and selective CHOP 
inducer (AC50 = 0.8 µM; XBP1 > 80 µM), which was efficacious in both mouse
embryonic fibroblast cells and a human oral squamous cell cancer cell line, and
demonstrated antiproliferative effects for multiple cancer cell lines in the
NCI-60 panel.

PMCID: PMC4266338
PMID: 25530830  [PubMed]


211. Mol Oncol. 2015 Mar;9(3):675-88. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.11.005. Epub 2014 Nov
22.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and cell death in mTORC1-overactive cells is induced
by nelfinavir and enhanced by chloroquine.

Johnson CE(1), Hunt DK(1), Wiltshire M(1), Herbert TP(2), Sampson JR(1),
Errington RJ(1), Davies DM(1), Tee AR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14
4XN, UK. (2)Department of Cell Physiology and Pharmacology, University of
Leicester, The Henry Wellcome Building, University Road, Leicester LE1 9HN, UK.
(3)Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14
4XN, UK. Electronic address: teea@cardiff.ac.uk.

Inappropriate activation of mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1) is common in cancer and has many cellular consequences including
elevated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Cells employ autophagy as a critical 
compensatory survival mechanism during ER stress. This study utilised
drug-induced ER stress through nelfinavir in order to examine ER stress tolerance
in cell lines with hyper-active mTORC1 signalling. Our initial findings in wild
type cells showed nelfinavir inhibited mTORC1 signalling and upregulated
autophagy, as determined by decreased rpS6 and S6K1 phosphorylation, and SQTSM1
protein expression, respectively. Contrastingly, cells with hyper-active mTORC1
displayed basally elevated levels of ER stress which was greatly exaggerated
following nelfinavir treatment, seen through increased CHOP mRNA and XBP1
splicing. To further enhance the effects of nelfinavir, we introduced chloroquine
as an autophagy inhibitor. Combination of nelfinavir and chloroquine
significantly increased ER stress and caused selective cell death in multiple
cell line models with hyper-active mTORC1, whilst control cells with normalised
mTORC1 signalling tolerated treatment. By comparing chloroquine to other
autophagy inhibitors, we uncovered that selective toxicity invoked by chloroquine
was independent of autophagy inhibition yet entrapment of chloroquine to
acidified lysosomal/endosomal compartments was necessary for cytotoxicity. Our
research demonstrates that combination of nelfinavir and chloroquine has
therapeutic potential for treatment of mTORC1-driven tumours.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25498902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(12):1646-57. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.967992.

Regulation of dimethyl-fumarate toxicity by proteasome inhibitors.

Booth L(1), Cruickshanks N, Tavallai S, Roberts JL, Peery M, Poklepovic A, Dent
P.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

The present studies examined the biology of the multiple sclerosis drug
dimethyl-fumarate (DMF) or its in vivo breakdown product and active metabolite
mono-methyl-fumarate (MMF), alone or in combination with proteasome inhibitors,
in primary human glioblastoma (GBM) cells. MMF enhanced velcade and carfilzomib
toxicity in multiple primary GBM isolates. Similar data were obtained in breast
and colon cancer cells. MMF reduced the invasiveness of GBM cells, and enhanced
the toxicity of ionizing radiation and temozolomide. MMF killed freshly isolated 
activated microglia which was associated with reduced IL-6, TGFß and TNFa
production. The combination of MMF and the multiple sclerosis drug Gilenya
further reduced both GBM and activated microglia viability and cytokine
production. Over-expression of c-FLIP-s or BCL(-)XL protected GBM cells from MMF 
and velcade toxicity. MMF and velcade increased plasma membrane localization of
CD95, and knock down of CD95 or FADD blocked the drug interaction. The drug
combination inactivated AKT, ERK1/2 and mTOR. Molecular inhibition of
AKT/ERK/mTOR signaling enhanced drug combination toxicity whereas molecular
activation of these pathways suppressed killing. MMF and velcade increased the
levels of autophagosomes and autolysosomes and knock down of ATG5 or Beclin1
protected cells. Inhibition of the eIF2a/ATF4 arm or the IRE1a/XBP1 arm of the ER
stress response enhanced drug combination lethality. This was associated with
greater production of reactive oxygen species and quenching of ROS suppressed
cell killing.

PMCID: PMC4623310
PMID: 25482938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;59:21-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.11.011.
Epub 2014 Dec 4.

Involvement of BK channel in differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells
induced by mechanical stretch.

Wan XJ(1), Zhao HC(2), Zhang P(1), Huo B(3), Shen BR(1), Yan ZQ(1), Qi YX(4),
Jiang ZL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences &
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Lab of
Biomechanics, Department of Engineering Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China. (3)School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China. (4)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of
Life Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: qiyx@sjtu.edu.cn.

The differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), which are exposed to
mechanical stretch in vivo, plays an important role in vascular remodeling during
hypertension. Here, we demonstrated the mechanobiological roles of large
conductance calcium and voltage-activated potassium (BK) channels in this
process. In comparison with 5% stretch (physiological), 15% stretch
(pathological) induced the de-differentiation of VSMCs, resulting in
significantly decreased expressions of VSMC markers, i.e., a-actin, calponin and 
SM22. The activity of BK channels, assessed by patch clamp recording, was
significantly increased by 15% stretch and was accompanied by an increased
alternative splicing of BK channel a-subunit at the stress axis-regulated exons
(STREX). Furthermore, transfection of whole BK or STREX-deleted BK plasmids
revealed that STREX was important for BK channels to sense mechanical stretch.
Using thapsigargin (TG) which induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and
xbp1-targeted siRNA transfection which blocks ER stress, the results revealed
that ER stress was contribute to stretch-induced alternative splicing of STREX.
Our results suggested that during hypertension, pathological stretch may induce
the ER stress in VSMCs, which affects the alternative splicing and activity of BK
channels, and subsequently modulates VSMC differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25481230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Dec;50:122-8. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.10.012. Epub 2014
Oct 25.

Analysis of endoplasmic reticulum stress in placentas of HIV-infected women
treated with protease inhibitors.

Brüning A(1), Kimmich T(2), Brem GJ(2), Buchholtz ML(2), Mylonas I(2), Kost B(2),
Weizsäcker K(3), Gingelmaier A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. Electronic address: ansgar.bruening@med.uni-muenchen.de.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.

Combined antiretroviral therapy has proven efficacy in decreasing vertical HIV
transmission. However, endoplasmic reticulum stress is a known side effect of HIV
protease inhibitors. We investigated endoplasmic reticulum stress in placentas of
HIV-infected and uninfected mothers by PCR-based splicing analysis of the
specific endoplasmic reticulum stress marker XBP1 in post-delivery placental
samples of uninfected mothers and in HIV-infected mothers taking antiretroviral
therapy. No elevated XBP1 splicing could be detected in placentas of uninfected
mothers and most of the mothers receiving combined anti-retroviral therapy.
However, markedly elevated XBP1 splicing was found in the placentas of three
individuals on combined antiviral therapy, all receiving lopinavir or atazanavir.
In vitro experiments confirmed induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress by
lopinavir and atazanavir in trophoblast-derived cell lines. Since endoplasmic
reticulum stress occurred in selective patients only, individual differences in
susceptibility of HIV-infected mothers to protease inhibitor induced endoplasmic 
reticulum stress can be postulated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25461911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1852(1):156-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.11.017.
Epub 2014 Nov 29.

IRE1 impairs insulin signaling transduction of fructose-fed mice via JNK
independent of excess lipid.

Sun RQ(1), Wang H(1), Zeng XY(1), Chan SM(1), Li SP(1), Jo E(1), Leung SL(1),
Molero JC(1), Ye JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology for Diabetes, Health Innovations Research Institute and
School of Health Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Molecular Pharmacology for Diabetes, Health Innovations Research Institute and
School of Health Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Electronic
address: jiming.ye@rmit.edu.au.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways have been implicated in the
development of hepatic insulin resistance during high fructose (HFru) feeding.
The present study investigated their roles in initiating impaired insulin
signaling transduction in the liver induced by HFru feeding in mice. HFru feeding
resulted in hepatic steatosis, increased de novo lipogenesis and activation of
two arms of the UPR pathways (IRE1/XBP1 and PERK/eIF2a) in similar patterns from 
3days to 8weeks. In order to identify the earliest trigger of impaired insulin
signaling in the liver, we fed mice a HFru diet for one day and revealed that
only the IRE1 branch was activated (by 2-fold) and insulin-mediated Akt
phosphorylation was blunted (~25%) in the liver. There were significant increases
in phosphorylation of JNK (~50%) and IRS at serine site (~50%), protein content
of ACC and FAS (up to 2.5-fold) and triglyceride level (2-fold) in liver (but not
in muscle or fat). Blocking IRE1 activity abolished increases in JNK activity,
IRS serine phosphorylation and protected insulin-stimulated Akt phosphorylation
without altering hepatic steatosis or PKCe activity, a key link between lipids
and insulin resistance. Our findings together suggest that activation of IRE1-JNK
pathway is a key linker of impaired hepatic insulin signaling transduction
induced by HFru feeding.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25458704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1849(1):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.10.004. 
Epub 2014 Oct 27.

Expression of citrate carrier gene is activated by ER stress effectors XBP1 and
ATF6a, binding to an UPRE in its promoter.

Damiano F(1), Tocci R(2), Gnoni GV(2), Siculella L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Biological and
Environmental Sciences and Technologies, University of Salento, Via Prov. le
Lecce-Monteroni, Lecce 73100, Italy. Electronic address:
fabrizio.damiano@unisalento.it. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Technologies,
University of Salento, Via Prov. le Lecce-Monteroni, Lecce 73100, Italy.

The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is an intracellular signaling pathway which
is activated when unfolded or misfolded proteins accumulate in the Endoplasmic
Reticulum (ER), a condition commonly referred to as ER stress. It has been shown 
that lipid biosynthesis is increased in ER-stressed cells. The N(e)-lysine
acetylation of ER-resident proteins, including chaperones and enzymes involved in
the post-translational protein modification and folding, occurs upon UPR
activation. In both ER proteins acetylation and lipid synthesis, acetyl-CoA is
the donor of acetyl group and it is transported from the cytosol into the ER. The
cytosolic pool of acetyl-CoA is mainly derived from the activity of mitochondrial
citrate carrier (CiC). Here, we have demonstrated that expression of CiC is
activated in human HepG2 and rat BRL-3A cells during tunicamycin-induced ER
stress. This occurs through the involvement of an ER stress responsive region
identified within the human and rat CiC proximal promoter. A functional Unfolded 
Protein Response Element (UPRE) confers responsiveness to the promoter activation
by UPR transducers ATF6a and XBP1. Overall, our data demonstrate that CiC
expression is activated during ER stress through the binding of ATF6a and XBP1 to
an UPRE element located in the proximal promoter of Cic gene. The role of ER
stress-mediated induction of CiC expression has been discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 28;588(23):4413-21. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.10.011. Epub 
2014 Oct 19.

Reactive oxygen species increase HEPN1 expression via activation of the XBP1
transcription factor.

Kim HS(1), Jung G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: keynome@naver.com. (2)Department of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: drjung@snu.ac.kr.

Hepatocellular carcinoma downregulated 1 (HEPN1), a cell growth arrest- and
apoptosis-related gene, is suppressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However,
transcriptional control of HEPN1 has not been characterized. Here, we show that
exposure to reactive oxygen species (ROS) leads to upregulation of the mRNA
expression of HEPN1 in HCC cell lines. Mechanistically, ROS increase production
of an alternately spliced form of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1s) and XBP1s
increases HEPN1 expression by binding to the HEPN1 promoter, thereby acting as a 
transcriptional activator. Finally, HEPN1 overexpression increases the expression
of p53, p21, and Bax, all of which are ROS-upregulated proteins.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 6;9(3):850-8. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.09.016. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Ire1 has distinct catalytic mechanisms for XBP1/HAC1 splicing and RIDD.

Tam AB(1), Koong AC(2), Niwa M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Molecular Biology, UCSD, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0377, USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5152, USA. (3)Division of Biological Sciences,
Section of Molecular Biology, UCSD, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, USA. Electronic
address: niwa@ucsd.edu.

An evolutionarily conserved unfolded protein response (UPR) component, IRE1,
cleaves XBP1/HAC1 introns in order to generate spliced mRNAs that are translated 
into potent transcription factors. IRE1 also cleaves
endoplasmic-reticulum-associated RNAs leading to their decay, an activity termed 
regulated IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD); however, the mechanism by which IRE1
differentiates intron cleavage from RIDD is not well understood. Using in vitro
experiments, we found that IRE1 has two different modes of action: XBP1/HAC1 is
cleaved by IRE1 subunits acting cooperatively within IRE1 oligomers, whereas a
single subunit of IRE1 performs RIDD without cooperativity. Furthermore, these
distinct activities can be separated by complementation of catalytically inactive
IRE1 RNase and mutations at oligomerization interfaces. Using an IRE1 RNase
inhibitor, STF-083010, selective inhibition of XBP1 splicing indicates that XBP1 
promotes cell survival, whereas RIDD leads to cell death, revealing modulation of
IRE1 activities as a drug-development strategy.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4486022
PMID: 25437541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 1;9(12):e113929. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113929.
eCollection 2014.

Resveratrol enhances palmitate-induced ER stress and apoptosis in cancer cells.

Rojas C(1), Pan-Castillo B(2), Valls C(1), Pujadas G(3), Garcia-Vallve S(3),
Arola L(3), Mulero M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nutrigenomics Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology,
Rovira i Virgili University, Tarragona, 43007, Spain. (2)Nutrigenomics Research
Group, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Rovira i Virgili University,
Tarragona, 43007, Spain; Reproductive Biology and Gynecological Oncology Group,
Center for Nanohealth, Institute of Life, Swansea University, Swansea, SA28PP,
United Kingdom. (3)Nutrigenomics Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Rovira i Virgili University, Tarragona, 43007, Spain; Centre
Tecnològic de Nutrició i Salut (CTNS), TECNIO, CEICS, Reus, 43204, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Palmitate, a saturated fatty acid (FA), is known to induce toxicity
and cell death in various types of cells. Resveratrol (RSV) is able to prevent
pathogenesis and/or decelerate the progression of a variety of diseases. Several 
in vitro and in vivo studies have also shown a protective effect of RSV on fat
accumulation induced by FAs. Additionally, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has 
recently been linked to cellular adipogenic responses. To address the hypothesis 
that the RSV effect on excessive fat accumulation promoted by elevated saturated 
FAs could be partially mediated by a reduction of ER stress, we studied the RSV
action on experimentally induced ER stress using palmitate in several cancer cell
lines.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show that, unexpectedly, RSV promotes an amplification of 
palmitate toxicity and cell death and that this mechanism is likely due to a
perturbation of palmitate accumulation in the triglyceride form and to a less
important membrane fluidity variation. Additionally, RSV decreases radical oxygen
species (ROS) generation in palmitate-treated cells but leads to enhanced X-box
binding protein-1 (XBP1) splicing and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression.
These molecular effects are induced simultaneously to caspase-3 cleavage,
suggesting that RSV promotes palmitate lipoapoptosis primarily through an ER
stress-dependent mechanism. Moreover, the lipotoxicity reversion induced by
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) or by a liver X receptor (LXR) agonist reinforces the
hypothesis that RSV-mediated inhibition of palmitate channeling into triglyceride
pools could be a key factor in the aggravation of palmitate-induced cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that RSV exerts its cytotoxic role in cancer
cells exposed to a saturated FA context primarily by triglyceride accumulation
inhibition, probably leading to an intracellular palmitate accumulation that
triggers a lipid-mediated cell death. Additionally, this cell death is promoted
by ER stress through a CHOP-mediated apoptotic process and may represent a
potential anticancer strategy.

PMCID: PMC4250062
PMID: 25436452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2015 Mar;164(1):64-71. doi: 10.1007/s12011-014-0192-4. Epub 
2014 Dec 2.

Fluorosis induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in osteoblasts in
vivo.

Liu L(1), Zhang Y, Gu H, Zhang K, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, School of Stomatology, China Medical
University, ShenYang, China.

The present study investigated the effects of fluoride on endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress (ERS) and osteoblast apoptosis in vivo. Forty-eight Wistar rats were 
randomly divided into four groups (12/group) and exposed to 0, 50, 100, and 150
mg/L of fluoride in drinking water for 8 weeks, respectively. Peripheral blood
samples and bilateral femurs were used to monitor the progression of fluorosis in
the animals. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of the bone tissues was used to
determine the severity of osteofluorosis. The expression of ERS chaperones
(glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), X-box binding protein l (XBP1), cysteine
aspartate specific protease-12 (caspase-12), and growth arrest and DNA
damage-inducible gene 153 (Gadd153/CHOP) was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
staining, and osteoblast apoptosis was determined by TUNEL staining and flow
cytometry. Accumulation of fluoride in bone was associated with the severity of
osteofluorosis. The expression of GRP78, XBP1, caspase-12, and CHOP was increased
in a dose-dependent manner. Fluoride-induced apoptosis in osteoblasts was also
dose-dependent. High concentrations of fluoride induced ERS and osteoblast
apoptosis in vivo. The increased expression of GRP78 and XBP1 increased the
adaptation of osteoblasts to ERS to a certain extent. Caspase-12 and CHOP
activation was associated with ERS and osteoblast apoptosis.

PMID: 25434583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Int J Toxicol. 2014 Nov-Dec;33(6):532-41. doi: 10.1177/1091581814557701. Epub
2014 Nov 27.

2,4,6-Trichlorophenol cytotoxicity involves oxidative stress, endoplasmic
reticulum stress, and apoptosis.

Zhang X(1), Zhang X(1), Niu Z(1), Qi Y(1), Huang D(2), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gansu Key Laboratory of Biomonitoring and Bioremediation for Environmental
Pollution, School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China. (2)Gansu 
Key Laboratory of Biomonitoring and Bioremediation for Environmental Pollution,
School of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China huangdj@lzu.edu.cn
ymzhang@lzu.edu.cn.

This study aims to evaluate the cytotoxicity and potential mechanisms of
2,4,6-trichlorophenol (2,4,6-TCP) in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Our results
show that 2,4,6-TCP causes morphological changes and reduces cell viability. The 
overproduction of reactive oxygen species, the upregulation of nuclear
factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) messenger RNA
(mRNA) expressions, and the nuclear translocation of Nrf2 protein demonstrate
that 2,4,6-TCP induces oxidative stress, and the Nrf2/HMOX1 pathway might be
involved in 2,4,6-TCP-induced antioxidative response. Simultaneously, our data
also demonstrate that 2,4,6-TCP upregulates the expressions of binding
immunoglobulin protein, inositol-requiring enzyme/endonuclease 1a, and C/EBP
homologous protein; stimulates a subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2 phosphorylation; and induces the splicing of Xbp1 mRNA, suggesting that 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is triggered. Moreover, 2,4,6-TCP alters the
mitochondrial membrane potential and increases the apoptosis rate, the caspase 3 
activity, and the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio, demonstrating that the mitochondrial pathway
is involved in the 2,4,6-TCP-induced apoptosis. Thus, these results show that
2,4,6-TCP induces oxidative stress, ER stress, and apoptosis, which together
contribute to its cytotoxicity in vitro.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25431364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 20;5:e1528. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.479.

Activation of volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying chloride channel by ROS
contributes to ER stress and cardiac contractile dysfunction: involvement of CHOP
through Wnt.

Shen M(1), Wang L(2), Wang B(2), Wang T(3), Yang G(3), Shen L(3), Wang T(3), Guo 
X(2), Liu Y(2), Xia Y(2), Jia L(3), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Geriatrics, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China [2] Department of Cardiology, Hainan Branch of PLA
General Hospital, Sanya, China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, Xijing Hospital,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurring in stringent conditions is critically
involved in cardiomyocytes apoptosis and cardiac contractile dysfunction (CCD).
However, the molecular machinery that mediates cardiac ER stress and subsequent
cell death remains to be fully deciphered, which will hopefully provide novel
therapeutic targets for these disorders. Here, we establish tunicamycin-induced
model of cardiomyocyte ER stress, which effectively mimicks pathological stimuli 
to trigger CCD. Tunicamycin activates volume-sensitive outward rectifying Cl(-)
currents. Blockade of the volume-sensitive outwardly rectifying (VSOR) Cl(-)
channel by 4,4'-diisothiocya-natostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid (DIDS), a
non-selective Cl(-) channel blocker, and
4-(2-butyl-6,7-dichlor-2-cyclopentyl-indan-1-on-5-yl) oxybutyric acid (DCPIB), a 
selective VSOR Cl(-) channel blocker, improves cardiac contractility, which
correlates with suppressed ER stress through inhibiting the canonical
GRP78/eIF2a/ATF4 and XBP1 pathways, and promotes survival of cardiomyocytes by
inverting tunicamycin-induced decrease of Wnt through the CHOP pathway. VSOR
activation of tunicamycin-treated cardiomyocytes is attributed to increased
intracellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Our study demonstrates a
pivotal role of ROS/VSOR in mediating ER stress and functional impairment of
cardiomyocytes via the CHOP-Wnt pathway, and suggests the therapeutic values of
VSOR Cl(-) channel blockers against ER stress-associated cardiac anomalies.

PMCID: PMC4260737
PMID: 25412307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Mar;11(3):2048-54. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2960. Epub 2014 Nov
17.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress preconditioning antagonizes low-density
lipoprotein-induced inflammation in human mesangial cells through upregulation of
XBP1 and suppression of the IRE1a/IKK/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

Yu Y(1), Zhang L(1), Liu Q(2), Tang L(1), Sun H(2), Guo H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400010, P.R. China. (2)Institute for Viral Hepatitis, Key
Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Infectious Diseases, The Second Affiliated
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400010, P.R. China.

Elevated plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is associated with systemic
inflammation, and is an important factor in the pathogenesis of chronic kidney
disease. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress preconditioning on LDL-induced inflammatory
responses, in human mesangial cells (HMCs). HMCs were exposed to LDL (200 nm),
with or without pretreatment with tunicamycin, an ER stress inducer, and tested
for changes to gene expression levels. Small interfering RNA technology was used 
to knockdown the expression of inositol-requiring enzyme-1a (IRE1a) and
X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP-1), in order to determine their effects on
LDL-treated HMCs. LDL treatment resulted in a significant, and time-dependent,
increase in the relative mRNA expression levels of proinflammatory cytokines and 
CD40, which was coupled with enhanced phosphorylation of IRE1a, I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK),
and nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B p65 and p65 nuclear translocation. The LDL-induced
inflammatory responses were significantly reduced in the IRE1a-depleted HMCs.
Furthermore, pretreatment with tunicamycin significantly attenuated the induction
of proinflammatory cytokines and CD40, by LDL. Whereas, silencing XBP1 expression
significantly restored the production of proinflammatory cytokines, in the
LDL-treated HMCs with ER stress preconditioning. The phosphorylation levels of
IRE1a, IKK, and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 were markedly increased in the XBP1-depleted HMCs.
Conversely, overexpression of XBP1 blocked LDL-induced inflammation in the HMCs. 
The results of the present study demonstrate that ER stress preconditioning
antagonizes LDL-induced inflammatory responses in HMCs, which may be mediated
through upregulation of XBP1, and subsequent inactivation of the IRE1a/IKK/NF-<U+03BA>B 
pathway.

PMID: 25405329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Sci Rep. 2014 Nov 18;4:7096. doi: 10.1038/srep07096.

Leptin induced GRP78 expression through the PI3K-mTOR pathway in neuronal cells.

Thon M(1), Hosoi T(1), Yoshii M(1), Ozawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Japan.

Leptin is a circulating hormone that plays a critical role in regulating energy
expenditure and food intake. Evidence to suggest the involvement of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress in the development of obesity is increasing. To adapt
against ER stress, cells trigger the unfolded protein response (UPR). The 78 kDa 
glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) is an ER chaperone that protects cells against 
ER stress by inducing protein folding. In the present study, we hypothesized that
leptin may activate UPR and protect against ER stress associated with obesity.
SH-SY5Y, a human neuroblastoma cell line stably transfected with the Ob-Rb leptin
receptor (SH-SY5Y-ObRb), was treated with leptin. We demonstrated that leptin
induced GRP78 expression. We then validated the mechanism responsible for the
leptin-induced expression of GRP78. Interestingly, leptin-induced GRP78
expression was not dependent on IRE1-XBP1 pathway. On the other hand, the PI3K
inhibitor, LY294002, and mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, inhibited the leptin-induced 
expression of GRP78. These results suggested that the leptin-induced expression
of GRP78 may be dependent on the PI3K-mTOR pathway. Leptin specifically induced
GRP78 because the induction of the ER-apoptotic marker, CHOP, was not detected in
leptin-treated cells. Therefore, leptin may upregulate the expression of GRP78,
thereby protecting against ER stress associated with obesity.

PMCID: PMC4235288
PMID: 25403445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Gen Virol. 2015 Mar;96(Pt 3):580-9. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.071845-0. Epub 2014 Nov 
13.

Chikungunya virus non-structural protein 2-mediated host shut-off disables the
unfolded protein response.

Fros JJ(1), Major LD(2), Scholte FE(3), Gardner J(2), van Hemert MJ(3), Suhrbier 
A(4), Pijlman GP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, The
Netherlands QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029,
Australia. (2)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029,
Australia. (3)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD 4029, Australia
andreas.suhrbier@qimrberghofer.edu.au gorben.pijlman@wur.nl. (5)Laboratory of
Virology, Wageningen University, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands
andreas.suhrbier@qimrberghofer.edu.au gorben.pijlman@wur.nl.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular defence mechanism against high 
concentrations of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In the
presence of misfolded proteins, ER-transmembrane proteins PERK and IRE1a become
activated. PERK phosphorylates eIF2a leading to a general inhibition of cellular 
translation, whilst the expression of transcription factor ATF4 is upregulated.
Active IRE1a splices out an intron from XBP1 mRNA, to produce a potent
transcription factor. Activation of the UPR increases the production of several
proteins involved in protein folding, degradation and apoptosis. Here, we
demonstrated that transient expression of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) (family
Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus) envelope glycoproteins induced the UPR and that
CHIKV infection resulted in the phosphorylation of eIF2a and partial splicing of 
XBP1 mRNA. However, infection with CHIKV did not increase the expression of ATF4 
and known UPR target genes (GRP78/BiP, GRP94 and CHOP). Moreover, nuclear XBP1
was not observed during CHIKV infection. Even upon stimulation with tunicamycin, 
the UPR was efficiently inhibited in CHIKV-infected cells. Individual expression 
of CHIKV non-structural proteins (nsPs) revealed that nsP2 alone was sufficient
to inhibit the UPR. Mutations that rendered nsP2 unable to cause host-cell
shut-off prevented nsP2-mediated inhibition of the UPR. This indicates that
initial UPR induction takes place in the ER but that expression of functional UPR
transcription factors and target genes is efficiently inhibited by CHIKV nsP2.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMID: 25395592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2922-36. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490332. Epub 2014 Nov
6.

The mammalian tRNA ligase complex mediates splicing of XBP1 mRNA and controls
antibody secretion in plasma cells.

Jurkin J(1), Henkel T(1), Nielsen AF(2), Minnich M(3), Popow J(4), Kaufmann T(1),
Heindl K(5), Hoffmann T(3), Busslinger M(3), Martinez J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
(IMBA), Vienna, Austria. (2)European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO),
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria. 
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. (6)Institute 
of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna,
Austria javier.martinez@imba.oeaw.ac.at.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2887-9.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a conserved stress-signaling pathway
activated after accumulation of unfolded proteins within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Active UPR signaling leads to unconventional, enzymatic splicing 
of XBP1 mRNA enabling expression of the transcription factor XBP1s to control ER 
homeostasis. While IRE1 has been identified as the endoribonuclease required for 
cleavage of this mRNA, the corresponding ligase in mammalian cells has remained
elusive. Here, we report that RTCB, the catalytic subunit of the tRNA ligase
complex, and its co-factor archease mediate XBP1 mRNA splicing both in vitro and 
in vivo. Depletion of RTCB in plasma cells of Rtcb(fl/fl) Cd23-Cre mice prevents 
XBP1s expression, which normally is strongly induced during plasma cell
development. RTCB-depleted plasma cells show reduced and disorganized ER
structures as well as severe defects in antibody secretion. Targeting RTCB and/or
archease thus represents a promising strategy for the treatment of a growing
number of diseases associated with elevated expression of XBP1s.

© 2014 IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology GmbH. Published under the
terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4282640
PMID: 25378478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Sci Rep. 2014 Nov 6;4:6943. doi: 10.1038/srep06943.

Reduction of endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibits neointima formation after
vascular injury.

Ishimura S(1), Furuhashi M(1), Mita T(1), Fuseya T(1), Watanabe Y(1), Hoshina
K(1), Kokubu N(1), Inoue K(2), Yoshida H(1), Miura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolic Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, S-1, W-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kokura Memorial Hospital, 3-2-1 Asano,
Kokurakita-ku, Kitakyushu, Kokura 802-8555, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and inappropriate adaptation through the
unfolded protein response (UPR) are predominant features of pathological
processes. However, little is known about the link between ER stress and
endovascular injury. We investigated the involvement of ER stress in neointima
hyperplasia after vascular injury. The femoral arteries of 7-8-week-old male mice
were subjected to wire-induced vascular injury. After 4 weeks, immunohistological
analysis showed that ER stress markers were upregulated in the hyperplastic
neointima. Neointima formation was increased by 54.8% in X-box binding protein-1 
(XBP1) heterozygous mice, a model of compromised UPR. Knockdown of Xbp1 in human 
coronary artery smooth muscle cells (CASMC) in vitro promoted cell proliferation 
and migration. Furthermore, treatment with ER stress reducers, 4-phenylbutyrate
(4-PBA) and tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), decreased the intima-to-media
ratio after wire injury by 50.0% and 72.8%, respectively. Chronic stimulation of 
CASMC with PDGF-BB activated the UPR, and treatment with 4-PBA and TUDCA
significantly suppressed the PDGF-BB-induced ER stress markers in CASMC and the
proliferation and migration of CASMC. In conclusion, increased ER stress
contributes to neointima formation after vascular injury, while UPR signaling
downstream of XBP1 plays a suppressive role. Suppression of ER stress would be a 
novel strategy against post-angioplasty vascular restenosis.

PMCID: PMC4221790
PMID: 25373918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(2):379-90. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00847-14. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

NF-<U+03BA>B signaling is required for XBP1 (unspliced and spliced)-mediated effects on 
antiestrogen responsiveness and cell fate decisions in breast cancer.

Hu R(1), Warri A(1), Jin L(1), Zwart A(1), Riggins RB(1), Fang HB(2), Clarke
R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Department
of Physiology and Biophysics, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, Bioinformatics and
Biomathematics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA. (3)Department of Oncology, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA
clarker@georgetown.edu.

Antiestrogen therapy induces the unfolded protein response (UPR) in estrogen
receptor-positive (ER(+)) breast cancer. X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), which
exists in the transcriptionally inactive unspliced form [XBP1(U)] and the spliced
active form [XBP1(S)], is a key UPR component mediating antiestrogen resistance. 
We now show a direct link between the XBP1 and NF-<U+03BA>B survival pathways in driving
the cell fate decisions in response to antiestrogens in ER(+) breast cancer
cells, both in vitro and in a xenograft mouse model. Using novel spliced and
nonspliceable forms of XBP1, we show that XBP1(U) functions beyond being a
dominant negative of XBP1(S). Both isoforms regulate NF-<U+03BA>B activity via ERa;
XBP1(S) is more potent because it also directly regulates p65/RelA expression.
These findings provide new insights into the fundamental signaling activities of 
spliced and unspliced XBP1 in breast cancer, establish NF-<U+03BA>B to be a mediator of 
these activities, and identify XBP1 and its splicing to be novel therapeutic
targets.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4272419
PMID: 25368386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. EMBO Rep. 2014 Dec;15(12):1278-85. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439531. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

The RtcB RNA ligase is an essential component of the metazoan unfolded protein
response.

Kosmaczewski SG(1), Edwards TJ(1), Han SM(1), Eckwahl MJ(2), Meyer BI(1), Peach
S(3), Hesselberth JR(3), Wolin SL(2), Hammarlund M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration
and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (2)Department
of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics Department, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. (4)Department of Genetics and Program in Cellular
Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA marc.hammarlund@yale.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2887-9.

RNA ligation can regulate RNA function by altering RNA sequence, structure and
coding potential. For example, the function of XBP1 in mediating the unfolded
protein response requires RNA ligation, as does the maturation of some tRNAs.
Here, we describe a novel in vivo model in Caenorhabditis elegans for the
conserved RNA ligase RtcB and show that RtcB ligates the xbp-1 mRNA during the
IRE-1 branch of the unfolded protein response. Without RtcB, protein stress
results in the accumulation of unligated xbp-1 mRNA fragments, defects in the
unfolded protein response, and decreased lifespan. RtcB also ligates endogenous
pre-tRNA halves, and RtcB mutants have defects in growth and lifespan that can be
bypassed by expression of pre-spliced tRNAs. In addition, animals that lack RtcB 
have defects that are independent of tRNA maturation and the unfolded protein
response. Thus, RNA ligation by RtcB is required for the function of multiple
endogenous target RNAs including both xbp-1 and tRNAs. RtcB is uniquely capable
of performing these ligation functions, and RNA ligation by RtcB mediates
multiple essential processes in vivo.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4264930
PMID: 25366321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cancer. 2014 Oct 23;13:239. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-239.

MYC regulates the unfolded protein response and glucose and glutamine uptake in
endocrine resistant breast cancer.

Shajahan-Haq AN(1), Cook KL, Schwartz-Roberts JL, Eltayeb AE, Demas DM, Warri AM,
Facey CO, Hilakivi-Clarke LA, Clarke R.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.
ans33@georgetown.edu.

BACKGROUND: About 70% of all breast cancers are estrogen receptor alpha positive 
(ER+) and are treated with antiestrogens. However, 50% of ER + tumors develop
resistance to these drugs (endocrine resistance). In endocrine resistant cells,
an adaptive pathway called the unfolded protein response (UPR) is elevated that
allows cells to tolerate stress more efficiently than in sensitive cells. While
the precise mechanism remains unclear, the UPR can trigger both pro-survival and 
pro-death outcomes that depend on the nature and magnitude of the stress. In this
study, we identified MYC, an oncoprotein that is upregulated in endocrine
resistant breast cancer, as a regulator of the UPR in glucose-deprived
conditions.
METHODS: ER+ human breast cancer cell lines (LCC1, LCC1, LY2 and LCC9) and rat
mammary tumors were used to confirm upregulation of MYC in endocrine resistance. 
To evaluate functional relevance of proteins, siRNA-mediated inhibition or small 
molecule inhibitors were used. Cell density/number was evaluated with crystal
violet assay; cell cycle and apoptosis were measured by flow cytometry. Relative 
quantification of glutamine metabolites were determined by mass spectrometry.
Signaling molecules of the UPR, apoptosis or autophagy pathways were investigated
by western blotting.
RESULTS: Increased MYC function in resistant cells correlated with increased
dependency on glutamine and glucose for survival. Inhibition of MYC reduced cell 
growth and uptake of both glucose and glutamine in resistant cells.
Interestingly, in glucose-deprived conditions, glutamine induced apoptosis and
necrosis, arrested autophagy, and triggered the unfolded protein response (UPR)
though GRP78-IRE1a with two possible outcomes: (i) inhibition of cell growth by
JNK activation in most cells and, (ii) promotion of cell growth by spliced XBP1
in the minority of cells. These disparate effects are regulated, at different
signaling junctions, by MYC more robustly in resistant cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Endocrine resistant cells overexpress MYC and are better adapted to 
withstand periods of glucose deprivation and can use glutamine in the short term 
to maintain adequate metabolism to support cell survival. Our findings reveal a
unique role for MYC in regulating cell fate through the UPR, and suggest that
targeting glutamine metabolism may be a novel strategy in endocrine resistant
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4216870
PMID: 25339305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 15;9(10):e110581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110581.
eCollection 2014.

Purple perilla extracts allay ER stress in lipid-laden macrophages.

Park SH(1), Shin D(1), Lim SS(1), Lee JY(2), Kang YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food science and Nutrition, Hallym University, Chuncheon,
Kangwon-do, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Hallym University, 
Chuncheon, Kangwon-do, Republic of Korea.

There is a growing body of evidence that excess lipids, hypoxic stress and other 
inflammatory signals can stimulate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in metabolic
diseases. However, the pathophysiological importance and the underlying
mechanisms of this phenomenon remain unknown. The current study investigated that
50 ng/ml oxidized LDL promoted unfolded protein response (UPR) and ER stress in
J774A1 murine macrophages, which was blocked by extracts (PPE) of purple Perilla 
frutescens, a plant of the mint family Lamiaceae. The ER stressor tunicamycin was
employed as a positive control. Treating 1-10 µg/ml oxidized LDL for 24 h
elicited lipotoxic apoptosis in macrophages with obvious nuclear condensation and
DNA fragmentation, which was inhibited by PPE. Tunicamycin and oxidized LDL
activated and induced the UPR components of activating transcription factor 6 and
ER resident chaperone BiP/Grp78 in temporal manners and such effects were blocked
by =5 µg/ml PPE. In addition, PPE suppressed the enhanced mRNA transcription and 
splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) by tunicamycin and oxidized LDL. The
protein induction and nuclear translocation of XBP1 were deterred in PPE-treated 
macrophages under ER stress. The induction of ATP-binding cassette transporter A1
(ABCA1), scavenger receptor-B1 (SR-B1) and intracellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1) was abolished by the ER stressor in activated macrophages. The protein
induction of ABCA1 and ICAM1 but not SR-B1 was retrieved by adding 10 µg/ml PPE
to cells. These results demonstrate that PPE inhibited lipotoxic apoptosis and
demoted the induction and activation of UPR components in macrophages. PPE
restored normal proteostasis in activated macrophages oxidized LDL. Therefore,
PPE was a potent agent antagonizing macrophage ER stress due to lipotoxic signals
associated with atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4198214
PMID: 25333946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Reprod Sci. 2015 May;22(5):572-84. doi: 10.1177/1933719114553445. Epub 2014 Oct
20.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptotic pathway is involved in corpus
luteum regression in rats.

Yang Y(1), Sun M(1), Shan Y(1), Zheng X(1), Ma H(1), Ma W(1), Wang Z(1), Pei
X(2), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Ningxia Medical University, Key
Laboratory of Fertility Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of Education, Key 
Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics in Ningxia, Yinchuan, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Ningxia Medical University, Key
Laboratory of Fertility Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of Education, Key 
Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics in Ningxia, Yinchuan, P.R. China
nxykdyang@163.com 4083304@163.com peixuiying@163.com.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS), which is a novel pathway of regulating
cellular apoptosis and the function of ERS during corpus luteum (CL) regression, 
is explored. Early-luteal stage (day 2), mid-luteal stage (day 7), and
late-luteal stage (day 14 and 20) were induced, and the apoptosis of luteal cells
was detected by a terminal 2'-deoxyuridine 5'-triphosphate nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) assay. The apoptotic cells were increased with the regression of CL,
especially during the late-luteal stage. The ERS markers glucose-regulated
protein 78 (Grp78), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP),
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), activating transcription factor 6a (ATF6a),
eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), inositol-requiring protein 1a (IRE1a),
caspase 12, and apoptosis marker caspase 3 were analyzed by real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and immunohistochemistry, in agreement with the results of
the TUNEL assay; the expression levels of CHOP, caspase 12, and caspase 3 were
increased during the process of CL regression. Luteal cells were isolated and
cultured in vitro, and the apoptosis of luteal cells was induced by prostaglandin
F2a. The ERS was attenuated by the ERS inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid, and
the apoptotic rate was analyzed by flow cytometry. The ERS markers Grp78, CHOP,
XBP1s, ATF6a, eIF2a, IRE1a, caspase 12, and apoptotic execute marker caspase 3
were analyzed by real-time PCR and immunofluorescence, and the results suggested 
that the expression of CHOP, caspase 12, and caspase 3 were increased, and there 
was increased apoptosis of luteal cells. But the expression of IRE1a/XBP1s and
eIF2a was not detected. Taken together, the ERS is involved in the CL regression 
of rats through the CHOP and caspase 12 pathway.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4519763 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25332219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 28;289(48):33391-403. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.579870. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

Asbestos-induced disruption of calcium homeostasis induces endoplasmic reticulum 
stress in macrophages.

Ryan AJ(1), Larson-Casey JL(2), He C(2), Murthy S(1), Carter AB(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Internal Medicine. (2)Radiation Oncology and Program
in Free Radical and Radiation Biology, Carver College of Medicine. (3)From the
Departments of Internal Medicine, Radiation Oncology and Program in Free Radical 
and Radiation Biology, Carver College of Medicine, Human Toxicology, College of
Public Health, University of Iowa, and Iowa City Veterans Administration Center, 
Iowa City, Iowa 52242 brent-carter@uiowa.edu.

Although the mechanisms for fibrosis development remain largely unknown, recent
evidence indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) may act as an important fibrotic stimulus in
diseased lungs. ER stress is observed in lungs of patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. In this study we evaluated if ER stress and the UPR was
present in macrophages exposed to chrysotile asbestos and if ER stress in
macrophages was associated with asbestos-induced pulmonary fibrosis. Macrophages 
exposed to chrysotile had elevated transcript levels of several ER stress genes. 
Macrophages loaded with the Ca(2+)-sensitive dye Fura2-AM showed that cytosolic
Ca(2+) increased significantly within minutes after chrysotile exposure and
remained elevated for a prolonged time. Chrysotile-induced increases in cytosolic
Ca(2+) were partially inhibited by either anisomycin, an inhibitor of passive
Ca(2+) leak from the ER, or 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxyl)ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic 
acid (BAPTA-AM), an intracellular Ca(2+) chelator known to deplete ER Ca(2+)
stores. Anisomycin inhibited X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing and
reduced immunoglobulin-binding protein (BiP) levels, whereas BAPTA-AM increased
XBP1 splicing and BiP expression, suggesting that ER calcium depletion may be one
factor contributing to ER stress in cells exposed to chrysotile. To evaluate ER
stress in vivo, asbestos-exposed mice showed fibrosis development, and alveolar
macrophages from fibrotic mice showed increased expression of BiP.
Bronchoalveolar macrophages from asbestosis patients showed increased expression 
of several ER stress genes compared with normal subjects. These findings suggest 
that alveolar macrophages undergo ER stress, which is associated with fibrosis
development.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4246095
PMID: 25324550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Eur Respir J. 2015 Feb;45(2):365-76. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00046114. Epub 2014
Oct 16.

Function of monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages in a1-antitrypsin
deficiency.

Van't Wout EF(1), van Schadewijk A(2), Lomas DA(3), Stolk J(2), Marciniak SJ(4), 
Hiemstra PS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
Dept of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, Cambridge, UK. (2)Dept of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research,
University College London, London, UK. (4)Dept of Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, UK. (5)Dept of
Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
p.s.hiemstra@lumc.nl.

a1-antitrypsin deficiency is the most widely recognised genetic disorder causing 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Mutant Z a1-antitrypsin expression 
has previously been linked to intracellular accumulation and polymerisation of
this proteinase inhibitor. Subsequently, this has been described to underlie an
exaggerated endoplasmic reticulum stress response and enhanced nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B 
signalling. However, whether monocyte-derived macrophages display the same
features remains unknown. Monocytes from homozygous PiZZ a1-antitrypsin
deficiency patients and PiMM controls were cultured for 6 days in the presence of
granulocyte-macrophage or macrophage colony-stimulating factor to obtain pro- and
anti-inflammatory macrophages (mf-1 and mf-2, respectively). We first showed
that, in contrast to monocytes, pre-stressed mf-1 and mf-2 from healthy blood
donors display an enhanced endoplasmic reticulum stress response upon a
lipopolysaccharide trigger (XBP1 splicing, CHOP, GADD34 and GRP78 mRNA). However,
this endoplasmic reticulum stress response did not differ between
monocyte-derived macrophages and monocytes from ZZ patients compared to MM
controls. Furthermore, these ZZ cells do not secrete higher cytokine levels, and 
a1-antitrypsin polymers were not detectable by ELISA. These data suggest that
monocyte-derived macrophages are not the local source of Z a1-antitrypsin
polymers found in the lung and that endoplasmic reticulum stress and
pro-inflammatory cytokine release is not altered.

Copyright ©ERS 2015.

PMID: 25323228  [PubMed - in process]


235. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jan;399(1-2):209-16. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2247-4. Epub 
2014 Oct 14.

Single-prolonged stress activates the transcription factor ATF6a branch of the
unfolded protein response in rat neurons of dorsal raphe nucleus.

Xie J(1), Han F, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Institute of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Basic Medical Sciences
College, China Medical University, 92 North 2nd Road, Shenyang, 110001, Liaoning 
Province, People's Republic of China.

In our previous studies, we have found that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is 
associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), however, the activation of
ER stress sensors in PTSD remains unclear. ATF6 alpha (ATF6a) is an
ER-membrane-bound transcription factor and functions as a critical sensor and
regulator of ER stress in mammalian cells. The goal of this study is to detect
whether there is activation of the transcription factor ATF6a branch of the
unfolded protein response in the dorsal raphe nucleus neurons of the rats exposed
to single-prolonged stress (SPS), which is a model employed extensively in PTSD
study. Our results have demonstrated that SPS activated the ER transmembrane
protein ATF6a via its cleavage; and induced the up-regulation of the downstream
targets of ATF6a, the mRNA of XBP1 and GRP94. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first study to investigate the relationship between the ATF6a pathways and
PTSD, and our results show that SPS activates the ATF6a branch of the ER stress
response, which may be contributed to the pathogenesis of PTSD.

PMID: 25312904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Cell Physiol. 2015 May;230(5):1115-27. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24843.

PDE5 inhibitors enhance celecoxib killing in multiple tumor types.

Booth L(1), Roberts JL, Cruickshanks N, Tavallai S, Webb T, Samuel P, Conley A,
Binion B, Young HF, Poklepovic A, Spiegel S, Dent P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia.

The present studies determined whether clinically relevant phosphodiesterase 5
(PDE5) inhibitors interacted with a clinically relevant NSAID, celecoxib, to kill
tumor cells. Celecoxib and PDE5 inhibitors interacted in a greater than additive 
fashion to kill multiple tumor cell types. Celecoxib and sildenafil killed ex
vivo primary human glioma cells as well as their associated activated microglia. 
Knock down of PDE5 recapitulated the effects of PDE5 inhibitor treatment; the
nitric oxide synthase inhibitor L-NAME suppressed drug combination toxicity. The 
effects of celecoxib were COX2 independent. Over-expression of c-FLIP-s or knock 
down of CD95/FADD significantly reduced killing by the drug combination. CD95
activation was dependent on nitric oxide and ceramide signaling. CD95 signaling
activated the JNK pathway and inhibition of JNK suppressed cell killing. The drug
combination inactivated mTOR and increased the levels of autophagy and knock down
of Beclin1 or ATG5 strongly suppressed killing by the drug combination. The drug 
combination caused an ER stress response; knock down of IRE1a/XBP1 enhanced
killing whereas knock down of eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP suppressed killing. Sildenafil and 
celecoxib treatment suppressed the growth of mammary tumors in vivo. Collectively
our data demonstrate that clinically achievable concentrations of celecoxib and
sildenafil have the potential to be a new therapeutic approach for cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4398314
PMID: 25303541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 8;9(10):e109095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109095.
eCollection 2014.

Self DNA from lymphocytes that have undergone activation-induced cell death
enhances murine B cell proliferation and antibody production.

Lu Q(1), Wang JY(2), Wang L(1), Jiang X(1), Chu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of MOE/MOH, Department of
Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
(2)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology of MOE/MOH, Department of
Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; 
Biotherapy Research Center of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is characterized by prominent autoinflammatory
tissue damage associated with impaired removal of dying cells and DNA. Self
DNA-containing immune complexes are able to activate both innate and adaptive
immune responses and play an important role in the maintenance and exacerbation
of autoimmunity in SLE. In this study, we used DNA from lymphocytes that have
undergone activation-induced cell death (ALD-DNA) and analyzed its role on the
activation and differentiation of B cells from normal BALB/c mice as well as
lupus-prone MRL+/+ and MRL/lpr mice. We found that ALD-DNA directly increased the
expression of costimulatory molecules and the survival of naïve B cells in vitro.
Although ALD-DNA alone had little effect on the proliferation of naïve B cells,
it enhanced LPS-activated B cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo. In addition,
ALD-DNA increased plasma cell numbers and IgG production in LPS-stimulated
cultures of naïve B cells, in part via enhancing IL-6 production. Importantly, B 
cells from lupus mice were hyperresponsive to ALD-DNA and/or LPS relative to
normal control B cells in terminal plasma cell differentiation, as evidenced by
increases in CD138+ cell numbers, IgM production, and mRNA levels of B
lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) and the X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1). Furthermore, ALD-DNA enhanced CD40-activated naïve B cell proliferation. 
Collectively, these data indicate that self DNA can serve as a DAMP
(damage-associated molecular pattern) that cooperates with signals from both
innate and adaptive immunity to promote polyclonal B cell activation, a common
characteristic of autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC4189923
PMID: 25296026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cell Signal. 2015 Jan;27(1):82-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.09.018. Epub 2014
Oct 2.

XBP1 induces snail expression to promote epithelial- to-mesenchymal transition
and invasion of breast cancer cells.

Li H(1), Chen X(2), Gao Y(1), Wu J(1), Zeng F(1), Song F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Cancer Research Center, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China. Electronic address: fzsongcqmu@163.com.

Breast cancer is highly metastatic disease and the most lethal of the gynecologic
malignancies. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal is a crucial process for the invasion of 
epithelial tumors. Recent studies revealed that breast cancer cells that have
undergone EMT acquire aggressive malignant properties, but the molecular
mechanisms underlying this transition are not well-understood. In this study, we 
report findings that human X-box binding protein1 (XBP1) acts as a novel
regulator of EMT. We found that increased expression of XBP1 was associated with 
the progression of breast cancer and that XBP1 protein was significantly
over-expressed in matched metastatic tumor. High XBP1 protein also predicts
shorter overall survival of breast cancer patients. RNA interference-mediated
knockdown of XBP1 expression restored E-cadherin expression and cell-cell
junction formation in breast cancer cells, suppressing cell invasion, and tumor
formation. In contrast, overexpression of XBP1 decreased the expression of the
epithelial marker E-cadherin but increased the mesenchymal markers in breast
cancer cells. Our finding demonstrates the upregulated expression of the key EMT 
regulator Snail and that it mediated EMT activation and cell invasion by XBP1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25280941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 21;289(47):32798-810. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.575191. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox protein 1 (Pdx-1) maintains endoplasmic
reticulum calcium levels through transcriptional regulation of sarco-endoplasmic 
reticulum calcium ATPase 2b (SERCA2b) in the islet ß cell.

Johnson JS(1), Kono T(2), Tong X(3), Yamamoto WR(3), Zarain-Herzberg A(4),
Merrins MJ(5), Satin LS(6), Gilon P(7), Evans-Molina C(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. (2)Medicine, and. 
(3)Cellular and Integrative Physiology and. (4)the Departamento de Bioquimica,
Facultad de Medicina, National Autonomous University of México, México City,
04510 México. (5)the Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism,
Department of Medicine, and Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705.
(6)the Department of Pharmacology and Brehm Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105. (7)the Pôle
d'Endocrinologie, Diabète et Nutrition, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et
Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 1348 Belgium, and. (8)From 
the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medicine, and Cellular and
Integrative Physiology and the Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, the Roudebush
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 cevansmo@iu.edu.

Although the pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx-1) transcription factor is known
to play an indispensable role in ß cell development and secretory function,
recent data also implicate Pdx-1 in the maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
health. The sarco-endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase 2b (SERCA2b) pump maintains
a steep Ca(2+) gradient between the cytosol and ER lumen. In models of diabetes, 
our data demonstrated loss of ß cell Pdx-1 that occurs in parallel with altered
SERCA2b expression, whereas in silico analysis of the SERCA2b promoter revealed
multiple putative Pdx-1 binding sites. We hypothesized that Pdx-1 loss under
inflammatory and diabetic conditions leads to decreased SERCA2b levels and
activity with concomitant alterations in ER health. To test this, siRNA-mediated 
knockdown of Pdx-1 was performed in INS-1 cells. The results revealed reduced
SERCA2b expression and decreased ER Ca(2+), which was measured using fluorescence
lifetime imaging microscopy. Cotransfection of human Pdx-1 with a reporter fused 
to the human SERCA2 promoter increased luciferase activity 3- to 4-fold relative 
to an empty vector control, and direct binding of Pdx-1 to the proximal SERCA2
promoter was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. To determine whether
restoration of SERCA2b could rescue ER stress induced by Pdx-1 loss, Pdx1(+/-)
mice were fed a high-fat diet. Isolated islets demonstrated an increased
spliced-to-total Xbp1 ratio, whereas SERCA2b overexpression reduced the Xbp1
ratio to that of wild-type controls. Together, these results identify SERCA2b as 
a novel transcriptional target of Pdx-1 and define a role for altered ER Ca(2+)
regulation in Pdx-1-deficient states.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4239629
PMID: 25271154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Immunol. 2014 Nov 1;193(9):4663-74. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401608. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Transcription elongation factor ELL2 drives Ig secretory-specific mRNA production
and the unfolded protein response.

Park KS(1), Bayles I(1), Szlachta-McGinn A(1), Paul J(1), Boiko J(1), Santos
P(1), Liu J(1), Wang Z(2), Borghesi L(1), Milcarek C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261; and.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Shadyside
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15232. (3)Department of Immunology, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261; and milcarek@pitt.edu.

Differentiation of B cells into Ab-secreting cells induces changes in gene
transcription, IgH RNA processing, the unfolded protein response (UPR), and cell 
architecture. The transcription elongation factor eleven nineteen lysine-rich
leukemia gene (ELL2) stimulates the processing of the secreted form of the IgH
mRNA from the H chain gene. Mice (mus musculus) with the ELL2 gene floxed in
either exon 1 or exon 3 were constructed and crossed to CD19-driven cre/CD19(+). 
The B cell-specific ELL2 conditional knockouts (cKOs; ell2(loxp/loxp)
CD19(cre/+)) exhibit curtailed humoral responses both in 4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl 
acetyl-Ficoll and in 4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenyl acetyl-keyhole limpet hemocyanin
immunized animals; recall responses were also diminished. The number of immature 
and recirculating B cells in the bone marrow is increased in the cKOs, whereas
plasma cells in spleen are reduced relative to control animals. There are fewer
IgG1 Ab-producing cells in the bone marrow of cKOs. LPS ex vivo-stimulated
B220(lo)CD138(+) cells from ELL2-deficient mouse spleens are 4-fold less abundant
than from control splenic B cells; have a paucity of secreted IgH; and have
distended, abnormal-appearing endoplasmic reticulum. IRE1a is efficiently
phosphorylated, but the amounts of Ig <U+03BA>, ATF6, BiP, Cyclin B2, OcaB (BOB1,
Pou2af1), and XBP1 mRNAs, unspliced and spliced, are severely reduced in
ELL2-deficient cells. ELL2 enhances the expression of BCMA (also known as
Tnfrsf17), which is important for long-term survival. Transcription yields from
the cyclin B2 and the canonical UPR promoter elements are upregulated by ELL2
cDNA. Thus, ELL2 is important for many aspects of Ab secretion, XBP1 expression, 
and the UPR.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4201982
PMID: 25238757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2014 Dec;165B(8):665-72. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32271. Epub 2014 Sep 17.

The -116C/G polymorphism in XBP1 gene is associated with psychiatric illness in
Asian population: A meta-analysis.

Cheng D(1), Zhang K, Zhen G, Xue Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei,
China; Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, National Health and Family
Planning Commission of the People's Republic of China, China.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a pivotal transcription factor and plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric illness. The association
between XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and risk of psychiatric illness has been
investigated in different populations. However, the results of these studies
remain conflicting. Therefore, we performed a systematic meta-analysis to
evaluate the association between XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and the overall
psychiatric illness risk. Pubmed, Embase, and Chinese Biomedical Literature
Database (CBM) were searched for case-control studies on the association between 
XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and psychiatric illness risk published up to July 31,
2014. Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to access
the strength of this association. Fourteen case-control studies including 3,512
cases and 4,889 controls were included. Overall, no significant association was
found between XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and the risk of psychiatric illness (C/G
vs. C/C: OR = 1.04, 95%CI = 0.92-1.17, P = 0.54). However, there was a
significant association between this polymorphism and the psychiatric illness in 
Asian population (C/G vs. C/C: OR = 1.27, 95%CI = 1.00-1.61, P = 0.05; G/G + C/G 
vs. C/C: OR = 1.32, 95%CI = 1.05-1.65, P = 0.02). Furthermore, we found a
significant association between XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and the risk of bipolar 
disorder in Asian population (C/G vs. C/C: OR = 1.81, 95%CI = 1.15-2.86, P =
0.01). The XBP1-116C/G polymorphism is associated with an increased risk of
bipolar disorder in Asian population.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25231123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Med Sci. 2014 Dec;348(6):465-73. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0000000000000328.

Deficiency of IRE1 and PERK signal pathways in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Wang J(1), Cheng Q, Wang X, Zu B, Xu J, Xu Y, Zuo X, Shen Y, Wang J, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences (JW, QC, XW, YS, YS), Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China; Institute of Biopharmaceutics (JW, QC, XW, YS, YS),
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China; Rheumatism Immunity Branch of Xuzhou
Central Hospital (BZ), Xuzhou, China; First Affiliated Hospital (JX, YX, XZ),
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China; School of Pharmacy (QC), Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China; and School of Public Health (JW), Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.

Erratum in
    Am J Med Sci. 2015 Mar;349(3):285.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease with uncertain
pathogenesis. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has close correlations with
inflammation and/or immune diseases. However, it is unknown whether aberrant ER
stress is involved in SLE pathogenesis. We aimed to characterize the ER
stress-related genes in patients with SLE and analyzed their correlations with
the disease. Peripheral blood leucocytes were isolated from 76 well-characterized
patients with SLE and 69 healthy controls. ER stress-related genes were
determined at transcription level by absolute quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction. Stepwise regression and correlation analysis were used to analyze
the relationships between SLE disease and ER stress. Abnormal unfolded protein
responses were found in patients with SLE with the downregulation of
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), pancreatic ER kinase (PERK) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) and upregulation of
XBP1, XBP1s and MANF. In the patients with SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI)
<12, PERK and MANF expressions were significantly decreased, compared with the
patients with severe SLE (SLEDAI = 12). However, there was no significant change 
in ATF6 mRNA expression in the patients with SLE. Negative correlation between
IRE1/XBP1 and SLEDAI was observed in lower SLEDAI score group. Negative
correlations between CHOP and anti-dsDNA antibody, MANF and antinuclear antibody 
were observed in high-SLEDAI score group. We also found that antinuclear antibody
and anti-dsDNA antibodies correlated with SLEDAI in a weak positive manner.
SLEDAI was negatively related with C3 level. SLEDAI and anti-dsDNA antibody
showed modestly positive correlation with urine protein. These findings suggest
that the abnormal unfolded protein responses, especially IRE1/XBP1 and PERK/CHOP 
axes, may contribute to SLE pathogenesis, which may be potential diagnosis
indicators or treatment targets.

PMID: 25226532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 16;9(9):e107635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107635.
eCollection 2014.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces different molecular structural alterations
in human dilated and ischemic cardiomyopathy.

Ortega A(1), Roselló-Lletí E(1), Tarazón E(1), Molina-Navarro MM(1),
Martínez-Dolz L(2), González-Juanatey JR(3), Lago F(3), Montoro-Mateos JD(1),
Salvador A(2), Rivera M(1), Portolés M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiocirculatory Unit, Health Research Institute of La Fe University
Hospital, Valencia, Spain. (2)Heart Failure and Transplantation Unit, Cardiology 
Department, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain. (3)Cellular and Molecular
Cardiology Research Unit, Department of Cardiology and Institute of Biomedical
Research, University Clinical Hospital, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multifunctional organelle
responsible for the synthesis and folding of proteins as well as for signalling
and calcium storage, that has been linked to the contraction-relaxation process. 
Perturbations of its homeostasis activate a stress response in diseases such as
heart failure (HF). To elucidate the alterations in ER molecular components, we
analyze the levels of ER stress and structure proteins in human dilated (DCM) and
ischemic (ICM) cardiomyopathies, and its relationship with patient's functional
status.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined 52 explanted human hearts from DCM (n = 21) and 
ICM (n = 21) subjects and 10 non-failing hearts as controls. Our results showed
specific changes in stress (IRE1, p<0.05; p-IRE1, p<0.05) and structural
(Reticulon 1, p<0.01) protein levels. The stress proteins GRP78, XBP1 and ATF6 as
well as the structural proteins RRBP1, kinectin, and Nogo A and B, were
upregulated in both DCM and ICM patients. Immunofluorescence results were
concordant with quantified Western blot levels. Moreover, we show a novel
relationship between stress and structural proteins. RRBP1, involved in
procollagen synthesis and remodeling, was related with left ventricular function.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we report the existence of alterations in ER
stress response and shaping proteins. We show a plausible effect of the ER stress
on ER structure in a suitable sample of DCM and ICM subjects. Patients with
higher values of RRBP1 had worse left ventricular function.

PMCID: PMC4166610
PMID: 25226522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. FEBS J. 2014 Nov;281(22):5132-46. doi: 10.1111/febs.13052. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

X-box binding protein 1 is a novel key regulator of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>2.

Cho YM(1), Kwak SN, Joo NS, Kim DH, Lee AH, Kim KS, Seo JB, Jeong SW, Kwon OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a transcription factor of the unfolded protein
response, plays various roles in many biological processes. We examined its
pro-adipogenic activity and target genes during adipogenic differentiation in
wild-type and genetically modified 3T3-L1 cells. Signalling pathways that
contribute to Xbp1 mRNA splicing, and the correlation of the transcriptionally
active XBP1 isoform (XBP1s) level with body mass index and the level of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>2 (PPAR<U+03B3>2) in human adipose tissues
were also examined. The mRNA and nuclear protein expression levels of XBP1s
increased immediately following hormonal induction of adipogenesis, reaching a
peak at 6 h. Results from cDNA microarray and gene expression analyses using
genetically modified cells indicated that PPAR<U+03B3>2 was a principal target of XBP1s.
The XBP1s-specific binding motif, which is distinct from the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a binding site, was identified in the PPAR<U+03B3>2
promoter by site-directed mutagenesis. Fetal bovine serum, insulin,
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and dexamethasone contributed independently to Xbp1
mRNA splicing. In human subcutaneous adipose tissues, the levels of both Xbp1s
and Ppar<U+03B3>2 mRNA increased proportionally with body mass index, and there was a
significant positive correlation between the two genes. These data suggest for
the first time that positive regulation of PPAR<U+03B3>2 is a principal mechanism of
XBP1s-mediated adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25223794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;34(1):6-18. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2552.

Involvement of the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway and XBP1s-dependent transcriptional
reprogramming in metabolic diseases.

Wu R(1), Zhang QH, Lu YJ, Ren K, Yi GH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Key Laboratory for Atherosclerology of Hunan Province, Institute of
Cardiovascular Research, University of South China , Hengyang, China .

The X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is not only an important component of the
unfolded protein response (UPR), but also an important nuclear transcription
factor. Upon endoplasmic reticulum stress, XBP1 is spliced by inositol-requiring 
enzyme 1 (IRE1), thereby generating functional spliced XBP1 (XBP1s). XBP1s
functions by translocating into the nucleus to initiate transcriptional programs 
that regulate a subset of UPR- and non-UPR-associated genes involved in the
pathophysiological processes of various diseases. Recent reports have implicated 
XBP1 in metabolic diseases. This review summarizes the effects of XBP1-mediated
regulation on lipid metabolism, glucose metabolism, obesity, and atherosclerosis.
Additionally, for the first time, we present XBP1s-dependent transcriptional
reprogramming in metabolic diseases under different conditions, including
pathology and physiology. Understanding the function of XBP1 in metabolic
diseases may provide a basic knowledge for the development of novel therapeutic
targets for ameliorating these diseases.

PMCID: PMC4281841
PMID: 25216212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 31;289(44):30625-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.571984. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Unspliced X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) protects endothelial cells from
oxidative stress through interaction with histone deacetylase 3.

Martin D(1), Li Y(1), Yang J(1), Wang G(2), Margariti A(3), Jiang Z(4), Yu H(5), 
Zampetaki A(1), Hu Y(1), Xu Q(6), Zeng L(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London SE5 9NU,
United Kingdom. (2)the Department of Emergency Medicine, the Second Affiliated
Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710004, China.
(3)the Centre for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Institute of Clinical Sciences, 
Belfast BT12 6BL, United Kingdom. (4)the Centre Laboratory, 305th Hospital of the
People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100017, China, and. (5)the Sino-German
Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Key Laboratory for Clinical Cardiovascular
Genetics, Ministry of Education, FuWai Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100037, China. (6)From the Cardiovascular Division, King's
College London, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom, qingbo.xu@kcl.ac.uk. (7)From the 
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom,
lingfang.zeng@kcl.ac.uk.

It is well known that atherosclerosis occurs geographically at branch points
where disturbed flow predisposes to the development of plaque via triggering of
oxidative stress and inflammatory reactions. In this study, we found that
disturbed flow activated anti-oxidative reactions via up-regulating heme
oxygenase 1 (HO-1) in an X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) and histone deacetylase 3
(HDAC3)-dependent manner. Disturbed flow concomitantly up-regulated the unspliced
XBP1 (XBP1u) and HDAC3 in a VEGF receptor and PI3K/Akt-dependent manner. The
presence of XBP1 was essential for the up-regulation of HDAC3 protein.
Overexpression of XBP1u and/or HDAC3 activated Akt1 phosphorylation, Nrf2 protein
stabilization and nuclear translocation, and HO-1 expression. Knockdown of XBP1u 
decreased the basal level and disturbed flow-induced Akt1 phosphorylation, Nrf2
stabilization, and HO-1 expression. Knockdown of HDAC3 ablated XBP1u-mediated
effects. The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) inhibitor, AZD2014,
ablated XBP1u or HDAC3 or disturbed flow-mediated Akt1 phosphorylation, Nrf2
nuclear translocation, and HO-1 expression. Neither actinomycin D nor
cycloheximide affected disturbed flow-induced up-regulation of Nrf2 protein.
Knockdown of Nrf2 abolished XBP1u or HDAC3 or disturbed flow-induced HO-1
up-regulation. Co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that XBP1u physically
bound to HDAC3 and Akt1. The region of amino acids 201 to 323 of the HDAC3
protein was responsible for the binding to XBP1u. Double immunofluorescence
staining revealed that the interactions between Akt1 and mTORC2, Akt1 and HDAC3, 
Akt1 and XBP1u, HDAC3, and XBP1u occurred in the cytosol. Thus, we demonstrate
that XBP1u and HDAC3 exert a protective effect on disturbed flow-induced
oxidative stress via up-regulation of mTORC2-dependent Akt1 phosphorylation and
Nrf2-mediated HO-1 expression.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4215241
PMID: 25190803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3101-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-567198. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

Stimulation of surface IgM of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells induces an
unfolded protein response dependent on BTK and SYK.

Krysov S(1), Steele AJ(1), Coelho V(1), Linley A(1), Sanchez Hidalgo M(1), Carter
M(1), Potter KN(1), Kennedy B(2), Duncombe AS(3), Ashton-Key M(4), Forconi F(5), 
Stevenson FK(1), Packham G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research United Kingdom Centre, Cancer Sciences Unit, University of
Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton,
United Kingdom; (2)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, University of
Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; (3)Department of Haematology, Southampton
General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom; and. (4)Cancer Research United
Kingdom Centre, Cancer Sciences Unit, University of Southampton Faculty of
Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom; Department
of Cellular Pathology, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(5)Cancer Research United Kingdom Centre, Cancer Sciences Unit, University of
Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton,
United Kingdom; Department of Haematology, Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton, United Kingdom; and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3040-1.

B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling plays a key role in the behavior of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). However, cellular consequences of signaling are
incompletely defined. Here we explored possible links between BCR signaling and
the unfolded protein response (UPR), a stress response pathway that can promote
survival of normal and malignant cells. Compared with normal B cells, circulating
CLL cells expressed increased, but variable, levels of UPR components. Higher
expression of CHOP and XBP1 RNAs was associated with more aggressive disease. UPR
activation appeared due to prior tissue-based antigenic stimulation because
elevated expression of UPR components was detected within lymph node
proliferation centers. Basal UPR activation also correlated closely with surface 
immunoglobulin M (sIgM) signaling capacity in vitro in both IGHV unmutated CLL
and within mutated CLL. sIgM signaling increased UPR activation in vitro with
responders showing increased expression of CHOP and XBP1 RNAs, and PERK and BIP
proteins, but not XBP1 splicing. Inhibitors of BCR-associated kinases effectively
prevented sIgM-induced UPR activation. Overall, this study demonstrates that sIgM
signaling results in activation of some components the UPR in CLL cells.
Modulation of the UPR may contribute to variable clinical behavior, and its
inhibition may contribute to clinical responses to BCR-associated kinase
inhibitors.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4231419
PMID: 25170122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 24;289(43):29751-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.565960. Epub
2014 Aug 28.

Fibroblast growth factor 21 is regulated by the IRE1a-XBP1 branch of the unfolded
protein response and counteracts endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced hepatic
steatosis.

Jiang S(1), Yan C(2), Fang QC(1), Shao ML(2), Zhang YL(2), Liu Y(2), Deng YP(2), 
Shan B(2), Liu JQ(2), Li HT(1), Yang L(2), Zhou J(3), Dai Z(3), Liu Y(4), Jia
WP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Clinical
Center for Diabetes, and Shanghai Key Clinical Center for Metabolic Disease,
Shanghai JiaoTong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233.
(2)the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, and.
(3)the Department of Liver Surgery, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (4)the Key Laboratory of Nutrition and 
Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, and liuy@sibs.ac.cn. (5)From the Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Clinical Center for Diabetes, and Shanghai 
Key Clinical Center for Metabolic Disease, Shanghai JiaoTong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, wpjia@sjtu.edu.cn.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress activates the adaptive unfolded protein
response (UPR) and represents a critical mechanism that underlies metabolic
dysfunctions. Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), a hormone that is
predominantly secreted by the liver, exerts a broad range of effects upon the
metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids. Although increased circulating levels of 
FGF21 have been documented in animal models and human subjects with obesity and
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, the functional interconnections between
metabolic ER stress and FGF21 are incompletely understood. Here, we report that
increased ER stress along with the simultaneous elevation of FGF21 expression
were associated with the occurrence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease both in
diet-induced obese mice and human patients. Intraperitoneal administration of the
ER stressor tunicamycin in mice resulted in hepatic steatosis, accompanied by
activation of the three canonical UPR branches and increased the expression of
FGF21. Furthermore, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway of the UPR could directly activate the
transcriptional expression of Fgf21. Administration of recombinant FGF21 in mice 
alleviated tunicamycin-induced liver steatosis, in parallel with reduced
eIF2a-ATF4-CHOP signaling. Taken together, these results suggest that FGF21 is an
integral physiological component of the cellular UPR program, which exerts
beneficial feedback effects upon lipid metabolism through counteracting ER
stress.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4207989
PMID: 25170079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 Jul 3;4:602-10. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.06.008. eCollection
2014.

Cytoprotective role of the fatty acid binding protein 4 against oxidative and
endoplasmic reticulum stress in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Kajimoto K(1), Minami Y(1), Harashima H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-12 Nishi-6,
Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

The fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4), one of the most abundant proteins in
adipocytes, has been reported to have a proinflammatory function in macrophages. 
However, the physiological role of FABP4, which is constitutively expressed in
adipocytes, has not been fully elucidated. Previously, we demonstrated that FABP4
was involved in the regulation of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) production in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. In this study, we examined 
the effects of FABP4 silencing on the oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. We found that the cellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and 8-nitro-cyclic GMP levels were significantly elevated in the
differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes transfected with a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
against Fabp4, although the intracellular levels or enzyme activities of
antioxidants including reduced glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and 
glutathione S-transferase A4 (GSTA4) were not altered. An in vitro evaluation
using the recombinant protein revealed that FABP4 itself functions as a scavenger
protein against hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). FABP4-knockdown resulted in a
significant lowering of cell viability of 3T3-L1 adipocytes against H2O2
treatment. Moreover, four kinds of markers related to the ER stress response
including the endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1 (Ern1), the signal
sequence receptor a (Ssr1), the ORM1-like 3 (Ormdl3), and the spliced X-box
binding protein 1 (Xbp1s), were all elevated as the result of the knockdown of
FABP4. Consequently, FABP4 might have a new role as an antioxidant protein
against H2O2 and contribute to cytoprotection against oxidative and ER stress in 
adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC4141204
PMID: 25161868  [PubMed]


250. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12752-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02138-14. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress sensor IRE1a protects cells from apoptosis
induced by the coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus.

Fung TS(1), Liao Y(1), Liu DX(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
dxliu@ntu.edu.sg.

The unfolded-protein response (UPR) is a signal transduction cascade triggered by
perturbation of the homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). UPR resolves
ER stress by activating a cascade of cellular responses, including the induction 
of molecular chaperones, translational attenuation, ER-associated degradation,
and other mechanisms. Under prolonged and irremediable ER stress, however, the
UPR can also trigger apoptosis. Here, we report that in cells infected with the
avian coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), ER stress was induced and
the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway of UPR was activated. Knockdown and overexpression
experiments demonstrated that IRE1a protects infected cells from IBV-induced
apoptosis, which required both its kinase and RNase activities. Our data also
suggest that splicing of XBP1 mRNA by IRE1a appears to convert XBP1 from a
proapoptotic XBP1u protein to a prosurvival XBP1s protein. Moreover, IRE1a
antagonized IBV-induced apoptosis by modulating the phosphorylation status of the
proapoptotic c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and the prosurvival RAC-alpha
serine/threonine-protein kinase (Akt). Taken together, the data indicate that the
ER stress sensor IRE1a is activated in IBV-infected cells and serves as a
survival factor during coronavirus infection.IMPORTANCE: Animal coronaviruses are
important veterinary viruses, which could cross the species barrier, becoming
severe human pathogens. Molecular characterization of the interactions between
coronaviruses and host cells is pivotal to understanding the pathogenicity and
species specificity of coronavirus infection. It has been well established that
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is closely associated with coronavirus
replication. Here, we report that inositol-requiring protein 1 alpha (IRE1a), a
key sensor of ER stress, is activated in cells infected with the avian
coronavirus infectious bronchitis virus (IBV). Moreover, IRE1a is shown to
protect the infected cells from apoptosis by modulating the unfolded-protein
response (UPR) and two kinases related to cell survival. This study demonstrates 
that UPR activation constitutes a major aspect of coronavirus-host interactions. 
Manipulations of the coronavirus-induced UPR may provide novel therapeutic
targets for the control of coronavirus infection and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248946
PMID: 25142592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jan 15;330(2):412-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.08.014. Epub
2014 Aug 17.

Celastrol induces unfolded protein response-dependent cell death in head and neck
cancer.

Fribley AM(1), Miller JR(2), Brownell AL(2), Garshott DM(3), Zeng Q(4), Reist
TE(5), Narula N(6), Cai P(6), Xi Y(2), Callaghan MU(2), Kodali V(7), Kaufman
RJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School 
of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: afribley@med.wayne.edu.
(2)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s
Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program,
Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (4)Carmen and Ann 
Adams Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, MI
48201, USA; Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA. (5)The Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program, University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (6)Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA. (7)Degenerative Disease Research Center,
Sanford|Burnham Medical Research Institute La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The survival rate for patients with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has not
seen marked improvement in recent decades despite enhanced efforts in prevention 
and the introduction of novel therapies. We have reported that pharmacological
exacerbation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is an effective approach to
killing OSCC cells. The UPR is executed via distinct signaling cascades whereby
an initial attempt to restore folding homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum
during stress is complemented by an apoptotic response if the defect cannot be
resolved. To identify novel small molecules able to overwhelm the adaptive
capacity of the UPR in OSCC cells, we engineered a complementary cell-based assay
to screen a broad spectrum of chemical matter. Stably transfected CHO-K1 cells
that individually report (luciferase) on the PERK/eIF2a/ATF4/CHOP (apoptotic) or 
the IRE1/XBP1 (adaptive) UPR pathways, were engineered [1]. The triterpenoids
dihydrocelastrol and celastrol were identified as potent inducers of UPR
signaling and cell death in a primary screen and confirmed in a panel of OSCC
cells and other cancer cell lines. Biochemical and genetic assays using OSCC
cells and modified murine embryonic fibroblasts demonstrated that intact
PERK-eIF2-ATF4-CHOP signaling is required for pro-apoptotic UPR and OSCC death
following celastrol treatment.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4280347
PMID: 25139619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e105588. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105588.
eCollection 2014.

Ire1 mediated mRNA splicing in a C-terminus deletion mutant of Drosophila Xbp1.

Coelho DS(1), Gaspar CJ(1), Domingos PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Oeiras, Portugal.

The Unfolded Protein Response is a homeostatic mechanism that permits eukaryotic 
cells to cope with Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress caused by excessive
accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER lumen. The more conserved branch of 
the UPR relies on an ER transmembrane enzyme, Ire1, which, upon ER stress,
promotes the unconventional splicing of a small intron from the mRNA encoding the
transcription factor Xbp1. In mammals, two specific regions (the hydrophobic
region 2--HR2--and the C-terminal translational pausing site) present in the
Xbp1unspliced protein mediate the recruitment of the Xbp1 mRNA-ribosome-nascent
chain complex to the ER membrane, so that Xbp1 mRNA can be spliced by Ire1. Here,
we generated a Drosophila Xbp1 deletion mutant (Excision101) lacking both HR2 and
C-terminal region, but not the Ire1 splicing site. We show that Ire1-dependent
splicing of Xbp1 mRNA is reduced, but not abolished in Excision101. Our results
suggest the existence of additional mechanisms for ER membrane targeting of Xbp1 
mRNA that are independent of the C-terminal domain of Drosophila Xbp1unspliced.

PMCID: PMC4138184
PMID: 25136861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Apr;51(2):571-90. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8819-1. Epub 2014
Aug 17.

Enhanced amyloidogenic processing of amyloid precursor protein and cell death
under prolonged endoplasmic reticulum stress in brain endothelial cells.

Plácido AI(1), Oliveira CR, Moreira PI, Pereira CM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Rua Larga;
Faculty of Medicine, Pólo I, 3004-504, Coimbra, Portugal.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy resulting from the deposition of misfolded amyloid
beta (Aß) peptide in the walls of brain's blood vessels is exhibited by the
majority of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, suggesting that alterations in
protein quality control contribute to AD-associated vascular dysfunction. The
present work addressed the role of ER stress in the amyloidogenic amyloid
precursor protein (APP) processing and subsequent Aß generation in brain
endothelial cells (ECs). For that purpose, the RBE4 cell line was exposed to the 
classical ER stressors thapsigargin or brefeldin A to mimic the altered ER
homeostasis observed in AD. In treated cells, an increase in the levels of
markers of ER stress (XBP1 and GRP78) and of the ER stress-induced apoptotic
pathway (caspase-12, JNK, and CHOP) was observed concomitantly with the
accumulation of reactive oxygen species. Under these conditions, a significant
ER-to-mitochondria Ca(2+) transfer was also found, which culminated in
mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload and activation of mitochondria-dependent apoptosis.
Moreover, it was showed that prolonged ER stress induces intracellular APP
accumulation, which colocalizes with the ER chaperone GRP78, and activation of
ß-secretase, leading to increased intracellular Aß levels, together with a
decrease in secreted Aß. Finally, it was demonstrated that ER stress-induced
changes in Aß levels and apoptotic cell death can be ameliorated by a blocker of 
the mitochondrial Bax channel. These observations suggest that chronic ER stress 
triggers APP accumulation in early comportments along the secretory pathway in
brain ECs and increases its amyloidogenic processing and Aß generation leading to
apoptotic cell death.

PMID: 25128025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2014 Oct;47(10):834-41. Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Bioinformatics analysis of biomarkers and transcriptional factor motifs in Down
syndrome.

Kong XD(1), Liu N(1), Xu XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prenatal Diagnosis Center, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.

In this study, biomarkers and transcriptional factor motifs were identified in
order to investigate the etiology and phenotypic severity of Down syndrome. GSE
1281, GSE 1611, and GSE 5390 were downloaded from the gene expression ominibus
(GEO). A robust multiarray analysis (RMA) algorithm was applied to detect
differentially expressed genes (DEGs). In order to screen for biological pathways
and to interrogate the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
database, the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery
(DAVID) was used to carry out a gene ontology (GO) function enrichment for DEGs. 
Finally, a transcriptional regulatory network was constructed, and a
hypergeometric distribution test was applied to select for significantly enriched
transcriptional factor motifs. CBR1, DYRK1A, HMGN1, ITSN1, RCAN1, SON, TMEM50B,
and TTC3 were each up-regulated two-fold in Down syndrome samples compared to
normal samples; of these, SON and TTC3 were newly reported. CBR1, DYRK1A, HMGN1, 
ITSN1, RCAN1, SON, TMEM50B, and TTC3 were located on human chromosome 21 (mouse
chromosome 16). The DEGs were significantly enriched in macromolecular complex
subunit organization and focal adhesion pathways. Eleven significantly enriched
transcription factor motifs (PAX5, EGR1, XBP1, SREBP1, OLF1, MZF1, NFY, NFKAPPAB,
MYCMAX, NFE2, and RP58) were identified. The DEGs and transcription factor motifs
identified in our study provide biomarkers for the understanding of Down syndrome
pathogenesis and progression.

PMCID: PMC4181218
PMID: 25118625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Oct;13(10):2384-98. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0172.
Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Regulation of OSU-03012 toxicity by ER stress proteins and ER stress-inducing
drugs.

Booth L(1), Roberts JL(1), Cruickshanks N(1), Grant S(2), Poklepovic A(2), Dent
P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia. (2)Department of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, Virginia. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. pdent@vcu.edu.

The present studies examined the toxic interaction between the non-coxib
celecoxib derivative OSU-03012 and phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) inhibitors, and
also determined the roles of endoplasmic reticulum stress response regulators in 
cell survival. PDE5 inhibitors interacted in a greater than additive fashion with
OSU-03012 to kill parental glioma and stem-like glioma cells. Knockdown of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response proteins IRE1 or XBP1 enhanced the
lethality of OSU-03012, and of [OSU-03012 + PDE5 inhibitor] treatment.
Pan-caspase and caspase-9 inhibition did not alter OSU-03012 lethality but did
abolish enhanced killing in the absence of IRE1 or XBP1. Expression of the
mitochondrial protective protein BCL-XL or the caspase-8 inhibitor c-FLIP-s, or
knockdown of death receptor CD95 or the death receptor caspase-8 linker protein
FADD, suppressed killing by [OSU-03012 + PDE5 inhibitor] treatment. CD95
activation was blocked by the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor L-NAME. Knockdown
of the autophagy regulatory proteins Beclin1 or ATG5 protected the cells from
OSU-03012 and from [OSU-03012 + PDE5 inhibitor] toxicity. Knockdown of IRE1
enhanced OSU-03012/[OSU-03012 + PDE5 inhibitor]-induced JNK activation, and
inhibition of JNK suppressed the elevated killing caused by IRE1 knockdown.
Knockdown of CD95 blunted JNK activation. Collectively, our data demonstrate that
PDE5 inhibitors recruit death receptor signaling to enhance OSU-03012 toxicity in
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4185238
PMID: 25103559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biol Reprod. 2014 Sep;91(3):70. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.120741. Epub 2014 Aug
6.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is increased after spontaneous labor in human fetal 
membranes and myometrium where it regulates the expression of prolabor mediators.

Liong S(1), Lappas M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics, Nutrition and Endocrinology Group, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaMercy Perinatal Research
Centre, Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia. (2)Obstetrics,
Nutrition and Endocrinology Group, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Melbourne, Victoria, AustraliaMercy Perinatal Research Centre,
Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia mlappas@unimelb.edu.au.

Increasing evidence indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved 
in various diseases. In nongestational tissues, several markers of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) have been shown to regulate the inflammatory response.
Thus, the aim of this study was to determine the effect of human labor on markers
of ER stress in fetal membranes and myometrium. In addition, the effect of ER
stress inhibition on the expression and secretion of proinflammatory and prolabor
mediators was also assessed. The markers of ER stress, GRP78, IRE1, and spliced
XBP1 (XBP1s), were significantly increased in fetal membranes and myometrium
after term and preterm labor compared to nonlaboring samples. Given that
inflammation is considered to be one of the leading causes of spontaneous preterm
birth, here we used bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as a model for
infection-induced preterm birth. In term nonlabored fetal membranes and
myometrium, LPS induced UPR activation as evidenced by a significant increase in 
the expression of GRP78, IRE1, and XBP1s in fetal membranes and myometrium. The
use of the chemical chaperones 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA) and
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) alleviated ER stress induced by LPS. 4-PBA and 
TUDCA also ameliorated the increase in LPS-induced prolabor mediators. Our data
suggest that the UPR may regulate the inflammatory responses associated with
labor or infection in fetal membranes and myometrium of pregnant term and preterm
women. Thus, the use of ER stress inhibitors, in particular 4-PBA or TUDCA, may
be a potential therapeutic strategy for the prevention of infection-mediated
spontaneous preterm birth.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25100709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Jul;68(6):709-13. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.07.011.
Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Upregulated ROS production induced by the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 on XBP1
gene expression and cell apoptosis in Tca-8113 cells.

Chen HY(1), Ren XY(1), Wang WH(1), Zhang YX(1), Chen SF(1), Zhang B(2), Wang
LX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Maxillofacial Head-Neck Key Laboratory of Medical Biology, and central
laboratory of Liaocheng People's Hospital, Liaocheng, Shandong 252000, China.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Liaocheng People's Hospital,
Liaocheng, Shandong 252000, China. Electronic address: Bin_zhanglc@yahoo.com.cn. 
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW
2650, Australia. Electronic address: lwang@csu.edu.au.

Exposure of Tca-8113 cells to proteasome inhibitor carbobenzoxy-Leu-Leu-leucinal 
(MG-132) causing apoptosis is associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. 
X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) is an important regulator of a subset of genes
active during ER stress, which is related to cell survival and is required for
tumor growth. The present study is to evaluate the effect of MG-132 on ROS
production, XBP1 gene expression, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 2 (TRAF2), ASK1 and c-jun protein expression in tongue squamous cell
carcinoma cell line Tca-8113 cells. ROS production was measured by reactive
oxygen species assay. X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA was analyzed by
real-time-PCR, TRAF2, ASK1 and c-jun protein were investigated by western blot
and immunocytochemistry respectively. The result indicated that ROS production,
TRAF2, ASK1 and c-jun were elevated in MG-132 treated cells. Giving ROS scavenger
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) largely prevented the effects of MG-132. Furthermore,
treating with MG-132 lead to decreased XBP1 mRNA expression but could not
completely block the expression of XBP1. Taken together, these findings provide
the evidence that MG-132 induced ER stress lead to Tca-8113 cells apoptosis
through ROS generation and TRAF2-ASK1-JNK signal pathway activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25092240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Org Lett. 2014 Aug 15;16(16):4320-3. doi: 10.1021/ol5020653. Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Mollanol A, a diterpenoid with a new C-nor-D-homograyanane skeleton from the
fruits of Rhododendron molle.

Li Y(1), Liu YB, Liu YL, Wang C, Wu LQ, Li L, Ma SG, Qu J, Yu SS.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substance and Function of Natural Medicines,
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100050, China.

Two new grayanoids, mollanol A (1) and rhodomollein XXV (2), were isolated from
the fruits of Rhododendron molle. Their structures were elucidated by
spectroscopic methods and X-ray diffraction analyses. Mollanol A (1) possesses a 
new C-nor-D-homograyanane carbon skeleton, while rhodomollein XXV (2) is the
first example of an 11,16-epoxygrayanane and features a caged
oxa-tricyclo[3.3.1.0(3.7)]nonane ring system. Plausible biogenetic pathways for 1
were proposed. Compound 1 exhibited transcriptional activation effects on the
xbp1 upstream promoter in IEC-6, 293T, and RAW264.7 cells.

PMID: 25090103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell. 2014 Sep 4;55(5):758-70. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.06.032. Epub 2014
Jul 31.

A synthetic biology approach identifies the mammalian UPR RNA ligase RtcB.

Lu Y(1), Liang FX(2), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA. (2)Office of Collaborative Science Microscopy Core, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.
Electronic address: awang@northwestern.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2887-9.

Signaling in the ancestral branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is
initiated by unconventional splicing of HAC1/XBP1 mRNA during endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. In mammals, IRE1a has been known to cleave the XBP1
intron. However, the enzyme responsible for ligation of two XBP1 exons remains
unknown. Using an XBP1 splicing-based synthetic circuit, we identify RtcB as the 
primary UPR RNA ligase. In RtcB knockout cells, XBP1 mRNA splicing is defective
during ER stress. Genetic rescue and in vitro splicing show that the RNA ligase
activity of RtcB is directly required for the splicing of XBP1 mRNA. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that RtcB is the long-sought RNA ligase that
catalyzes unconventional RNA splicing during the mammalian UPR.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4156904
PMID: 25087875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 3;289(40):27551-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.528174. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is chronically activated in chronic pancreatitis.

Sah RP(1), Garg SK(1), Dixit AK(1), Dudeja V(1), Dawra RK(1), Saluja AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery, 
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455. (2)From the
Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery, University
of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455 asaluja@umn.edu.

The pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis (CP) is poorly understood. Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress has now been recognized as a pathogenic event in many
chronic diseases. However, ER stress has not been studied in CP, although
pancreatic acinar cells seem to be especially vulnerable to ER dysfunction
because of their dependence on high ER volume and functionality. Here, we aim to 
investigate ER stress in CP, study its pathogenesis in relation to trypsinogen
activation (widely regarded as the key event of pancreatitis), and explore its
mechanism, time course, and downstream consequences during pancreatic injury. CP 
was induced in mice by repeated episodes of acute pancreatitis (AP) based on
caerulein hyperstimulation. ER stress leads to activation of unfolded protein
response components that were measured in CP and AP. We show sustained
up-regulation of unfolded protein response components ATF4, CHOP, GRP78, and XBP1
in CP. Overexpression of GRP78 and ATF4 in human CP confirmed the experimental
findings. We used novel trypsinogen-7 knock-out mice (T(-/-)), which lack
intra-acinar trypsinogen activation, to clarify the relationship of ER stress to 
intra-acinar trypsinogen activation in pancreatic injury. Comparable activation
of ER stress was seen in wild type and T(-/-) mice. Induction of ER stress
occurred through pathologic calcium signaling very early in the course of
pancreatic injury. Our results establish that ER stress is chronically activated 
in CP and is induced early in pancreatic injury through pathologic calcium
signaling independent of trypsinogen activation. ER stress may be an important
pathogenic mechanism in pancreatitis that needs to be explored in future studies.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4183795
PMID: 25077966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1843(11):2662-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 Jul 26.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibition synergizes with the NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor DHMEQ
to kill hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Lampiasi N(1), Umezawa K(2), Montalto G(3), Cervello M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology "Alberto Monroy", National
Research Council, Via Ugo La Malfa 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
lampiasi@ibim.cnr.it. (2)Department of Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Science and 
Technology, Keio University, Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Biomedical Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties, University of
Palermo, Via del Vespro 143, 90127 Palermo, Italy. (4)Institute of Biomedicine
and Molecular Immunology "Alberto Monroy", National Research Council, Via Ugo La 
Malfa 153, 90146 Palermo, Italy.

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes play a key role in the cellular
machinery responsible for DNA repair. Dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ), a
new inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B, induces oxidative stress and DNA damage. The effects of
DHMEQ in combination with Olaparib (PARP inhibitor) were studied on
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. The DHMEQ-Olaparib combination
synergistically inhibited cell viability, cell proliferation and colony formation
of Hep3B, but had additive effects on Huh7 cells. The synergistic effects of the 
combination correlated with increased apoptosis, caspase 3/7 activity and PARP
cleavage. There was an induction of an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response
with significant up-regulation of CHOP and TRB3 genes and splicing of XBP1 mRNA
in Hep3B cells but not in Huh7 cells. Silencing of the TRB3 mRNA in Hep3B cells
reversed the reduction in viability caused by DHMEQ-Olaparib treatment, while
depletion of unspliced XBP1 mRNA in DHMEQ-Olaparib-treated Huh7 cells reduced
viability. ROS production was increased after DHMEQ-Olaparib treatment of Hep3B, 
which caused DNA damage by an accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX, increased AKT
phosphorylation and reduced cell viability. The combination reduced Rad51 nuclear
foci in Hep3B cells (not Huh7 cells), and silencing of Rad51 enhanced sensitivity
of Huh7 cells to the DHMEQ-Olaparib combination. Knockdown of AKT in Hep3B cells 
restored the number of Rad51 nuclear foci after DHMEQ-Olaparib treatment. In
summary, the DHMEQ-Olaparib combination induced ROS production, which killed HCC 
cells via DNA damage that could not be repaired by Rad51.SUMMARY: PARPs and NF-<U+03BA>B
are frequently deregulated in HCC. The DHMEQ-Olaparib combination exerted
synergistic anti-tumour effects on HCC cells through ROS production via DNA
damage that could not be repaired by Rad51. This suggested that the
DHMEQ-Olaparib combination could be used to treat tumours that were resistant to 
Olaparib treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25072752  [PubMed - in process]


262. Front Microbiol. 2014 Jul 1;5:322. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00322. eCollection
2014.

Varicella-zoster virus glycoprotein expression differentially induces the
unfolded protein response in infected cells.

Carpenter JE(1), Grose C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virology Laboratory, Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Iowa
Children's Hospital Iowa City, IA, USA.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a human herpesvirus that spreads to children as
varicella or chicken pox. The virus then establishes latency in the nervous
system and re-emerges, typically decades later, as zoster or shingles. We have
reported previously that VZV induces autophagy in infected cells as well as
exhibiting evidence of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR): XBP1 splicing, a
greatly expanded Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) and CHOP expression. Herein we report
the results of a UPR specific PCR array that measures the levels of mRNA of 84
different components of the UPR in VZV infected cells as compared to tunicamycin 
treated cells as a positive control and uninfected, untreated cells as a negative
control. Tunicamycin is a mixture of chemicals that inhibits N-linked
glycosylation in the ER with resultant protein misfolding and the UPR. We found
that VZV differentially induces the UPR when compared to tunicamycin treatment.
For example, tunicamycin treatment moderately increased (8-fold) roughly half of 
the array elements while downregulating only three (one ERAD and two FOLD
components). VZV infection on the other hand upregulated 33 components including 
a little described stress sensor CREB-H (64-fold) as well as ER membrane
components INSIG and gp78, which modulate cholesterol synthesis while
downregulating over 20 components mostly associated with ERAD and FOLD. We
hypothesize that this expression pattern is associated with an expanding ER with 
downregulation of active degradation by ERAD and apoptosis as the cell attempts
to handle abundant viral glycoprotein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4076746
PMID: 25071735  [PubMed]


263. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(2):393-404. doi: 10.1159/000363008. Epub 2014 Jul
11.

The impact of intermittent and repetitive cold stress exposure on endoplasmic
reticulum stress and instability of atherosclerotic plaques.

Dai MX(1), Zheng XH, Yu J, Yin T, Ma MJ, Zhang L, Liu M, Ma Y, Liu LW, Gao X, Li 
Y, Song LQ, Wang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medial
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of acute coronary syndrome caused by the rupture of
atherosclerotic plaque and subsequent arterial thrombosis increases as the
weather gets colder. However, the association between cold stress and
atherosclerotic plaque rupture is currently unknown.
METHODS: An atherosclerotic plaque model was established in rabbits by balloon
injury and a high-fat diet with or without cold stress (4 °C, 1 hour per day, 20 
weeks) at the onset of modeling. Additionally, oxidized low-density lipoprotein
(ox-LDL) was applied to induce the formation of macrophage foam cells in vitro.
RESULTS: Serum lipid profiles and inflammatory cytokines (ox-LDL,
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, and interleukin-8) were significantly higher
in cold stress-exposed rabbits than in controls (P<0.05). Animals with
atherosclerotic lesions that were exposed to cold stress had increased
macrophages, foam cells, intima-media thickness, and neovascularization in the
plaque, along with significantly thinned plaque fibrous caps. Moreover, we found 
that cold stress induced more apoptotic cells in the atherosclerotic plaques and 
up-regulated endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS)-associated proteins CHOP, GRP78, 
and p-JNK (P<0.05). In addition, tunicamycin treatment promoted ox-LDL-induced
apoptosis, expression of CHOP and GPR78, and the p-JNK level in macrophage foam
cells, while JNK inhibitor sp600125 reduced cell apoptosis and the p-JNK level.
The three main ERS sensors sensors phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and inositol-requiring
enzyme1 (IRE1) declined significantly after ox-LDL treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Cold stress may enhance the instability of atherosclerotic plaques
through activating ERS and enhancing cell apoptosis. Up-regulated CHOP levels
mediated by PERK and ATF6 and the activated IRE1-XBP1-JNK pathway contributed to 
the apoptosis of foam cells.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25059288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biomed Res. 2014 Jul;28(4):275-81. doi: 10.7555/JBR.28.20120075. Epub 2014 Mar 
15.

IRE1a knockdown rescues tunicamycin-induced developmental defects and apoptosis
in Xenopus laevis.

Yuan L(1), Yu J(2), Li X(1), Feng J(1), Yin C(1), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Friendship hospital 
of yili kazakh prefecture, Yining, Xinjiang 835000, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

Inositol requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1) is highly conserved from yeasts to humans.
Upon endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, IRE1 activates X-box-binding protein 1
(XBP1) by unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA, which activates unfolded protein 
response (UPR) to restore ER homeostasis. In mice, IRE1a plays an essential role 
in extraembryonic tissues. However, its precise action during the early stage of 
development is unknown. In this study, the gain and loss-of-function analyses
were used to investigate the function of Xenopus IRE1a (xIRE1a). The effects of
xIRE1a during embryo development were detected with RT-PCR and whole mount in
situ hybridization. ER stress was induced by tunicamycin. The apoptotic cells
were measured by TUNNEL assays. Although both gain and loss of xIRE1a function
had no significant effect on Xenopus embryogenesis, knockdown of xIRE1a could
rescue tunicamycin-induced developmental defects and apoptosis. The finding
indicates that xIRE1a is not required for embryogenesis but is required for
tunicamycin-induced developmental defects and apoptosis in Xenopus laevis.

PMCID: PMC4102841
PMID: 25050111  [PubMed]


265. J Proteomics. 2014 Sep 23;109:228-39. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.07.011. Epub 2014
Jul 18.

Proteomic analysis of the mitochondria from embryonic and postnatal rat brains
reveals response to developmental changes in energy demands.

Villeneuve LM(1), Stauch KL(2), Fox HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, United States. Electronic address:
lvillene@unmc.edu. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, United States. Electronic
address: kelly.stauch@unmc.edu. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, United
States. Electronic address: hfox@unmc.edu.

Many biological processes converge on the mitochondria. In such systems, where
many pathways converge, manipulation of the components can produce varied and
far-reaching effects. Due to the centrality of the mitochondria in many cellular 
pathways, we decided to investigate the brain mitochondrial proteome during early
development. Using a SWATH mass spectrometry-based technique, we were able to
identify vast proteomic alterations between whole brain mitochondria from rats at
embryonic day 18 compared to postnatal day 7. These findings include
statistically significant alterations in proteins involved in glycolysis and
mitochondrial trafficking/dynamics. Additionally, bioinformatic analysis enabled 
the identification of HIF1A and XBP1 as upstream transcriptional regulators of
many of the differentially expressed proteins. These data suggest that the cell
is rearranging the mitochondria to accommodate special energy demands and that
cytosolic proteins exert mitochondrial effects through dynamic interactions with 
the mitochondria.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Although mitochondria play critical
roles in many cellular pathways, our understanding of how these organelles change
over time is limited. The changes occurring in the mitochondria at early time
points are especially important as many mitochondrial disorders produce
neurological dysfunction early in life. Herein, we utilize a SWATH mass
spectrometry approach to quantify proteomic alterations of rat brain mitochondria
between embryonic and postnatal stages. We found this method to be highly
reproducible, enabling the identification of alterations in many biochemical
pathways and mitochondrial properties. This insight into the distinct changes in 
these biological pathways to maintain homeostasis under divergent conditions will
help elucidate the pathological changes occurring in disease states.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253732
PMID: 25046836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):534-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.07.002. Epub 2014 Jul
10.

Allosteric inhibition of the IRE1a RNase preserves cell viability and function
during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Ghosh R(1), Wang L(2), Wang ES(3), Perera BG(4), Igbaria A(2), Morita S(2), Prado
K(2), Thamsen M(2), Caswell D(3), Macias H(5), Weiberth KF(2), Gliedt MJ(6),
Alavi MV(7), Hari SB(4), Mitra AK(4), Bhhatarai B(8), Schürer SC(9), Snapp
EL(10), Gould DB(11), German MS(5), Backes BJ(6), Maly DJ(4), Oakes SA(12), Papa 
FR(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Pathology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Diabetes Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Lung Biology Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; California
Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Diabetes Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Lung
Biology Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Diabetes Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Lung Biology Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (8)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,, 
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, FL 33136, USA. (9)Center for
Computational Science, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, FL 33136, 
USA; Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,, Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, FL 33136, USA. (10)Department of Anatomy and
Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Anatomy, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (12)Department of Pathology, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Diabetes Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: scott.oakes@ucsf.edu. (13)Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Diabetes Center,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Lung
Biology Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA; California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic address:
frpapa@medicine.ucsf.edu.

Depending on endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress levels, the ER transmembrane
multidomain protein IRE1a promotes either adaptation or apoptosis. Unfolded ER
proteins cause IRE1a lumenal domain homo-oligomerization, inducing trans
autophosphorylation that further drives homo-oligomerization of its cytosolic
kinase/endoribonuclease (RNase) domains to activate mRNA splicing of adaptive
XBP1 transcription factor. However, under high/chronic ER stress, IRE1a surpasses
an oligomerization threshold that expands RNase substrate repertoire to many
ER-localized mRNAs, leading to apoptosis. To modulate these effects, we developed
ATP-competitive IRE1a Kinase-Inhibiting RNase Attenuators-KIRAs-that
allosterically inhibit IRE1a's RNase by breaking oligomers. One optimized KIRA,
KIRA6, inhibits IRE1a in vivo and promotes cell survival under ER stress.
Intravitreally, KIRA6 preserves photoreceptor functional viability in rat models 
of ER stress-induced retinal degeneration. Systemically, KIRA6 preserves
pancreatic ß cells, increases insulin, and reduces hyperglycemia in Akita
diabetic mice. Thus, IRE1a powerfully controls cell fate but can itself be
controlled with small molecules to reduce cell degeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4244221
PMID: 25018104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Cell Biol. 2014 Jul 10;15:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-15-29.

IRE1 inhibition perturbs the unfolded protein response in a pancreatic ß-cell
line expressing mutant proinsulin, but does not sensitize the cells to apoptosis.

Zhang L, Nosak C, Sollazzo P, Odisho T, Volchuk A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Advanced Diagnostics-Metabolism, Toronto General Research
Institute, University Health Network, 101 College Street, TMDT 10-706, Toronto,
ON, Canada. allen.volchuk@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: The Akita mutation (C96Y) in the insulin gene results in early onset 
diabetes in both humans and mice. Expression of mutant proinsulin (C96Y) causes
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in pancreatic ß-cells and consequently the cell
activates the unfolded protein response (UPR). Since the proinsulin is terminally
misfolded ER stress is irremediable and chronic activation of the UPR eventually 
activates apoptosis in some cells. Here we analyzed the IRE1-dependent activation
of genes in response to misfolded proinsulin production in an inducible mutant
proinsulin (C96Y) insulinoma cell line.
RESULTS: The IRE1 endoribonuclease inhibitors 4µ8c and MKC-3946 prevented the
splicing of the XBP1 mRNA in response to ER stress caused by mutant proinsulin
production. Microarray expression analysis and qPCR validation of select genes
revealed that maximal upregulation of many UPR genes in response to mutant
proinsulin production required IRE1, although most were still increased above
control. Interestingly, neither degradation of misfolded proinsulin via
ER-associated degradation (ERAD), nor apoptosis induced by prolonged misfolded
proinsulin expression were affected by inhibiting IRE1.
CONCLUSIONS: Although maximal induction of most UPR genes requires IRE1,
inhibition of IRE1 does not affect ERAD of misfolded proinsulin or predispose
pancreatic ß-cells expressing misfolded proinsulin to chronic ER stress-induced
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4118655
PMID: 25011481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Fiziol Zh. 2014;60(2):38-44.

Expression of XBP1 in lymphocytes of the small intestine in rats under chronic
social stress and modulation of intestinal microflora composition.

Topol IA, Kamyshny AM, Abramov AV, Kolesnik YM.

The present study was conducted to investigate of the influence of chronic social
stress and modulation of the composition of intestinal microflora on the
distribution of Xbp(1+)-lymphocytes in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue of
ileum of the rats. Structure of population of Xbp(1+)-cells has been studied by
the analysis of serial histological sections using the method of indirect
immunofluorescence with monoclonal antibodies to Xbp1 of rat. Chronic social
stress development is accompanied with the reduction of total number of
Xbp(1+)-lymphocytes in lymphoid structures of ileum (31% -3 fold reduction, p <
0.05), mostly expressed in lymphoidfollicles, and changes the concentration of
Xbp1 protein in immunopositive cells. Modulation of the composition of intestinal
microflora by antibiotics and probiotics under chronic social stress results in
the increase of total number of Xbp1+ lymphocytes in gut-associated lymphoid
tissue, the degree of it depends on the kind ofstress. The discovered alterations
of Xbp1 expression under stress may be one of the triggers for development of
autoimmune and inflammatory bowel diseases. Thus, increased understanding of the 
molecular actions and transcriptional networks regulated by XBP1 in immune cells 
may aid in the development of potential therapeutics targeting immune disorders.

PMID: 25007519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Am J Chin Med. 2014;42(4):905-19. doi: 10.1142/S0192415X14500578.

Flavonoids from Litsea coreana decreases TNF-a secretion from peritoneal
macrophages in adjuvant-induced arthritis rats via UPR pathway.

Zhong J(1), Ma T, Huang C, Liu H, Chen Z, Cao L, Li X, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Key Laboratory for Bioactivity of Natural Products, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei 230032, Anhui, China , Key Laboratory of
Anti-Inflammatory and Immune Medicine, Ministry of Education, Hefei 230032, China
, The Anhui Mental Health Center, Hefei 230022, China.

Macrophages play a crucial role in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Their activation is
the initial step of RA. This study was designed to detect the effects of total
flavonoids from Litsea coreana Levl. (TFLC) on the complete Freund's
adjuvant-induced (CFA-induced) arthritis (AA) in rats and to explore whether
inflammatory cytokines were induced by the IRE1/mTORC1/TNF-a-dependant mechanism 
in peritoneal macrophages. In vivo, our data indicated that TFLC (100, 200 mg/kg,
i.g. × 10 days) could significantly suppress secondary paw swelling and serum
levels of TNF-a and IL-1ß. Histopathological figures showed that TFLC treatment
improved the morphologic changes of articular cartilages and synovium. Results of
RT-PCR and western blotting demonstrated that TFLC suppressed expression of 78-KD
glucose regulated protein (GRP78), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), mTOR complex 1
(mTORC1) and TNF-a in peritoneal macrophages of AA rats. Collectively, these
results indicate that TFLC is able to ameliorate adjuvant-induced arthritis in a 
dose-dependent manner by suppressing the IRE1/mTORC1/TNF-a-regulated inflammatory
response initiated in peritoneal macrophages.

PMID: 25004882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Sep 15;344(1-2):129-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.06.042. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor prevents neuron loss via
inhibiting ischemia-induced apoptosis.

Yang W(1), Shen Y(2), Chen Y(3), Chen L(4), Wang L(5), Wang H(6), Xu S(7), Fang
S(8), Fu Y(9), Yu Y(10), Shen Y(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui,
PR China; Biopharmaceutical Research Institute, Anhui Medical University, 81
Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic address: 781939240@qq.com.
(2)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road,
Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical Research Institute, Anhui Medical
University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic address:
jojo125520@163.com. (3)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan
Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical Research Institute, Anhui Medical
University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic address:
917879363@qq.com. (4)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical University, 
81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical Research Institute,
Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic
address: 526566755@qq.com. (5)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China.
Electronic address: 66872156@qq.com. (6)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical
Research Institute, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR
China. Electronic address: histologyw@163.com. (7)School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China.
Electronic address: 1922491779@qq.com. (8)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical
Research Institute, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR
China. Electronic address: syf8811@gmail.com. (9)Biopharmaceutical Research
Institute, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China.
(10)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, 218 Jixi Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic address:
yuyongqiang@hotmail.com. (11)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Anhui Medical
University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China; Biopharmaceutical Research
Institute, Anhui Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, PR China.
Electronic address: shenyx@ustc.edu.cn.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) has been shown to be
up-regulated under the focal cerebral ischemia and protected against ischemic
injury in rats. However, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. The aim of this
study was to verify the protection of MANF on the cerebral ischemic injury and
further investigate the possible mechanisms. Rat focal ischemic model was
established by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). The recombinant human
MANF was therapeutically administrated to the ipsilateral ventricle at 2 h after 
MCAO. MANF decreased the number of the propidium iodide (PI)- and TUNEL-positive 
neural cells. Contrarily, MANF protected the NeuN-positive cells in hippocampus
and cortex from death induced by ischemia. The more interesting results in this
study were that MANF repressed the cleavage of caspase-3 triggered by focal
cerebral ischemia. MANF also reduced the elevated levels of BIP/Grp78,
phosphorylated IRE1, and splicing XBP1 induced by focal cerebral ischemia, but
not affect CHOP expression. Meanwhile, focal cerebral ischemia elevated the
levels of XBP1 mRNA, including unspliced XBP1 (XBP1u) and spliced XBP1 (XBP1s).
However, MANF did not affect the expression of XBP1 mRNA, neither XBP1u nor
XBP1s. These results suggest that MANF can prevent the neuron loss via inhibiting
ischemia-induced apoptosis and regulating unfolded protein response-related
genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25001514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Front Microbiol. 2014 Jun 18;5:292. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00292. eCollection
2014.

Can't RIDD off viruses.

Bhattacharyya S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Research Centre, Translational Health Science
and Technology Institute Gurgaon, India.

The mammalian genome has evolved to encode a battery of mechanisms, to mitigate a
progression in the life cycle of an invasive viral pathogen. Although apparently 
disadvantaged by their dependence on the host biosynthetic processes, an
immensely faster rate of evolution provides viruses with an edge in this
conflict. In this review, I have discussed the potential anti-virus activity of
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), a well characterized effector of the cellular
homeostatic response to an overloading of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
protein-folding capacity. IRE1, an ER-membrane-resident ribonuclease (RNase),
upon activation catalyses regulated cleavage of select protein-coding and
non-coding host RNAs, using an RNase domain which is homologous to that of the
known anti-viral effector RNaseL. The latter operates as part of the
Oligoadenylate synthetase OAS/RNaseL system of anti-viral defense mechanism.
Protein-coding RNA substrates are differentially treated by the IRE1 RNase to
either augment, through cytoplasmic splicing of an intron in the Xbp1 transcript,
or suppress gene expression. This referred suppression of gene expression is
mediated through degradative cleavage of a select cohort of cellular RNA
transcripts, initiating the regulated IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD) pathway. The
review first discusses the anti-viral mechanism of the OAS/RNaseL system and
evasion tactics employed by different viruses. This is followed by a review of
the RIDD pathway and its potential effect on the stability of viral RNAs. I
conclude with a comparison of the enzymatic activity of the two RNases followed
by deliberations on the physiological consequences of their activation.

PMCID: PMC4061530
PMID: 24995003  [PubMed]


272. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 3;9(7):e100864. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100864. eCollection
2014.

Novel bioinformatics method for identification of genome-wide non-canonical
spliced regions using RNA-Seq data.

Bai Y(1), Hassler J(2), Ziyar A(2), Li P(2), Wright Z(3), Menon R(3), Omenn
GS(4), Cavalcoli JD(3), Kaufman RJ(2), Sartor MA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, and Center for
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America; Morgridge Institute for Research, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.
(2)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United
States of America. (3)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
and Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (4)Department of Computational
Medicine and Bioinformatics, and Center for Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America; Departments of Internal Medicine and Human Genetics, and School of
Public Health, University of Michigan, United States of America; Institute for
Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (5)Department of 
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, and Center for Computational Medicine 
and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America; Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, United States of America.

SETTING: During endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, the endoribonuclease (RNase)
Ire1a initiates removal of a 26 nt region from the mRNA encoding the
transcription factor Xbp1 via an unconventional mechanism (atypically within the 
cytosol). This causes an open reading frame-shift that leads to altered
transcriptional regulation of numerous downstream genes in response to ER stress 
as part of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Strikingly, other examples of
targeted, unconventional splicing of short mRNA regions have yet to be reported.
OBJECTIVE: Our goal was to develop an approach to identify non-canonical,
possibly very short, splicing regions using RNA-Seq data and apply it to ER
stress-induced Ire1a heterozygous and knockout mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF)
cell lines to identify additional Ire1a targets.
RESULTS: We developed a bioinformatics approach called the Read-Split-Walk (RSW) 
pipeline, and evaluated it using two Ire1a heterozygous and two Ire1a-null
samples. The 26 nt non-canonical splice site in Xbp1 was detected as the top hit 
by our RSW pipeline in heterozygous samples but not in the negative control Ire1a
knockout samples. We compared the Xbp1 results from our approach with results
using the alignment program BWA, Bowtie2, STAR, Exonerate and the Unix "grep"
command. We then applied our RSW pipeline to RNA-Seq data from the SKBR3 human
breast cancer cell line. RSW reported a large number of non-canonical spliced
regions for 108 genes in chromosome 17, which were identified by an independent
study.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that our RSW pipeline is a practical approach for
identifying non-canonical splice junction sites on a genome-wide level. We
demonstrate that our pipeline can detect novel splice sites in RNA-Seq data
generated under similar conditions for multiple species, in our case mouse and
human.

PMCID: PMC4084626
PMID: 24991935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(13):2438-44.

Common variants in PERK, JNK, BIP and XBP1 genes are associated with the risk of 
prediabetes or diabetes-related phenotypes in a Chinese population.

Feng N(1), Ma X(2), Wei X(1), Zhang J(1), Dong A(1), Jin M(3), Zhang H(1), Guo
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 
100034, China. Email: mxiaowei@yahoo.com. (3)Department of Endocrinology, General
Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100853, China.

BACKGROUND: Prediabetes is an early stage of ß-cell dysfunction presenting as
insulin resistance. Evidences suggest that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is
involved in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus and prediabetes. In a
Chinese population with prediabetes, we investigated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes of PERK, JNK, XBP1, BIP and CHOP which encode
molecular proteins involved in ER stress pathways.
METHODS: Nine SNPs at the PERK, JNK, XBP1, BIP and CHOP loci were genotyped by
mass spectrometry in 1 448 unrelated individuals. By using a 75 g oral glucose
tolerance test (OGTT), 828 subjects were diagnosed as prediabetes and 620
subjects aged 55 years and over as normal controls based on WHO diagnostic
criteria (1999) for diabetes mellitus.
RESULTS: The allele C of SNP rs867529 at PERK locus was a risk factor for
prediabetes, with the carriers of C allele genotype at a higher risk of
prediabetes compared to non-carriers (OR = 1.279, 95% CI: 1.013-1.614, P = 0.039,
after adjustment for age, sex and body mass index (BMI). The SNPs rs6750998 at
PERK locus was associated with homeostasis model assessments of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR) (P = 0.019), and rs17037621 with BMI (P = 0.044). The allele
G of SNP rs10986663 in BIP gene was associated with a decreased risk of
prediabetes (OR = 0.699, 95% CI: 0.539-0.907, P = 0.007). The SNP rs2076431 in
JNK gene was associated with fasting plasma glucose levels (P = 0.006) and
waist-hip ratios (P = 0.019). The SNP rs2239815 in XBP1 gene was associated with 
2-hour plasma glucose levels after 75 g oral glucose load (P = 0.048) in the
observed population.
CONCLUSION: Common variants at PERK and BIP loci contributed to the risk of
prediabetes, and the genetic variations in JNK and XBP1 genes are associated with
diabetes-related clinical parameters in this Chinese population.

PMID: 24985580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 15;289(33):22942-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.522656. Epub
2014 Jun 30.

The unfolded protein response and the phosphorylations of activating
transcription factor 2 in the trans-activation of il23a promoter produced by
ß-glucans.

Rodríguez M(1), Domingo E(2), Alonso S(2), Frade JG(3), Eiros J(4), Crespo MS(5),
Fernández N(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad de Valladolid, 47005-Valladolid. (2)the Instituto de
Biología y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
47003-Valladolid. (3)the Division of Hematology, Hospital Universitario Rio
Hortega, 47012-Valladolid, and. (4)the Division of Microbiology, Hospital
Universitario Rio Hortega, 47012-Valladolid, Spain. (5)the Instituto de Biología 
y Genética Molecular, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
47003-Valladolid, mscres@ibgm.uva.es.

Current views on the control of IL-23 production focus on the regulation of
il23a, the gene encoding IL-23 p19, by NF-<U+03BA>B in combination with other
transcription factors. C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), X2-Box-binding protein 1 
(XBP1), activator protein 1 (AP1), SMAD, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß),
and cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) have been involved in response
to LPS, but no data are available regarding the mechanism triggered by the fungal
mimic and ß-glucan-containing stimulus zymosan, which produces IL-23 and to a low
extent the related cytokine IL-12 p70. Zymosan induced the mobilization of CHOP
from the nuclear fractions to phagocytic vesicles. Hypha-forming Candida also
induced the nuclear disappearance of CHOP. Assay of transcription factor binding 
to the il23a promoter showed an increase of Thr(P)-71-Thr(P)-69-activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF2) binding in response to zymosan. PKC and
PKA/mitogen- and stress-activated kinase inhibitors down-regulated Thr(P)-71-ATF2
binding to the il23a promoter and il23a mRNA expression. Consistent with the
current concept of complementary phosphorylations on N-terminal Thr-71 and Thr-69
of ATF2 by ERK and p38 MAPK, MEK, and p38 MAPK inhibitors blunted Thr(P)-69-ATF2 
binding. Knockdown of atf2 mRNA with siRNA correlated with inhibition of il23a
mRNA, but it did not affect the expression of il12/23b and il10 mRNA. These data 
indicate the following: (i) zymosan decreases nuclear proapoptotic CHOP, most
likely by promoting its accumulation in phagocytic vesicles; (ii) zymosan-induced
il23a mRNA expression is best explained through coordinated <U+03BA>B- and
ATF2-dependent transcription; and (iii) il23a expression relies on complementary 
phosphorylation of ATF2 on Thr-69 and Thr-71 dependent on PKC and MAPK
activities.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4132795
PMID: 24982422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):5978-91.

A novel copper(I) complex induces ER-stress-mediated apoptosis and sensitizes
B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells to chemotherapeutic agents.

Bortolozzi R(1), Viola G(1), Porcù E(2), Consolaro F(2), Marzano C(3), Pellei
M(4), Gandin V(3), Basso G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Oncohematology Laboratory,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. These authors contributed equally to this
work. (2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Oncohematology Laboratory, 
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Department of Pharmaceutical and
Pharmacological Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (4)School of
Science and Technology-Chemistry Division, Università di Camerino, Camerino,
Macerata, Italy.

A phosphine copper(I) complex [Cu(thp)4][PF6] (CP) was recently identified as an 
efficient in vitro antitumor agent. In this study, we evaluated the
antiproliferative activity of CP in leukemia cell lines finding a significant
efficacy, especially against SEM and RS4;11 cells. Immunoblot analysis showed the
activation of caspase-12 and caspase-9 and of the two effector caspase-3 and -7, 
suggesting that cell death occurred in a caspase-dependent manner. Interestingly 
we did not observe mitochondrial involvement in the process of cell death.
Measures on semipurified proteasome from RS4;11 and SEM cell extracts
demonstrated that chymotrypsin-, trypsin- and caspase-like activity decreased in 
the presence of CP. Moreover, we found an accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins 
and a remarkable increase of ER stress markers: GRP78, CHOP, and the spliced form
of XBP1. Accordingly, the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide significantly
protected cancer cells from CP-induced cell death, suggesting that protein
synthesis machinery was involved. In well agreement with results obtained on
stabilized cell lines, CP induced ER-stress and apoptosis also in primary cells
from B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients. Importantly, we showed that the
combination of CP with some chemotherapeutic drugs displayed a good synergy that 
strongly affected the survival of both RS4;11 and SEM cells.

PMCID: PMC4171606
PMID: 24980813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 25;450(2):1005-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.091. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Chemical chaperones reduce ionizing radiation-induced endoplasmic reticulum
stress and cell death in IEC-6 cells.

Lee ES(1), Lee HJ(1), Lee YJ(1), Jeong JH(2), Kang S(3), Lim YB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Radiotherapy, Korea
Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea.
(3)Division of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.
(4)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
yblim@kirams.re.kr.

Radiotherapy, which is one of the most effective approaches to the treatment of
various cancers, plays an important role in malignant cell eradication in the
pelvic area and abdomen. However, it also generates some degree of intestinal
injury. Apoptosis in the intestinal epithelium is the primary pathological factor
that initiates radiation-induced intestinal injury, but the mechanism by which
ionizing radiation (IR) induces apoptosis in the intestinal epithelium is not
clearly understood. Recently, IR has been shown to induce endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress, thereby activating the unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling
pathway in intestinal epithelial cells. However, the consequences of the
IR-induced activation of the UPR signaling pathway on radiosensitivity in
intestinal epithelial cells remain to be determined. In this study, we
investigated the role of ER stress responses in IR-induced intestinal epithelial 
cell death. We show that chemical ER stress inducers, such as tunicamycin or
thapsigargin, enhanced IR-induced caspase 3 activation and DNA fragmentation in
intestinal epithelial cells. Knockdown of Xbp1 or Atf6 with small interfering RNA
inhibited IR-induced caspase 3 activation. Treatment with chemical chaperones
prevented ER stress and subsequent apoptosis in IR-exposed intestinal epithelial 
cells. Our results suggest a pro-apoptotic role of ER stress in IR-exposed
intestinal epithelial cells. Furthermore, inhibiting ER stress may be an
effective strategy to prevent IR-induced intestinal injury.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24973711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Neurochem Res. 2014 Sep;39(9):1741-52. doi: 10.1007/s11064-014-1369-0. Epub 2014 
Jun 25.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is involved in the neuroprotective effect of
propofol.

Wang L(1), Tang W, Jiang T, Lu P, Li Y, Sun A, Shen Y, Chen Y, Wang H, Zong Z,
Wang Y, Chen L, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.

Propofol is a common clinically used intravenous anaesthetic agent with
antioxidative property. It has been thought to have neuroprotection in vitro and 
in vivo. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress plays an important role in regulating the signaling pathways
concerning cell death and survival. Therefore, we wondered whether the
neuroprotective effects of propofol are associated with its regulation on ER
stress. In this study, we found that propofol up-regulated BiP and attenuated
tunicamycin-induced neural cell death. Propofol pretreatment also inhibited
tunicamycin-induced up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). We also
found that propofol or tunicamycin alone increased the levels of spliced XBP1
(XBP1s) and cleaved activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), an active form of
ATF6. However, pretreatment with propofol attenuated the levels of phosphorylated
protein kinase receptor-like ER kinase, phosphorylated elF2a, ATF4, and
caspase-3, but failed to affect the increase of cleaved ATF6 and XBP1s, induced
by tunicamycin. Knockdown endogenous BiP with siRNA abolished the suppression of 
propofol on tunicamycin-mediated activation of CHOP and caspase-3. Meanwhile,
knockdown BiP attenuated the protective effects of propofol on the neural cells
exposed to tunicamycin. These data suggest that ER stress is involved in the
neuroprotection of propofol via differentially regulating the unfolded protein
response pathway, in which BiP plays an important role in initiating the adaptive
ER stress and inhibiting the apoptotic ER stress.

PMID: 24962313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dig Liver Dis. 2014 Sep;46(9):788-94. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2014.05.013. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response are involved in
paediatric inflammatory bowel disease.

Negroni A(1), Prete E(2), Vitali R(2), Cesi V(2), Aloi M(3), Civitelli F(3),
Cucchiara S(3), Stronati L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiobiology and Human Health, ENEA, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: anna.negroni@enea.it. (2)Department of Radiobiology and Human Health,
ENEA, Rome, Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics and Infantile Neuropsychiatry,
Paediatric Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response have been 
recently associated with the development of inflammatory bowel diseases in
adults. We aimed at assessing the involvement of these pathways also in
paediatric inflammatory bowel disease by analysing the expression of the main
genes involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress and correlating them with the
degree of intestinal inflammation.
METHODS: Real-time PCR and Western blot analysis of the expression of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress marker HSPA5 and of selected genes representing the 
three pathways of unfolded protein response (IRE-XBP1, PERK-ATF4, ATF6p90-p50) in
inflamed and uninflamed biopsies from 28 inflammatory bowel disease paediatric
patients and 10 controls.
RESULTS: HSPA5, PDIA4, as well as unspliced and spliced XBP1 mRNAs were
significantly increased in patients' inflamed colonic mucosa compared to
uninflamed mucosa and controls. HSPA5, PDIA4, ATF6, and phospho-IRE proteins were
also upregulated, indicating the activation of the IRE-XBP1 and ATF6p90-p50
branches of unfolded protein response. A positive significant correlation between
interleukin-8 levels, as a marker of inflammation, and upregulated genes was
found in the inflamed colonic mucosa.
CONCLUSION: A deregulation of the genes involved in the endoplasmic reticulum
stress and unfolded protein response pathways may be a key component of the
inflammatory response in paediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2014 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Pharmacol Res. 2014 Sep;87:26-41. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.06.003. Epub 2014 Jun 
18.

Protection afforded by pre- or post-treatment with 4-phenylbutyrate against liver
injury induced by acetaminophen overdose in mice.

Shimizu D(1), Ishitsuka Y(2), Miyata K(3), Tomishima Y(1), Kondo Y(1), Irikura
M(4), Iwawaki T(5), Oike Y(3), Irie T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Informatics, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 
862-0973, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Informatics, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku,
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan. Electronic address: y-zuka@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Evidence-Based Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Daiichi University, 22-1 Tamagawa-Cho, Minami-Ku, Fukuoka 815-8511,
Japan. (5)Iwawaki Lab, Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit,
Gunma University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Informatics, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 
862-0973, Japan; Center for Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto 
862-0973, Japan.

Erratum in
    Pharmacol Res. 2014 Nov;89:57-8.

Acetaminophen (paracetamol, N-acetyl-p-aminophenol; APAP) is a widely used
analgesic/antipyretic drug with few adverse effects at therapeutic doses;
suicidal or unintentional overdose of APAP frequently induces severe
hepatotoxicity. To explore a new and effective antidote for APAP hepatotoxicity, 
this study examined the effects of sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) on liver
injury induced by APAP overdose in mice. Liver injury was induced in C57BL/6 male
mice by intraperitoneal injection of APAP (400mg/kg). The effects of 4-PBA
(100-200mg/kg) treatment at 1h before the APAP injection were evaluated with
serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and blood ammonia levels, hepatic
pathological changes, including histopathology, DNA damage, nitrotyrosine
formation, and mRNA or protein expression involved in the development of
hepatotoxicity, such as X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and B-cell lymphoma 2 interacting mediator
of cell death (Bim). In addition, glutathione depletion and CYP2E1 protein
expression, which are measures of the metabolic conversion of APAP to a toxic
metabolite, were examined. Furthermore, we examined the effects of post-treatment
with 4-PBA against APAP-induced hepatotoxicity in mice. When administered at 1h
before APAP injection, 4-PBA significantly prevented the increase in serum ALT
and blood ammonia levels, centrilobular necrosis of hepatocytes, DNA
fragmentation, and nitrotyrosine formation induced by APAP in mice. 4-PBA also
inhibited hepatic Xbp1 mRNA splicing and JNK phosphorylation induced by APAP, but
did not suppress CHOP and Bim mRNA and protein expression. In addition, 4-PBA had
little effect on hepatic glutathione depletion and CYP2E1 expression, parameters 
of toxic APAP metabolite production. Post-treatment with 4-PBA administration at 
1 or 2h after APAP injection also attenuated the increase in serum ALT and blood 
ammonia levels and hepatic pathological changes in APAP-induced hepatotoxicity in
mice. Although post-treatment with 4-PBA did not show any effects on hepatic Xbp1
mRNA splicing and JNK phosphorylation, it drastically attenuated the DNA
fragmentation induced by APAP. The precise molecular mechanisms of the protection
afforded by 4-PBA against APAP hepatotoxicity in mice are unclear, but they seem 
to involve inhibition of hepatocellular DNA fragmentation. We suggest that 4-PBA 
is a promising candidate as an antidote against APAP-induced liver injury.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24951965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 25;588(17):3062-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.05.065. Epub
2014 Jun 16.

Polynomial algebra reveals diverging roles of the unfolded protein response in
endothelial cells during ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Le Pape S(1), Dimitrova E(2), Hannaert P(3), Konovalov A(4), Volmer R(5), Ron
D(5), Thuillier R(3), Hauet T(3).

Author information: 
(1)IRTOMIT, INSERM UMR 1082, Université de Médecine et de Pharmacie de Poitiers, 
Rue de la Milétrie, 86021 Poitiers, France. Electronic address:
sylvain.le.pape@univ-poitiers.fr. (2)Mathematical Sciences, Clemson University,
Martin O-303, Clemson, SC 29634-0975, United States. (3)IRTOMIT, INSERM UMR 1082,
Université de Médecine et de Pharmacie de Poitiers, Rue de la Milétrie, 86021
Poitiers, France. (4)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Computational
Algebra, School of Computer Science, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife
KY16 9SX, Scotland, United Kingdom. (5)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research
Laboratories and National Institute for Health Research, Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, CB2 0QQ Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The unfolded protein response (UPR)--the endoplasmic reticulum stress
response--is found in various pathologies including ischemia-reperfusion injury
(IRI). However, its role during IRI is still unclear. Here, by combining two
different bioinformatical methods--a method based on ordinary differential
equations (Time Series Network Inference) and an algebraic method (probabilistic 
polynomial dynamical systems)--we identified the IRE1a-XBP1 and the ATF6 pathways
as the main UPR effectors involved in cell's adaptation to IRI. We validated
these findings experimentally by assessing the impact of their knock-out and
knock-down on cell survival during IRI.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24945730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. An Bras Dermatol. 2014 May-Jun;89(3):461-70.

Vitiligo--part 1.

Tarlé RG(1), Nascimento LM(1), Mira MT(1), Castro CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

Vitiligo is a chronic stigmatizing disease, already known for millennia, which
mainly affects melanocytes from epidermis basal layer, leading to the development
of hypochromic and achromic patches. Its estimated prevalence is 0.5% worldwide. 
The involvement of genetic factors controlling susceptibility to vitiligo has
been studied over the last decades, and results of previous studies present
vitiligo as a complex, multifactorial and polygenic disease. In this context, a
few genes, including DDR1, XBP1 and NLRP1 have been consistently and functionally
associated with the disease. Notwithstanding, environmental factors that
precipitate or maintain the disease are yet to be described. The pathogenesis of 
vitiligo has not been totally clarified until now and many theories have been
proposed. Of these, the autoimmune hypothesis is now the most cited and studied
among experts. Dysfunction in metabolic pathways, which could lead to production 
of toxic metabolites causing damage to melanocytes, has also been investigated.
Melanocytes adhesion deficit in patients with vitiligo is mainly speculated by
the appearance of Köebner phenomenon, recently, new genes and proteins involved
in this deficit have been found.

PMCID: PMC4056705
PMID: 24937821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Leukemia. 2015 Jan;29(1):218-29. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.159. Epub 2014 May 14.

A multiepitope of XBP1, CD138 and CS1 peptides induces myeloma-specific cytotoxic
T lymphocytes in T cells of smoldering myeloma patients.

Bae J(1), Prabhala R(2), Voskertchian A(3), Brown A(1), Maguire C(4), Richardson 
P(1), Dranoff G(1), Anderson KC(1), Munshi NC(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)1] Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2] Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA [3] VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

We evaluated a cocktail of HLA-A2-specific peptides including heteroclitic XBP1
US184-192 (YISPWILAV), heteroclitic XBP1 SP367-375 (YLFPQLISV), native
CD138260-268 (GLVGLIFAV) and native CS1239-247 (SLFVLGLFL), for their ability to 
elicit multipeptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (MP-CTLs) using T cells from
smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM) patients. Our results demonstrate that MP-CTLs 
generated from SMM patients' T cells show effective anti-MM responses including
CD137 (4-1BB) upregulation, CTL proliferation, interferon-<U+03B3> production and
degranulation (CD107a) in an HLA-A2-restricted and peptide-specific manner.
Phenotypically, we observed increased total CD3(+)CD8(+) T cells (>80%) and
cellular activation (CD69(+)) within the memory SMM MP-CTL
(CD45RO(+)/CD3(+)CD8(+)) subset after repeated multipeptide stimulation.
Importantly, SMM patients could be categorized into distinct groups by their
level of MP-CTL expansion and antitumor activity. In high responders, the
effector memory (CCR7(-)CD45RO(+)/CD3(+)CD8(+)) T-cell subset was enriched,
whereas the remaining responders' CTL contained a higher frequency of the
terminal effector (CCR7(-)CD45RO(-)/CD3(+)CD8(+)) subset. These results suggest
that this multipeptide cocktail has the potential to induce effective and durable
memory MP-CTL in SMM patients. Therefore, our findings provide the rationale for 
clinical evaluation of a therapeutic vaccine to prevent or delay progression of
SMM to active disease.

PMCID: PMC4237716
PMID: 24935722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Sci Signal. 2014 Jun 10;7(329):ra54. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004983.

Interplay between the oxidoreductase PDIA6 and microRNA-322 controls the response
to disrupted endoplasmic reticulum calcium homeostasis.

Groenendyk J(1), Peng Z(2), Dudek E(1), Fan X(2), Mizianty MJ(2), Dufey E(3),
Urra H(3), Sepulveda D(3), Rojas-Rivera D(3), Lim Y(4), Kim do H(4), Baretta
K(1), Srikanth S(5), Gwack Y(5), Ahnn J(6), Kaufman RJ(7), Lee SK(6), Hetz C(8), 
Kurgan L(2), Michalak M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S7, 
Canada. (2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2V4, Canada. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. Program of Cellular
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile. (4)College of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and
Technology (GIST), Gwangju 500-712, Korea. (5)Department of Physiology,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (6)Department 
of Life Science, BK21 PLUS Life Science for BDR team, The Research Institute of
Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea. (7)Degenerative
Disease Research Program, Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research,
Cancer Center, Sanford Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA. (8)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Chile, Santiago, Chile. Program of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. Neurounion Biomedical 
Foundation, Santiago, Chile. (9)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S7, Canada. marek.michalak@ualberta.ca.

The disruption of the energy or nutrient balance triggers endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress, a process that mobilizes various strategies, collectively called the
unfolded protein response (UPR), which reestablish homeostasis of the ER and
cell. Activation of the UPR stress sensor IRE1a (inositol-requiring enzyme 1a)
stimulates its endoribonuclease activity, leading to the generation of the mRNA
encoding the transcription factor XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1), which regulates
the transcription of genes encoding factors involved in controlling the quality
and folding of proteins. We found that the activity of IRE1a was regulated by the
ER oxidoreductase PDIA6 (protein disulfide isomerase A6) and the microRNA miR-322
in response to disruption of ER Ca2+ homeostasis. PDIA6 interacted with IRE1a and
enhanced IRE1a activity as monitored by phosphorylation of IRE1a and XBP1 mRNA
splicing, but PDIA6 did not substantially affect the activity of other pathways
that mediate responses to ER stress. ER Ca2+ depletion and activation of
store-operated Ca2+ entry reduced the abundance of the microRNA miR-322, which
increased PDIA6 mRNA stability and, consequently, IRE1a activity during the ER
stress response. In vivo experiments with mice and worms showed that the
induction of ER stress correlated with decreased miR-322 abundance, increased
PDIA6 mRNA abundance, or both. Together, these findings demonstrated that ER
Ca2+, PDIA6, IRE1a, and miR-322 function in a dynamic feedback loop modulating
the UPR under conditions of disrupted ER Ca2+ homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 24917591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Front Microbiol. 2014 May 16;5:222. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00222. eCollection
2014.

A new paradigm: innate immune sensing of viruses via the unfolded protein
response.

Smith JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and
Public Health Madison, WI, USA.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM DEPENDS UPON COMBINATIONS OF SIGNALS TO MOUNT APPROPRIATE
RESPONSES: pathogen specific signals in the context of co-stimulatory "danger"
signals drive immune strength and accuracy. Viral infections trigger anti-viral
type I interferon (IFN) responses by stimulating endosomal and cytosolic pattern 
recognition receptors (PRRs). However, viruses have also evolved many strategies 
to counteract IFN responses. Are there intracellular danger signals that enhance 
immune responses to viruses? During infection, viruses place a heavy demand on
the protein folding machinery of the host endoplasmic reticulum (ER). To survive 
ER stress, host cells mount an unfolded protein response (UPR) to decrease ER
protein load and enhance protein-folding capacity. Viruses also directly elicit
the UPR to enhance their replication. Increasing evidence supports an
intersection between the host UPR and inflammation, in particular the production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFN. The UPR directly activates
pro-inflammatory cytokine transcription factors and dramatically enhances
cytokine production in response to viral PRR engagement. Additionally, viral PRR 
engagement may stimulate specific pathways within the UPR to enhance cytokine
production. Through these mechanisms, viral detection via the UPR and
inflammatory cytokine production are intertwined. Consequently, the UPR response 
is perfectly poised to act as an infection-triggered "danger" signal. The UPR may
serve as an internal "co-stimulatory" signal that (1) provides specificity and
(2) critically augments responses to overcome viral subterfuge. Further work is
needed to test this hypothesis during viral infections.

PMCID: PMC4032990
PMID: 24904537  [PubMed]


285. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2014 Sep;28(9):413-7. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21579. Epub 2014
May 30.

Assessment of ER Stress and autophagy induced by ionizing radiation in both
radiotherapy patients and ex vivo irradiated samples.

Saglar E(1), Unlu S, Babalioglu I, Gokce SC, Mergen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Beytepe,
Ankara, Turkey. esaglar@hacettepe.edu.tr.

Acute radiation leads to several toxic clinical states and triggers some
molecular pathways. To shed light on molecular mechanisms triggered by ionizing
radiation (IR), we examined the expression profiles of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and autophagy-related genes in individuals who were exposed to IR. Blood
samples were collected from 50 cancer patients before radiotherapy and on the
5th, 15th, and 25th days of the treatment. Peripheral blood samples from 10
healthy volunteers were also obtained for ex vivo irradiation, divided into five 
and irradiated at a rate of 373 kGy/h to 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 3Gy <U+03B3>-rays using a
constant gamma source. GRP78, ATG5, LC3, ATF4, XBP1, and GADD153 genes were
analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR) using beta
2 microglobulin (B2M) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as
references. In both groups, expressions of the selected genes have increased. It 
can be concluded that IR induces ER stress and related authophagy pathway in the 
peripheral lymphocyte cells proportionally by dose.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24888459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Br J Nutr. 2014 Aug 28;112(4):573-82. doi: 10.1017/S0007114514001093. Epub 2014
May 28.

Postprandial inflammation is not associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy lean men.

Kracmerová J(1), Czudková E(1), Koc M(1), Maliová L(1), iklová M(1), tich
V(1), Rossmeislová L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport Medicine,Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague, Ruská 87,100 00,Prague 10,Czech Republic.

The consumption of lipids and simple sugars induces an inflammatory response
whose exact molecular trigger remains elusive. The aims of the present study were
to investigate (1) whether inflammation induced by a single high-energy, high-fat
meal (HFM) is associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and (2) whether these inflammatory and ERS
responses could be prevented by the chemical chaperone ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA). A total of ten healthy lean men were recruited to a randomised, blind,
cross-over trial. Subjects were given two doses of placebo (lactose) or UDCA
before the consumption of a HFM (6151 kJ; 47·4 % lipids). Blood was collected at 
baseline and 4 h after the HFM challenge. Cell populations and their activation
were analysed using flow cytometry, and plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines
were assessed by ELISA and Luminex technology. Gene expression levels of
inflammatory and ERS markers were analysed in CD14<U+207A> and CD14<U+207B> PBMC using
quantitative RT-PCR. The HFM induced an increase in the mRNA expression levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1ß, 2·1-fold; IL-8, 2·4-fold; TNF-a, 1·4-fold;
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, 2·1-fold) and a decrease in the expression
levels of miR181 (0·8-fold) in CD14<U+207A> monocytes. The HFM challenge did not
up-regulate the expression of ERS markers (XBP1, HSPA5, EDEM1, DNAJC3 and ATF4)
in either CD14<U+207A> or CD14<U+207B> cell populations, except for ATF3 (2·3-fold). The
administration of UDCA before the consumption of the HFM did not alter the
HFM-induced change in the expression levels of ERS or inflammatory markers. In
conclusion, HFM-induced inflammation detectable on the level of gene expression
in PBMC was not associated with the concomitant increase in the expression levels
of ERS markers and could not be prevented by UDCA.

PMID: 24870697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jul;59(7):1461-74. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3217-0. Epub 2014
May 28.

Tauroursodeoxycholic acid attenuates progression of steatohepatitis in mice fed a
methionine-choline-deficient diet.

Cho EJ(1), Yoon JH, Kwak MS, Jang ES, Lee JH, Yu SJ, Kim YJ, Kim CY, Lee HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in the 
development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. A methionine-choline-deficient (MCD)
diet induces robust ER stress response and steatohepatitis, but the effects of ER
stress modulation on the course of steatohepatitis remain uncertain. The present 
study evaluated whether reducing ER stress using the chemical chaperone
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) could limit hepatocyte lipoapoptosis and
progression of MCD diet-induced steatohepatitis.
METHODS: HuH7 cells stably transfected with sodium taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (HuH-Ntcp cells) and palmitate (PA) were used. Experimental
steatohepatitis was induced in male C57BL/6 mice using an MCD diet, and three
different doses of TUDCA (500, or 1,000 mg/kg, once daily; or 500 mg/kg twice
daily) were administered by gavage from the start of the MCD diet regimen or
after 4 weeks.
RESULTS: TUDCA reduced PA-induced ER stress as manifested by decreased eIF2a
phosphorylation, XBP1 splicing and expression of BiP, ATF4, and CHOP in HuH-Ntcp 
cells. TUDCA also decreased PA-induced JNK phosphorylation, Puma up-regulation
and Bax activation, which in turn suppressed caspase-dependent hepatocyte
lipoapoptosis. Mice given TUDCA did not show a significant decrease in the
intrahepatic triglyceride contents and steatosis. However, TUDCA treatment
significantly reduced hepatic damage compared to controls for both early and late
treatment groups. TUDCA treatment reduced the expression of ER stress markers and
pro-apoptotic proteins, leading to decreased apoptosis and oxidative stress.
Finally, TUDCA reduced histological fibrosis along with the down-regulation of
pro-fibrotic gene expression in both early and late treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that TUDCA attenuates the progression of MCD
diet-induced steatohepatitis by reducing ER stress.

PMID: 24865256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1240. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.203.

HKH40A downregulates GRP78/BiP expression in cancer cells.

Kosakowska-Cholody T(1), Lin J(1), Srideshikan SM(1), Scheffer L(1), Tarasova
NI(2), Acharya JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, National Cancer Institute at
Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA. (2)Cancer and Inflammation Program, National
Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD, USA.

HKH40A, the 8-methoxy analog of WMC79, is a synthetic agent with promising in
vitro and in vivo antitumor activity, especially against solid tumors. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying its antitumor effects are poorly understood.
Here, we report that HKH40A markedly reduces the level of GRP78/BiP protein in
cancer cell lines of various origin. In this study, we show that HKH40A not only 
downregulates transcription of GRP78 but also directly binds to the isolated
protein and induces its proteosomal degradation. Knockdown of BiP increased the
efficacy of the drug and overexpression of BiP diminished its activity. BiP is
generally highly elevated in solid tumors having a pivotal role in cancer cell
survival and chemoresistance, and has been suggested as a novel target for
therapeutic intervention. We show that reduction of BiP level by HKH40A impairs
its function and induces unfolded protein response as evidenced by the activation
of IRE1a, ATF6 and PERK. This leads to a series of downstream events, including
sustained eIF2a phosphorylation, increased abundance of spliced XBP1 mRNA and
protein levels of ATF4 and CHOP. We also demonstrate that HKH40A inhibited tumor 
formation in an in vivo xenograft tumor model. Collectively, our data show that
HKH40A reduces BiP levels and this could have an important role in the activity
of HKH40A against cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4047900
PMID: 24853418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cell Metab. 2014 Jul 1;20(1):73-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.04.006. Epub 2014
May 15.

BRD7 regulates XBP1s' activity and glucose homeostasis through its interaction
with the regulatory subunits of PI3K.

Park SW(1), Herrema H(2), Salazar M(2), Cakir I(2), Cabi S(2), Basibuyuk Sahin
F(2), Chiu YH(3), Cantley LC(4), Ozcan U(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: sangwon.park@childrens.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of System Biology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Signal Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Department of System Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Division of Signal Transduction, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City, NY 10065, USA. (5)Division of
Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: umut.ozcan@childrens.harvard.edu.

Erratum in
    Cell Metab. 2014 Dec 2;20(6):1088.

Bromodomain-containing protein 7 (BRD7) is a member of the bromodomain-containing
protein family that is known to play a role as tumor suppressors. Here, we show
that BRD7 is a component of the unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling through
its ability to regulate X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) nuclear translocation.
BRD7 interacts with the regulatory subunits of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) and increases the nuclear translocation of both p85a and p85ß and the
spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s). Deficiency of BRD7 blocks the nuclear translocation
of XBP1s. Furthermore, our in vivo studies have shown that BRD7 protein levels
are reduced in the liver of obese mice, and reinstating BRD7 levels in the liver 
restores XBP1s nuclear translocation, improves glucose homeostasis, and
ultimately reduces the blood glucose levels in the obese and diabetic mouse
models.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4079724
PMID: 24836559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 27;111(21):E2219-28. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400958111. Epub 2014 May 12.

Mechanistic rationale for targeting the unfolded protein response in pre-B acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Kharabi Masouleh B(1), Geng H(2), Hurtz C(2), Chan LN(2), Logan AC(3), Chang
MS(4), Huang C(5), Swaminathan S(2), Sun H(6), Paietta E(7), Melnick AM(5),
Koeffler P(6), Müschen M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine andDepartment of Oncology, Hematology and
Stem Cell Transplantation, Rheinisch-Westfaelische Technische Hochschule Aachen
University Medical School, 52070 Aachen, Germany; (2)Department of Laboratory
Medicine and. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143; (4)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027;
(5)Departments of Medicine andPharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY 10065; (6)Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048; and.
(7)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10466. 
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and markus.muschen@ucsf.edu.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway, a stress-induced signaling cascade
emanating from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), regulates the expression and
activity of molecules including BiP (HSPA5), IRE1 (ERN1), Blimp-1 (PRDM1), and
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). These molecules are required for terminal
differentiation of B cells into plasma cells and expressed at high levels in
plasma cell-derived multiple myeloma. Although these molecules have no known role
at early stages of B-cell development, here we show that their expression
transiently peaks at the pre-B-cell receptor checkpoint. Inducible, Cre-mediated 
deletion of Hspa5, Prdm1, and Xbp1 consistently induces cellular stress and cell 
death in normal pre-B cells and in pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 
driven by BCR-ABL1- and NRAS(G12D) oncogenes. Mechanistically, expression and
activity of the UPR downstream effector XBP1 is regulated positively by STAT5 and
negatively by the B-cell-specific transcriptional repressors BACH2 and BCL6. In
two clinical trials for children and adults with ALL, high XBP1 mRNA levels at
the time of diagnosis predicted poor outcome. A small molecule inhibitor of
ERN1-mediated XBP1 activation induced selective cell death of patient-derived
pre-B ALL cells in vitro and significantly prolonged survival of transplant
recipient mice in vivo. Collectively, these studies reveal that pre-B ALL cells
are uniquely vulnerable to ER stress and identify the UPR pathway and its
downstream effector XBP1 as novel therapeutic targets to overcome drug resistance
in pre-B ALL.

PMCID: PMC4040579
PMID: 24821775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Br J Haematol. 2014 Sep;166(5):677-89. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12936. Epub 2014 May 7.

Transcriptional repression of plasma cell differentiation is orchestrated by
aberrant over-expression of the ETS factor SPIB in Waldenström
macroglobulinaemia.

Zhou Y(1), Liu X, Xu L, Hunter ZR, Cao Y, Yang G, Carrasco R, Treon SP.

Author information: 
(1)Bing Center for Waldenström's Macroglobulinemia, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Departments of Medicine and
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

In Waldenström macroglobulinaemia (WM), the mechanism(s) responsible for
repression of B-cell differentiation remains unknown. We found that expression of
SPIB and ID2 were significantly increased and decreased, respectively, in WM
lymphoplasmacytic cells (LPC). Ectopic expression of SPIB in healthy donor
CD19(+) cells inhibited plasmacytic differentiation in conjunction with decreased
transcription of IRF4 and XBP1 spliced form. In primary WM LPC, knock-down of
SPIB induced plasmacytic differentiation in conjunction with increased
transcription of PRDM1, XBP1 spliced form, IRF4 and ID2. Knock-down of SPIB also 
led to decreased BCL2 expression. Given that SPIB is a direct target of POU2AF1
(OBF1) in complex with POU2F2 or POU2F1, we next examined their expression in WM 
LPC. POU2F2 transcription, as well as POU2F2 and POU2AF1 protein expression was
higher in WM LPC. Ectopic expression of POU2F2 in healthy donor CD19(+) cells
induced transcription of SPIB and suppressed transcription of PRDM1 and IRF4.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis in BCWM.1 WM cells confirmed binding of
POU2F2 and POU2AF1 in SPIB and ID2 promoters. These findings establish a
molecular hierarchy among POU2F2, SPIB and ID2 during B-cell differentiation, and
suggest that aberrant expression of these transcription factors plays an
important role in arresting plasmacytic differentiation in WM.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24801987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cell Res. 2014 Sep;24(9):1137-40. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.55. Epub 2014 May 6.

The IRE1a-XBP1 pathway regulates metabolic stress-induced compensatory
proliferation of pancreatic ß-cells.

Xu T(1), Yang L(2), Yan C(2), Wang X(2), Huang P(2), Zhao F(2), Zhao L(3), Zhang 
M(4), Jia W(4), Wang X(1), Liu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Shandong University School of Medicine, 44 Wenhua 
Road West, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and
Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)1]
Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China [2] China Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research,
Shanghai 201203, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. 
(5)1] Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China [2] School of Life Science and Technology,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China [3] University of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

PMCID: PMC4152740
PMID: 24797433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Front Genet. 2014 Apr 16;5:76. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00076. eCollection 2014.

Physiological roles of regulated Ire1 dependent decay.

Coelho DS(1), Domingos PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Oeiras, Portugal.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (Ire1) is an important transducer of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) that is activated by the accumulation of misfolded
proteins in the endoplamic reticulum (ER stress). Activated Ire1 mediates the
splicing of an intron from the mRNA of Xbp1, causing a frame-shift during
translation and introducing a new carboxyl domain in the Xbp1 protein, which only
then becomes a fully functional transcription factor. Studies using cell culture 
systems demonstrated that Ire1 also promotes the degradation of mRNAs encoding
mostly ER-targeted proteins, to reduce the load of incoming ER "client" proteins 
during ER stress. This process was called RIDD (regulated Ire1-dependent decay), 
but its physiological significance remained poorly characterized beyond cell
culture systems. Here we review several recent studies that have highlighted the 
physiological roles of RIDD in specific biological paradigms, such as
photoreceptor differentiation in Drosophila or mammalian liver and endocrine
pancreas function. These studies demonstrate the importance of RIDD in tissues
undergoing intense secretory function and highlight the physiologic role of RIDD 
during UPR activation in cells and organisms.

PMCID: PMC3997004
PMID: 24795742  [PubMed]


294. Gut. 2015 Feb;64(2):195-202. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306347. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

ER stress induces epithelial differentiation in the mouse oesophagus.

Rosekrans SL(1), Heijmans J(1), Büller NV(1), Westerlund J(1), Lee AS(2), Muncan 
V(1), van den Brink GR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research and Department of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) leads to activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Xbp1, a key component of the UPR has recently
been linked to the risk of developing oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma,
suggesting an important role for the UPR in the oesophageal epithelium. Here we
examined the role of ER stress and the UPR in oesophageal epithelial
homoeostasis.
DESIGN: We examined the expression of components of the UPR in the oesophageal
epithelium. We used a pharmacological approach and a genetic approach to examine 
the effects of ER stress in vivo in the mouse oesophagus. The oesophagus of these
mice was examined using immunohistochemistry and real-time reverse transcription 
(RT)-PCR.
RESULTS: Components of the UPR were heterogeneously expressed in the basal layer 
of the epithelium. Induction of ER stress by 24-h treatment with thapsigargin
resulted in depletion of proliferating cells in the basal layer of the oesophagus
and induced differentiation. We next activated the UPR by inducible deletion of
the major ER chaperone Grp78 in Ah1Cre-Rosa26-LacZ-Grp78(-/-) mice in which
mutant cells could be traced by expression of LacZ. In these mice LacZ-positive
mutant cells in the basal layer lost their proliferative capacity, migrated
towards the oesophageal lumen and were replaced by LacZ-negative non-mutant
cells. We observed no apoptosis in mutant cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that ER stress induces epithelial differentiation
in precursor cells in the oesophageal epithelium. This UPR induced
differentiation may serve as a quality control mechanism that protects against
oesophageal cancer development.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24789843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Aug;21(8):1313-24. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.53. Epub 2014
May 2.

JunB protects ß-cells from lipotoxicity via the XBP1-AKT pathway.

Cunha DA(1), Gurzov EN(1), Naamane N(1), Ortis F(1), Cardozo AK(1), Bugliani
M(2), Marchetti P(2), Eizirik DL(1), Cnop M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine and ULB Center of Diabetes Research,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Department of Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)1] Laboratory of Experimental
Medicine and ULB Center of Diabetes Research, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium [2] Division of Endocrinology, Erasmus Hospital, Université
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Diets rich in saturated fats may contribute to the loss of pancreatic ß-cells in 
type 2 diabetes. JunB, a member of the activating protein 1 (AP-1) transcription 
factor family, promotes ß-cell survival and mediates part of the beneficial
effects of GLP-1 agonists. In this study we interrogated the molecular mechanisms
involved in JunB-mediated ß-cell protection from lipotoxicity. The saturated
fatty acid palmitate decreased JunB expression, and this loss may contribute to
ß-cell apoptosis, as overexpression of JunB protected cells from lipotoxicity.
Array analysis of JunB-deficient ß-cells identified a gene expression signature
of a downregulated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response and inhibited AKT
signaling. JunB stimulates XBP1 expression via the transcription factor c/EBPd
during ER stress, and forced expression of XBP1s rescued the viability of
JunB-deficient cells, constituting an important antiapoptotic mechanism. JunB
silencing inhibited AKT activation and activated the proapoptotic Bcl-2 protein
BAD via its dephosphorylation. BAD knockdown reversed lipotoxic ß-cell death
potentiated by JunB siRNA. Interestingly, XBP1s links JunB and AKT signaling as
XBP1 knockdown also reduced AKT phosphorylation. GLP-1 agonists induced
cAMP-dependent AKT phosphorylation leading to ß-cell protection against
palmitate-induced apoptosis. JunB and XBP1 knockdown or IRE1 inhibition decreased
AKT activation by cAMP, leading to ß-cell apoptosis. In conclusion, JunB
modulates the ß-cell ER stress response and AKT signaling via the induction of
XBP1s. The activation of the JunB gene network and the crosstalk between the ER
stress and AKT pathway constitute a crucial defense mechanism by which GLP-1
agonists protect against lipotoxic ß-cell death. These findings elucidate novel
ß-cell-protective signal transduction in type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4085537
PMID: 24786832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Oct;127(7):507-18. doi: 10.1042/CS20140026.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress does not contribute to steatohepatitis in obese and 
insulin-resistant high-fat-diet-fed foz/foz mice.

Legry V(1), Van Rooyen DM(2), Lambert B(1), Sempoux C(3), Poekes L(1),
Español-Suñer R(1), Molendi-Coste O(1), Horsmans Y(1), Farrell GC(2), Leclercq
IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et
Clinique, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Liver Research
Group, ANU Medical School at the Canberra Hospital, Garran, ACT, Australia.
(3)Pathology Department, St-Luc University Hospital, Université catholique de
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver (steatosis) and steatohepatitis [non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH)] are hepatic complications of the metabolic syndrome.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is proposed as a crucial disease mechanism in
obese and insulin-resistant animals (such as ob/ob mice) with simple steatosis,
but its role in NASH remains controversial. We therefore evaluated the role of ER
stress as a disease mechanism in foz/foz mice, which develop both the metabolic
and histological features that mimic human NASH. We explored ER stress markers in
the liver of foz/foz mice in response to a high-fat diet (HFD) at several time
points. We then evaluated the effect of treatment with an ER stress inducer
tunicamycin, or conversely with the ER protectant tauroursodeoxycholic acid
(TUDCA), on the metabolic and hepatic features. foz/foz mice are obese, glucose
intolerant and develop NASH characterized by steatosis, inflammation, ballooned
hepatocytes and apoptosis from 6 weeks of HFD feeding. This was not associated
with activation of the upstream unfolded protein response [phospho-eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) activity and
spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (Xbp1)]. Activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) and up-regulation of activating transcription factor-4 (Atf4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (Chop) transcripts were however
compatible with a 'pathological' response to ER stress. We tested this by using
intervention experiments. Induction of chronic ER stress failed to worsen
obesity, glucose intolerance and NASH pathology in HFD-fed foz/foz mice. In
addition, the ER protectant TUDCA, although reducing steatosis, failed to improve
glucose intolerance, hepatic inflammation and apoptosis in HFD-fed foz/foz mice. 
These results show that signals driving hepatic inflammation, apoptosis and
insulin resistance are independent of ER stress in obese diabetic mice with
steatohepatitis.

PMID: 24766485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mod Pathol. 2014 Dec;27(12):1599-611. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.68. Epub 2014
Apr 25.

In vivo intratumoral Epstein-Barr virus replication is associated with XBP1
activation and early-onset post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders with
prognostic implications.

Gonzalez-Farre B(1), Rovira J(2), Martinez D(1), Valera A(1), Garcia-Herrera
A(1), Marcos MA(3), Sole C(4), Roue G(4), Colomer D(5), Gonzalvo E(1),
Ribera-Cortada I(6), Araya M(7), Lloreta J(8), Colomo L(1), Campo E(1),
Lopez-Guillermo A(2), Martinez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain. (2)Hematology Unit, Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain. (3)Department of Microbiology, Barcelona Centre for International Health
Research (CRESIB), Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Experimental Therapy in Lymphpoid Malignancies Group, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomediques Agusti Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, Centre Esther Koplowitz, Barcelona, Spain. (5)1] Department of
Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain [2] Experimental
Therapy in Lymphpoid Malignancies Group, Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques
Agusti Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Centre Esther Koplowitz,
Barcelona, Spain. (6)1] Department of Pathology, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain [2] Department of Pathology, Hospital Nostra Senyora 
de Meritxell, Escaldes-Engordany, Principat d'Andorra, Spain. (7)Department of
Pathology, Hospital San Juan de Dios, San José, Costa Rica. (8)Department of
Pathology, Hospital del Mar, Institut Municipal d'Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM),
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders are life-threatening complications 
following hematopoietic or solid organ transplantation. They represent a spectrum
of mostly EBV-driven lymphoplasmacytic proliferations. While the oncogenic effect
of EBV is related to latent infection, lytic infection also has a role in
lymphomagenesis. In vitro, EBV replication is linked to plasma cell
differentiation and XBP1 activation, although this phenomenon has never been
addressed in vivo. We analyzed for the first time latent and lytic intratumoral
EBV infection in a series of 35 adult patients with a diagnosis of
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (26M/9F, median age 54 years). A
complete EBV study was performed including the analysis of the latent EBER,
latent membrane protein-11, and EBV nuclear antigens as well as the
immediate-early BZLF1/ZEBRA and early BMRF1/EADE31 lytic genes. XBP1 activation
was assessed by nuclear protein expression. EBV infection was observed in 28
(80%) cases being latency II and III the most frequently observed 22 (79%).
Intratumoral EBV replication was detected in 17 (60%) cases. Among these, XBP1
activation was observed in 11/12 evaluable cases associated with strong
cytoplasmic immunoglobulin expression consistent with plasma cell
differentiation. Intriguingly, the combination of latency III infection and EBV
replication identified a high-risk subgroup of patients with significantly
shorter survival (overall survival at 1 year 18% vs 48%) and early-onset (median 
of 7 vs 26 months) post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder. Moreover, these 
patients appear to be more heavily immunosuppressed, so they exhibit lower rates 
of rejection and graft vs host disease but higher rates of cytomegalovirus
reactivation. In conclusion, EBV replication is associated with plasma cell
differentiation and XBP1 activation with prognostic implications. Both latency
III and lytic EBV infection are related to aggressive and early-onset
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder. These results suggest that
immunohistochemical study of latent and lytic EBV genes in the clinical practice 
may help to select higher-risk patients to new therapies including antiviral
treatments.

PMID: 24762547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 6;111(18):6804-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321845111. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Control of dopaminergic neuron survival by the unfolded protein response
transcription factor XBP1.

Valdés P(1), Mercado G, Vidal RL, Molina C, Parsons G, Court FA, Martinez A,
Galleguillos D, Armentano D, Schneider BL, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago 8380453, Chile.

Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by the selective loss of dopaminergic
neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). Although growing evidence
indicates that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is a hallmark of PD, its exact
contribution to the disease process is not well understood. Here we report that
developmental ablation of X-Box binding protein 1 (XBP1) in the nervous system, a
key regulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), protects dopaminergic
neurons against a PD-inducing neurotoxin. This survival effect was associated
with a preconditioning condition that resulted from induction of an adaptive ER
stress response in dopaminergic neurons of the SNpc, but not in other brain
regions. In contrast, silencing XBP1 in adult animals triggered chronic ER stress
and dopaminergic neuron degeneration. Supporting this finding, gene therapy to
deliver an active form of XBP1 provided neuroprotection and reduced striatal
denervation in animals injected with 6-hydroxydopamine. Our results reveal a
physiological role of the UPR in the maintenance of protein homeostasis in
dopaminergic neurons that may help explain the differential neuronal
vulnerability observed in PD.

PMCID: PMC4020088
PMID: 24753614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Jun;88(6):1267-80. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1240-8. Epub 2014
Apr 20.

The transcription factor CHOP, a central component of the transcriptional
regulatory network induced upon CCl4 intoxication in mouse liver, is not a
critical mediator of hepatotoxicity.

Campos G(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Ghallab A, Rochlitz K, Pütter L, Medinas DB, Hetz C,
Widera A, Cadenas C, Begher-Tibbe B, Reif R, Günther G, Sachinidis A, Hengstler
JG, Godoy P.

Author information: 
(1)IfADo-Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors,
Technical University Dortmund, Ardeystrasse 67, 44139, Dortmund, Germany.

Since xenobiotics enter the organism via the liver, hepatocytes must cope with
numerous perturbations, including modifications of proteins leading to
endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER-stress). This triggers a signaling pathway
termed unfolded protein response (UPR) that aims to restore homeostasis or to
eliminate disturbed hepatocytes by apoptosis. In the present study, we used the
well-established CCl4 hepatotoxicity model in mice to address the questions
whether CCl4 induces ER-stress and, if so, whether the well-known ER-stress
effector CHOP is responsible for CCl4-induced apoptosis. For this purpose, we
treated mice with a high dose of CCl4 injected i.p. and followed gene expression 
profile over time using Affymetrix gene array analysis. This time resolved gene
expression analysis allowed the identification of gene clusters with
overrepresented binding sites for the three most important ER-stress induced
transcription factors, CHOP, XBP1 and ATF4. Such result was confirmed by the
demonstration of CCl4-induced XBP1 splicing, upregulation of CHOP at mRNA and
protein levels, and translocation of CHOP to the nucleus. Two observations
indicated that CHOP may be responsible for CCl4-induced cell death: (1) Nuclear
translocation of CHOP was exclusively observed in the pericentral fraction of
hepatocytes that deteriorate in response to CCl4 and (2) CHOP-regulated genes
with previously reported pro-apoptotic function such as GADD34, TRB3 and ERO1L
were induced in the pericentral zone as well. Therefore, we compared CCl4 induced
hepatotoxicity in CHOP knockout versus wild-type mice. Surprisingly, genetic
depletion of CHOP did not afford protection against CCl4-induced damage as
evidenced by serum GOT and GPT as well as quantification of dead tissue areas.
The negative result was obtained at several time points (8, 24 and 72 h) and
different CCl4 doses (1.6 and 0.132 g/kg). Overall, our results demonstrate that 
all branches of the UPR are activated in mouse liver upon CCl4 treatment.
However, CHOP does not play a critical role in CCl4-induced cell death and cannot
be considered as a biomarker strictly linked to hepatotoxicity. The role of
alternative UPR effectors such as XBP1 remains to be investigated.

PMID: 24748426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Protein Sci. 2014 Jul;23(7):940-53. doi: 10.1002/pro.2477. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Increasing the affinity of selective bZIP-binding peptides through surface
residue redesign.

Kaplan JB(1), Reinke AW, Keating AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 02139.

The coiled-coil dimer is a prevalent protein interaction motif that is important 
for many cellular processes. The basic leucine-zipper (bZIP) transcription
factors are one family of proteins for which coiled-coil mediated dimerization is
essential for function, and misregulation of bZIPs can lead to disease states
including cancer. This makes coiled coils attractive protein-protein interaction 
targets to disrupt using engineered molecules. Previous work designing peptides
to compete with native coiled-coil interactions focused primarily on designing
the core residues of the interface to achieve affinity and specificity. However, 
folding studies on the model bZIP GCN4 show that coiled-coil surface residues
also contribute to binding affinity. Here we extend a prior study in which
peptides were designed to bind tightly and specifically to representative members
of each of 20 human bZIP families. These "anti-bZIP" peptides were designed with 
an emphasis on target-binding specificity, with contributions to design-target
specificity and affinity engineered considering only the coiled-coil core
residues. High-throughput testing using peptide arrays indicated many successes. 
We have now measured the binding affinities and specificities of anti-bZIPs that 
bind to FOS, XBP1, ATF6, and CREBZF in solution and tested whether redesigning
the surface residues can increase design-target affinity. Incorporating residues 
that favor helix formation into the designs increased binding affinities in all
cases, providing low-nanomolar binders of each target. However, changes in
surface electrostatic interactions sometimes changed the binding specificity of
the designed peptides.

© 2014 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC4088978
PMID: 24729132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 7;5:3554. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4554.

Phosphoregulation of Ire1 RNase splicing activity.

Prischi F(1), Nowak PR(1), Carrara M(1), Ali MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Centre for Structural Biology, Sir Ernst Chain
Building, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2014;5:4996.

Ire1 is activated in response to accumulation of misfolded proteins within the
endoplasmic reticulum as part of the unfolded protein response (UPR). It is a
unique enzyme, possessing both kinase and RNase activity that is required for
specific splicing of Xbp1 mRNA leading to UPR activation. How phosphorylation
impacts on the Ire1 splicing activity is unclear. In this study, we isolate
distinct phosphorylated species of Ire1 and assess their effects on RNase
splicing both in vitro and in vivo. We find that phosphorylation within the
kinase activation loop significantly increases RNase splicing in vitro.
Correspondingly, mutants of Ire1 that cannot be phosphorylated on the activation 
loop show decreased specific Xbp1 and promiscuous RNase splicing activity
relative to wild-type Ire1 in cells. These data couple the kinase phosphorylation
reaction to the activation state of the RNase, suggesting that phosphorylation of
the activation loop is an important step in Ire1-mediated UPR activation.

PMCID: PMC3988810
PMID: 24704861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014 May;43:62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.01.013.
Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Elevated systemic expression of ER stress related genes is associated with
stress-related mental disorders in the Detroit Neighborhood Health Study.

Nevell L(1), Zhang K(2), Aiello AE(3), Koenen K(4), Galea S(4), Soliven R(1),
Zhang C(1), Wildman DE(5), Uddin M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine and
Genetics, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (2)Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Department of Immunology and Microbiology,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (3)University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Gillings 
School of Global Public Health, Department of Epidemiology, Chapel Hill NC 27599 
USA. (4)Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, Department of
Epidemiology, New York, NY 10032, USA. (5)Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Detroit, MI 48201, USA;
Wayne State University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. (6)Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Detroit, MI 48201, USA; Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Neurosciences, Detroit, MI 48201, USA. Electronic address:
monica.uddin@wayne.edu.

BACKGROUND: The role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response in mental
illness is not well understood. Human studies and animal models of depression
show elevated brain ER stress response. In addition, some ER stress associated
disorders (e.g. cardiovascular disease) show higher rates of depression compared 
to the general population, raising the possibility that ER stress response
contributes to depression risk. It remains unknown, however, if ER stress
response is present among individuals suffering from other stress-related mental 
illness, and whether such a response would be evident in a non-clinical sample.
This study tests for systemic changes in ER stress response associated with Major
Depressive Disorder (MDD) or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) among
community-dwelling individuals.
METHODS: We analyzed expression of BiP, EDEM1, CHOP, and XBP1, the major
indicators of ER stress response, with real-time PCR in leukocyte-derived RNA
samples from 86 participants of the Detroit Neighborhood Health Study.
Participants were selected based on the presence of either past year MDD or past 
year PTSD; controls were age and sex matched.
RESULTS: Relative to controls, MDD is associated with a 1.34-fold increase in BiP
(P=0.004), 1.35-fold increase in EDEM1 (P=0.001), 1.68-fold increase in CHOP
(P=0.002), and 1.60-fold increase in XBP1 (P=0.004). These results remained
significant after correction for multiple testing. In contrast, PTSD is
associated with a 1.27-fold increase in EDEM1 expression only (P=0.027), a result
that is attenuated to non-significance following adjustment for multiple testing;
however, a subsample of participants with past month PTSD showed elevated
expression of BiP and EDEM1 (uncorrected P value 0.049 and 0.017, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate systemic and persistent activation of the ER
stress response pathway in MDD among community-dwelling individuals. Systemic
activation of the ER stress response may also occur in PTSD among persons with
more recent symptoms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4106129
PMID: 24703171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014 May;20(5):847-55. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000034.

Autophagy suppression by appendicitis and appendectomy protects against colitis.

Cheluvappa R(1), Luo AS, Grimm MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical School, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Jun;11(6):331.

BACKGROUND: When done at a young age, appendicitis followed by appendectomy (AA) 
offers protection against ulcerative colitis development in later life. We
developed the first ever murine AA model. Using this model, we showed earlier
that previous AA ameliorated colitis. We aimed to determine whether autophagy
genes contribute to the anti-colitis protection conferred by AA, and if so, to
delineate the autophagy-linked genes involved in this.
METHODS: Mice with 2 laparotomies each served as controls (sham-sham). Distal
colons were harvested (4 AA-group colons, 4 sham-sham group colons), and RNA
extracted from each. The RNA was taken through microarray analysis or reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction validation. Gene set enrichment analysis 
software was used to analyze the microarray data.
RESULTS: Out of 28 key autophagy-related genes investigated (VPS15, VPS34,
FIP200, ATG03, ATG04A, ATG04B, ATG05, ATG07, ATG10, ATG12, ATG13b, ATG14,
ATG16L1, BECN1, GABARAPL1, IRGM1, IRGM2, LAMP2, LC3A, LC3B, RAB7A, UVRAG, NOD2,
XBP1, LRRK2, ULK1, ULK2, PTPN2), 7 have genetic associations with inflammatory
bowel diseases (ATG16L1, IRGM1, NOD2, XBP1, LRRK2, ULK1, PTPN2). There was slight
upregulation of IRGM1, FIP200, and ATG04A (P < 0.05), but no variations with the 
other 25 genes. In contrast, gene set enrichment analysis revealed that AA
downregulated 74 gene sets (associated with 28 autophagy genes) while
upregulating only 5 (false discovery rate <5%; P < 0.001) gene sets.
Additionally, 22 gene sets associated with the 7 autophagy + inflammatory bowel
disease-associated genes were downregulated by AA, whereas only 3 were
upregulated. The genes with maximum AA-induced gene set suppression were VPS15,
LAMP2, LC3A, XBP1, and ULK1.
CONCLUSIONS: AA induces profound autophagy suppression in the distal colon. The
AA-induced upregulation of individual genes (IRGM1, FIP200, ATG04A) could be a
reflection of complex compensatory changes or the initial abnormality that led to
the pronounced autophagy suppression. Autophagy suppression by AA may induce
lesser antigen processing, leading to lesser cross-reactive immunity between
microbes and self-antigens, and subsequent amelioration of colitis.

PMID: 24694792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Anticancer Res. 2014 Apr;34(4):1731-5.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response as a possible mechanism of
cyclooxygenase-2-independent anticancer effect of celecoxib.

Cha W(1), Park SW, Kwon TK, Hah JH, Sung MW.

Author information: 
(1)Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehakro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744,
Korea. jhunhah@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: We investigated whether the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response could be a cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2)-independent mechanism of growth
inhibition by celecoxib in a head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell
line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed western blotting and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction to analyze the expression of ER stress
response-associated proteins C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), glucose-regulated
protein (GRP)-78 and X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), after treatment of celecoxib
in the SNU-1041 cell line. A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay was performed to determine the change in growth inhibition by
celecoxib after inhibition of the ER stress pathway by CHOP small-interfering RNA
(siRNA).
RESULTS: Celecoxib triggered an ER stress response in this HNSCC cell line as
shown by activation of CHOP, GRP78 and XBP1. The inhibition of cell proliferation
by celecoxib was effectively hindered with CHOP siRNA.
CONCLUSION: ER stress response could be a COX2-independent anticancer mechanism
of celecoxib.

PMID: 24692703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Br J Cancer. 2014 Apr 29;110(9):2224-31. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.164. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

Small molecule MIRA-1 induces in vitro and in vivo anti-myeloma activity and
synergizes with current anti-myeloma agents.

Saha MN(1), Chen Y(2), Chen MH(1), Chen G(3), Chang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Toronto General Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine &
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)1] Division of 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Toronto General Research Institute, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [3] Department of Hematology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China. (3)Department of
Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang,
China. (4)1] Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Toronto General Research
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine &
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada [3] Department of
Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China
[4] Department of Laboratory Hematology and Medical Oncology, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Small molecule MIRA-1 induced mutant p53-dependent apoptosis in
several types of solid tumours. However, anti-tumour activity of MIRA-1 in
haematological malignancies including multiple myeloma (MM) is unknown. In this
study, we evaluated the effect of MIRA-1 in MM.
METHODS: We examined the anti-tumour activity of MIRA-1 alone or in combination
with current anti-myeloma agents in a panel of MM cell lines, primary MM samples,
and in a mouse xenograft model of MM.
RESULTS: MIRA-1 treatment resulted in the inhibition of viability, colony
formation, and migration and increase in apoptosis of MM cells irrespective of
p53 status accompanied by upregulation of Puma and Bax and downregulation of
Mcl-1 and c-Myc. Genetic knockdown of p53 did not abrogate apoptotic response of 
MIRA-1. MIRA-1 triggered activation of PERK and IRE-a leading to splicing of XBP1
indicating an association of endoplasmic reticulum stress response. Furthermore, 
combined treatment of MIRA-1 with dexamethasone, doxorubicin or velcade displayed
synergistic response in MM cells. Importantly, MIRA-1 alone or in combination
with dexamethasone retarded tumour growth and prolonged survival without showing 
any untoward toxicity in the mice bearing MM tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide the preclinical framework for clinical evaluation
of MIRA-1 as a novel therapeutic agent to improve patient outcome in MM.

PMCID: PMC4007239
PMID: 24691427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Front Immunol. 2014 Mar 20;5:108. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00108. eCollection
2014.

Oct2 and Obf1 as Facilitators of B:T Cell Collaboration during a Humoral Immune
Response.

Corcoran L(1), Emslie D(1), Kratina T(1), Shi W(1), Hirsch S(1), Taubenheim N(1),
Chevrier S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research , Melbourne, VIC , Australia ; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne , Melbourne, VIC , Australia.

The Oct2 protein, encoded by the Pou2f2 gene, was originally predicted to act as 
a DNA binding transcriptional activator of immunoglobulin (Ig) in B lineage
cells. This prediction flowed from the earlier observation that an 8-bp sequence,
the "octamer motif," was a highly conserved component of most Ig gene promoters
and enhancers, and evidence from over-expression and reporter assays confirmed
Oct2-mediated, octamer-dependent gene expression. Complexity was added to the
story when Oct1, an independently encoded protein, ubiquitously expressed from
the Pou2f1 gene, was characterized and found to bind to the octamer motif with
almost identical specificity, and later, when the co-activator Obf1 (OCA-B,
Bob.1), encoded by the Pou2af1 gene, was cloned. Obf1 joins Oct2 (and Oct1) on
the DNA of a subset of octamer motifs to enhance their transactivation strength. 
While these proteins variously carried the mantle of determinants of Ig gene
expression in B cells for many years, such a role has not been borne out for them
by characterization of mice lacking functional copies of the genes, either as
single or as compound mutants. Instead, we and others have shown that Oct2 and
Obf1 are required for B cells to mature fully in vivo, for B cells to respond to 
the T cell cytokines IL5 and IL4, and for B cells to produce IL6 normally during 
a T cell dependent immune response. We show here that Oct2 affects Syk gene
expression, thus influencing B cell receptor signaling, and that Oct2 loss blocks
Slamf1 expression in vivo as a result of incomplete B cell maturation. Upon IL4
signaling, Stat6 up-regulates Obf1, indirectly via Xbp1, to enable plasma cell
differentiation. Thus, Oct2 and Obf1 enable B cells to respond normally to
antigen receptor signals, to express surface receptors that mediate physical
interaction with T cells, or to produce and respond to cytokines that are
critical drivers of B cell and T cell differentiation during a humoral immune
response.

PMCID: PMC3960507
PMID: 24688485  [PubMed]


307. J Biomed Res. 2014 Mar;28(2):123-31. doi: 10.7555/JBR.28.20130076. Epub 2013 Dec 
25.

IRE1a is essential for Xenopus pancreas development.

Yuan L(1), Li X(1), Feng J(1), Yin C(1), Yuan F(1), Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China; (2)Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
China.

Inositol requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1) is highly conserved from yeasts to humans.
Upon the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, IRE1 activates X-box-binding protein 
1 (XBP1) by unconventionally splicing XBP1 mRNA, which activates the unfolded
protein response (UPR) to restore ER homeostasis. In mice, IRE1a inactivity leads
to embryonic death and IRE1a plays an essential role in extraembryonic tissues
and the placenta. However, its precise action in the embryo proper is still
unknown. In this study, the loss of function analysis was performed to
investigate the function of Xenopus IRE1a (xIRE1a) during pancreas development.
Firstly, the complete open reading frame of xIRE1a was amplified and the
expression pattern was detected. The effects of Xenopus IRE1a and XBP1 during
embryo development were detected with whole-mount in situ hybridization. The
results demonstrated that xIRE1a was much closer to human IRE1a when compared
with their sequence alignment. xIRE1a was expressed strongly in developing
pancreas and the knockdown of xIRE1a inhibited the differentiation and
specification of the pancreas. xIRE1a, which was required for cytoplasmic
splicing of XBP1 pre-mRNA and XBP1MO, also showed inhibitory effects on pancreas 
development. These results suggest that xIRE1a is essential for pancreas
development during embryogenesis and functions via the XBP1 dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC3968283
PMID: 24683410  [PubMed]


308. J Theor Biol. 2014 Aug 7;354:72-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.03.027. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

Protein aggregation due to nsSNP resulting in P56S VABP protein is associated
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Vinay Kumar C(1), Kumar KM(1), Swetha R(1), Ramaiah S(1), Anbarasu A(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore 632014, Tamil
Nadu, India. (2)School of Biosciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore
632014, Tamil Nadu, India. Electronic address: aanand@vit.ac.in.

Mutations in the gene encoding vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAPB) cause
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder. The VAPB
gene is mapped to chromosome number 20 and can be found at cytogenetic location
20q13.33 of the chromosome. VAPB is seen to play a significant role in the
unfolded protein response (UPR), which is a process that suppresses the
accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Earlier studies
have reported two points; which we have analyzed in our study. Firstly, the
mutation P56S in the VAPB is seen to increase the stability of the protein and
secondly, the mutation P56S in VAPB is seen to interrupt the functioning of the
gene and loses its ability to be involved in the activation of the IRE1/XBP1
pathway which leads to ALS. With correlation on the previous research studies on 
the stability of this protein, we carried out Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.
We analyzed the SNP results of 17 nsSNPs obtained from dbSNP using SIFT,
polyphen, I-Mutant, SNP&GO, PhDSNP and Mutpred to predict the role of nsSNPs in
VAPB. MD simulation is carried out and plots for RMSD, RMSF, Rg, SASA, H-bond and
PCA are obtained to check and prove the stability of the wild type and the mutant
protein structure. The protein is checked for its aggregation and the results
obtained show changes in the protein structure that might result in the loss of
function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24681403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 27;5:3528. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4528.

Hepatic IRE1a regulates fasting-induced metabolic adaptive programs through the
XBP1s-PPARa axis signalling.

Shao M(1), Shan B(2), Liu Y(3), Deng Y(3), Yan C(3), Wu Y(3), Mao T(2), Qiu Y(2),
Zhou Y(4), Jiang S(5), Jia W(5), Li J(4), Li J(4), Rui L(6), Yang L(3), Liu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences; University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China
[2] [3]. (2)1] Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for
Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences; University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
200031, China [2]. (3)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for
Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences; University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
200031, China. (4)National Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai Institute of
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (5)Shanghai 
Diabetes Institute, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Diabetes Mellitus, Shanghai
Clinical Center for Diabetes, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai
200233, China. (6)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, the
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Although the mammalian IRE1a-XBP1 branch of the cellular unfolded protein
response has been implicated in glucose and lipid metabolism, the exact metabolic
role of IRE1a signalling in vivo remains poorly understood. Here we show that
hepatic IRE1a functions as a nutrient sensor that regulates the metabolic
adaptation to fasting. We find that prolonged deprivation of food or consumption 
of a ketogenic diet activates the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway in mouse livers.
Hepatocyte-specific abrogation of Ire1a results in impairment of fatty acid
ß-oxidation and ketogenesis in the liver under chronic fasting or ketogenic
conditions, leading to hepatosteatosis; liver-specific restoration of XBP1s
reverses the defects in IRE1a null mice. XBP1s directly binds to and activates
the promoter of PPARa, the master regulator of starvation responses. Hence, our
results demonstrate that hepatic IRE1a promotes the adaptive shift of fuel
utilization during starvation by stimulating mitochondrial ß-oxidation and
ketogenesis through the XBP1s-PPARa axis.

PMID: 24670948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nature. 2014 Apr 3;508(7494):103-7. doi: 10.1038/nature13119. Epub 2014 Mar 23.

XBP1 promotes triple-negative breast cancer by controlling the HIF1a pathway.

Chen X(1), Iliopoulos D(2), Zhang Q(3), Tang Q(4), Greenblatt MB(5),
Hatziapostolou M(6), Lim E(7), Tam WL(8), Ni M(7), Chen Y(9), Mai J(10), Shen
H(11), Hu DZ(12), Adoro S(1), Hu B(13), Song M(1), Tan C(1), Landis MD(14),
Ferrari M(15), Shin SJ(16), Brown M(7), Chang JC(17), Liu XS(9), Glimcher LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center of Weill Cornell Medical College,
1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA. (2)1]
Center for Systems Biomedicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA [2] Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [3]. (3)1] Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599,
USA [2]. (4)1] Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and
Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China [2] Institute of Animal
Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Ya'an, Sichuan 625014, China [3]. (5)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (6)1] 
Center for Systems Biomedicine, Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA [2] Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (7)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. 
(10)Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. (11)1] Department of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research
Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York
10065, USA. (12)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. (13)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's
Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (14)Houston Methodist Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (15)1] Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Department
of Nanomedicine, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(16)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA. (17)1] Department of
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York
10065, USA [2] Houston Methodist Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(6):471.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 May;14(5):295.

Cancer cells induce a set of adaptive response pathways to survive in the face of
stressors due to inadequate vascularization. One such adaptive pathway is the
unfolded protein (UPR) or endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response mediated in 
part by the ER-localized transmembrane sensor IRE1 (ref. 2) and its substrate
XBP1 (ref. 3). Previous studies report UPR activation in various human tumours,
but the role of XBP1 in cancer progression in mammary epithelial cells is largely
unknown. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC)--a form of breast cancer in which
tumour cells do not express the genes for oestrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor and HER2 (also called ERBB2 or NEU)--is a highly aggressive malignancy
with limited treatment options. Here we report that XBP1 is activated in TNBC and
has a pivotal role in the tumorigenicity and progression of this human breast
cancer subtype. In breast cancer cell line models, depletion of XBP1 inhibited
tumour growth and tumour relapse and reduced the CD44(high)CD24(low) population. 
Hypoxia-inducing factor 1a (HIF1a) is known to be hyperactivated in TNBCs.
Genome-wide mapping of the XBP1 transcriptional regulatory network revealed that 
XBP1 drives TNBC tumorigenicity by assembling a transcriptional complex with
HIF1a that regulates the expression of HIF1a targets via the recruitment of RNA
polymerase II. Analysis of independent cohorts of patients with TNBC revealed a
specific XBP1 gene expression signature that was highly correlated with HIF1a and
hypoxia-driven signatures and that strongly associated with poor prognosis. Our
findings reveal a key function for the XBP1 branch of the UPR in TNBC and
indicate that targeting this pathway may offer alternative treatment strategies
for this aggressive subtype of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4105133
PMID: 24670641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Neuroimmunol. 2014 May 15;270(1-2):29-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2014.03.005. 
Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is accompanied by activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

Prell T(1), Lautenschläger J(2), Weidemann L(2), Ruhmer J(2), Witte OW(3),
Grosskreutz J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Erlanger Allee 
101, D-07747 Jena, Germany. Electronic address: tino.prell@med.uni-jena.de.
(2)Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Erlanger Allee 
101, D-07747 Jena, Germany. (3)Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, Jena
University Hospital, Erlanger Allee 101, D-07747 Jena, Germany; Center for Sepsis
Control and Care (CSCC), Jena University Hospital, Erlanger Allee 101, D-07747
Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have indicated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
is involved in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ER stress
occurs when the ER-mitochondria calcium cycle is disturbed and misfolded proteins
accumulate in the ER. To cope with ER stress, cells activate the unfolded protein
response (UPR). Accumulating evidence from non-neuronal cell models suggests that
there is extensive cross-talk between the UPR and the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.
METHODS: Here we investigated the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and the main UPR markers
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), basic leucine-zipper transcription factor 6
(ATF6) and phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (p-eIF2) in mutated
SOD1(G93A) cell models of ALS, as well as their modulation by lipopolysaccharide 
and ER-stressing (tunicamycin) stimuli.
RESULTS: Expression of NF-<U+03BA>B was enhanced in the presence of SOD1(G93A).
Lipopolysaccharide did not induce the UPR in NSC34 cells and motor neurons in a
mixed motor neuron-glia coculture system. The induction of the UPR by tunicamycin
was accompanied by activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in NSC34 cells and motor neurons.
CONCLUSION: Our data linked two important pathogenic mechanisms of ALS, ER stress
and NF-<U+03BA>B signalling, in motor neurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24666819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014 May;39(5):245-54. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2014.02.008. Epub 
2014 Mar 20.

Getting RIDD of RNA: IRE1 in cell fate regulation.

Maurel M(1), Chevet E(2), Tavernier J(3), Gerlo S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium; Department of
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium. Electronic address: m.marionmaurel@gmail.com. (2)INSERM U1053,
Université Bordeaux Segalen, 33000 Bordeaux, France; Centre Régional de Lutte
Contre le Cancer Eugène Marquis, 35000 Rennes, France. (3)Department of Medical
Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (4)Department of 
Medical Protein Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium; Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
Electronic address: sarah.gerlo@vib-ugent.be.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) is the most conserved transducer of the
unfolded protein response (UPR), a homeostatic response that preserves
proteostasis. Intriguingly, via its endoribonuclease activity, IRE1 produces
either adaptive or death signals. This occurs through both unconventional
splicing of XBP1 mRNA and regulated IRE1-dependent decay of mRNA (RIDD). Whereas 
XBP1 mRNA splicing is cytoprotective in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, RIDD has revealed many unexpected features. For instance, RIDD cleaves
RNA at an XBP1-like consensus site but with an activity divergent from XBP1 mRNA 
splicing and can either preserve ER homeostasis or induce cell death. Here we
review recent findings on RIDD and propose a model of how IRE1 RNase activity
might control cell fate decisions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 1;28(7):708-22. doi: 10.1101/gad.238246.114. Epub 2014 Mar
17.

Hrd1 suppresses Nrf2-mediated cellular protection during liver cirrhosis.

Wu T(1), Zhao F, Gao B, Tan C, Yagishita N, Nakajima T, Wong PK, Chapman E, Fang 
D, Zhang DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, The University
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA:

Increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) are
the salient features of end-stage liver diseases. Using liver tissues from liver 
cirrhosis patients, we observed up-regulation of the XBP1-Hrd1 arm of the ER
stress response pathway and down-regulation of the Nrf2-mediated antioxidant
response pathway. We further confirmed this negative regulation of Nrf2 by Hrd1
using Hrd1 conditional knockout mice. Down-regulation of Nrf2 was a surprising
result, since the high levels of ROS should have inactivated Keap1, the primary
ubiquitin ligase regulating Nrf2 levels. Here, we identified Hrd1 as a novel E3
ubiquitin ligase responsible for compromised Nrf2 response during liver
cirrhosis. In cirrhotic livers, activation of the XBP1-Hrd1 arm of ER stress
transcriptionally up-regulated Hrd1, resulting in enhanced Nrf2 ubiquitylation
and degradation and attenuation of the Nrf2 signaling pathway. Our study reveals 
not only the convergence of ER and oxidative stress response pathways but also
the pathological importance of this cross-talk in liver cirrhosis. Finally, we
showed the therapeutic importance of targeting Hrd1, rather than Keap1, to
prevent Nrf2 loss and suppress liver cirrhosis.

PMCID: PMC4015486
PMID: 24636985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Mar 14;4:e191. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2014.13.

Translocations at 8q24 juxtapose MYC with genes that harbor superenhancers
resulting in overexpression and poor prognosis in myeloma patients.

Walker BA(1), Wardell CP(1), Brioli A(2), Boyle E(1), Kaiser MF(1), Begum DB(1), 
Dahir NB(1), Johnson DC(1), Ross FM(3), Davies FE(4), Morgan GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(2)1] Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, 
UK [2] Istituto di Ematologia Seràgnoli, Università degli Studi di Bologna,
Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. (3)Wessex Regional Genetics
Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, UK. (4)Divisions of Molecular
Pathology, Cancer Therapeutics and Clinical Sciences, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, UK.

Secondary MYC translocations in myeloma have been shown to be important in the
pathogenesis and progression of disease. Here, we have used a DNA capture and
massively parallel sequencing approach to identify the partner chromosomes in 104
presentation myeloma samples. 8q24 breakpoints were identified in 21 (20%)
samples with partner loci including IGH, IGK and IGL, which juxtapose the
immunoglobulin (Ig) enhancers next to MYC in 8/23 samples. The remaining samples 
had partner loci including XBP1, FAM46C, CCND1 and KRAS, which are important in
B-cell maturation or myeloma pathogenesis. Analysis of the region surrounding the
breakpoints indicated the presence of superenhancers on the partner chromosomes
and gene expression analysis showed increased expression of MYC in these samples.
Patients with MYC translocations had a decreased progression-free and overall
survival. We postulate that translocation breakpoints near MYC result in
colocalization of the gene with superenhancers from loci, which are important in 
the development of the cell type in which they occur. In the case of myeloma
these are the Ig loci and those important for plasma cell development and myeloma
pathogenesis, resulting in increased expression of MYC and an aggressive disease 
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3972699
PMID: 24632883  [PubMed]


315. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Mar 14;9:35. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-9-35.

Possible effects of EXT2 on mesenchymal differentiation--lessons from the
zebrafish.

Wiweger MI, de Andrea CE, Scheepstra KW, Zhao Z, Hogendoorn PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. p.c.w.hogendoorn@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the EXT genes disrupt polymerisation of heparan
sulphates (HS) and lead to the development of osteochondroma, an
isolated/sporadic- or a multifocal/hereditary cartilaginous bone tumour.
Zebrafish (Danio rerio) is a very powerful animal model which has shown to
present the same cartilage phenotype that is commonly seen in mice model and
patients with the rare hereditary syndrome, Multiple Osteochondroma (MO).
METHODS: Zebrafish dackel (dak) mutant that carries a nonsense mutation in the
ext2 gene was used in this study. A panel of molecular, morphological and
biochemical analyses was used to assess at what step bone formation is affected
and what mechanisms underlie changes in the bone formation in the ext2 mutant.
RESULTS: During bone development in the ext2-/- zebrafish, chondrocytes fail to
undergo terminal differentiation; and pre-osteoblasts do not differentiate toward
osteoblasts. This inadequate osteogenesis coincides with increased deposition of 
lipids/fats along/in the vessels and premature adipocyte differentiation as shown
by biochemical and molecular markers. Also, the ext2-null fish have a muscle
phenotype, i.e. muscles are shorter and thicker. These changes coexist with
misshapen bones. Normal expression of runx2 together with impaired expression of 
osterix and its master regulator--xbp1 suggest that unfolded protein responses
might play a role in MO pathogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Heparan sulphates are required for terminal differentiation of the
cartilaginous template and consecutive formation of a scaffold that is needed for
further bone development. HS are also needed for mesenchymal cell
differentiation. At least one copy of ext2 is needed to maintain the balance
between bone and fat lineages, but homozygous loss of the ext2 function leads to 
an imbalance between cartilage, bone and fat lineages. Normal expression of runx2
and impaired expression of osterix in the ext2-/- fish indicate that HS are
required by osteoblast precursors for their further differentiation towards
osteoblastic lineage. Lower expression of xbp1, a master regulator of osterix,
suggests that HS affect the 'unfolded protein response', a pathway that is known 
to control bone formation and lipid metabolism. Our observations in the ext2-null
fish might explain the musculoskeletal defects that are often observed in MO
patients.

PMCID: PMC4004154
PMID: 24628984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 1;277(2):109-17. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.02.018. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Ethanol metabolism, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress responses 
in the lungs of hepatic alcohol dehydrogenase deficient deer mice after chronic
ethanol feeding.

Kaphalia L(1), Boroumand N(2), Hyunsu J(3), Kaphalia BS(4), Calhoun WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 775555, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 775555, USA. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine &
Community Health, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 775555,
USA. (4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 775555, USA. Electronic address: bkaphali@utmb.edu.

Consumption and over-consumption of alcoholic beverages are well-recognized
contributors to a variety of pulmonary disorders, even in the absence of
intoxication. The mechanisms by which alcohol (ethanol) may produce disease
include oxidative stress and prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Many
aspects of these processes remain incompletely understood due to a lack of a
suitable animal model. Chronic alcohol over-consumption reduces hepatic alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH), the principal canonical metabolic pathway of ethanol
oxidation. We therefore modeled this situation using hepatic ADH-deficient deer
mice fed 3.5% ethanol daily for 3 months. Blood ethanol concentration was 180 mg%
in ethanol fed mice, compared to <1.0% in the controls. Acetaldehyde (oxidative
metabolite of ethanol) was minimally, but significantly increased in ethanol-fed 
vs. pair-fed control mice. Total fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEEs, nonoxidative
metabolites of ethanol) were 47.6 µg/g in the lungs of ethanol-fed mice as
compared to 1.5 µg/g in pair-fed controls. Histological and immunohistological
evaluation showed perivascular and peribronchiolar lymphocytic infiltration, and 
significant oxidative injury, in the lungs of ethanol-fed mice compared to
pair-fed controls. Several fold increases for cytochrome P450 2E1, caspase 8 and 
caspase 3 found in the lungs of ethanol-fed mice as compared to pair-fed controls
suggest role of oxidative stress in ethanol-induced lung injury. ER stress and
unfolded protein response signaling were also significantly increased in the
lungs of ethanol-fed mice. Surprisingly, no significant activation of
inositol-requiring enzyme-1a and spliced XBP1 was observed indicating a lack of
activation of corrective mechanisms to reinstate ER homeostasis. The data suggest
that oxidative stress and prolonged ER stress, coupled with formation and
accumulation of cytotoxic FAEEs may contribute to the pathogenesis of alcoholic
lung disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4021019
PMID: 24625836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 11;9(3):e90819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090819. eCollection
2014.

Gene expression profiling in tibial muscular dystrophy reveals unfolded protein
response and altered autophagy.

Screen M(1), Raheem O(2), Holmlund-Hampf J(1), Jonson PH(1), Huovinen S(3),
Hackman P(1), Udd B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman 
Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Neuromuscular Research
Unit, Department of Neurology, University Hospital and University of Tampere,
Tampere, Finland. (3)Neuromuscular Research Unit, Department of Neurology,
University Hospital and University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Department of
Pathology, Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere University Hospital and University of
Tampere, Tampere, Finland. (4)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of 
Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 
Neuromuscular Research Unit, Department of Neurology, University Hospital and
University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland; Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central
Hospital, Vaasa, Finland.

Tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD) is a late onset, autosomal dominant distal
myopathy that results from mutations in the two last domains of titin. The
cascade of molecular events leading from the causative Titin mutations to the
preterm death of muscle cells in TMD is largely unknown. In this study we
examined the mRNA and protein changes associated with the myopathology of TMD. To
identify these components we performed gene expression profiling using muscle
biopsies from TMD patients and healthy controls. The profiling results were
confirmed through quantitative real-time PCR and protein level analysis. One of
the pathways identified was activation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response. ER stress activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway. UPR
activation was supported by elevation of the marker genes HSPA5, ERN1 and the UPR
specific XBP1 splice form. However, UPR activation appears to be insufficient to 
correct the protein abnormalities causing its activation because degenerative TMD
muscle fibres show an increase in ubiquitinated protein inclusions. Abnormalities
of VCP-associated degradation pathways are also suggested by the presence of
proteolytic VCP fragments in western blotting, and VCP's accumulation within
rimmed vacuoles in TMD muscle fibres together with p62 and LC3B positive
autophagosomes. Thus, pathways controlling turnover and degradation, including
autophagy, are distorted and lead to degeneration and loss of muscle fibres.

PMCID: PMC3949689
PMID: 24618559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014 Mar 10;15:15. doi: 10.1186/2050-6511-15-15.

Whole adult organism transcriptional profiling of acute metal exposures in male
zebrafish.

Hussainzada N, Lewis JA, Baer CE, Ippolito DL, Jackson DA, Stallings JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers Program, US Army Center for Environmental Health Research, Fort
Detrick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-5010, USA. jonathan.d.stallings.mil@mail.mil.

BACKGROUND: A convergence of technological breakthroughs in the past decade has
facilitated the development of rapid screening tools for biomarkers of toxicant
exposure and effect. Platforms using the whole adult organism to evaluate the
genome-wide response to toxicants are especially attractive. Recent work
demonstrates the feasibility of this approach in vertebrates using the
experimentally robust zebrafish model. In the present study, we evaluated gene
expression changes in whole adult male zebrafish following an acute 24 hr high
dose exposure to three metals with known human health risks. Male adult zebrafish
were exposed to nickel chloride, cobalt chloride or sodium dichromate
concentrations corresponding to their respective 96 hr LC20, LC40 and LC60.
Histopathology was performed on a subset of metal-exposed zebrafish to
phenotypically anchor transcriptional changes associated with each metal.
RESULTS: Comparative analysis identified subsets of differentially expressed
transcripts both overlapping and unique to each metal. Application of gene
ontology (GO) and transcription factor (TF) enrichment algorithms revealed a
number of key biological processes perturbed by metal poisonings and the master
transcriptional regulators mediating gene expression changes. Metal poisoning
differentially activated biological processes associated with ribosome
biogenesis, proteosomal degradation, and p53 signaling cascades, while repressing
oxygen-generating pathways associated with amino acid and lipid metabolism.
Despite appreciable effects on gene regulation, nickel poisoning did not induce
any morphological alterations in male zebrafish organs and tissues.
Histopathological effects of cobalt remained confined to the olfactory system,
while chromium targeted the gills, pharynx, and intestinal mucosa. A number of
enriched transcription factors mediated the observed gene response to metal
poisoning, including known targets such as p53, HIF1a, and the myc oncogene, and 
novel regulatory factors such as XBP1, GATA6 and HNF3ß.
CONCLUSIONS: This work uses an experimentally innovative approach to capture
global responses to metal poisoning and provides mechanistic insights into metal 
toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4007779
PMID: 24612858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Autophagy. 2014 May;10(5):766-84. doi: 10.4161/auto.27954. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

Hepatitis C virus core protein activates autophagy through EIF2AK3 and ATF6 UPR
pathway-mediated MAP1LC3B and ATG12 expression.

Wang J(1), Kang R(1), Huang H(1), Xi X(1), Wang B(1), Wang J(1), Zhao Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens; Institute of Pathogen
Biology; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College;
Beijing, China.

HCV infection induces autophagy, but how this occurs is unclear. Here, we report 
the induction of autophagy by the structural HCV core protein and subsequent
endoplasmic reticular (ER) stress in Huh7 hepatoma cells. During ER stress, both 
the EIF2AK3 and ATF6 pathways of the unfolded protein response (UPR) were
activated by HCV core protein. Then, these pathways upregulated transcription
factors ATF4 and DDIT3. The ERN1-XBP1 pathway was not activated. Through ATF4 in 
the EIF2AK3 pathway, the autophagy gene ATG12 was upregulated. DDIT3 upregulated 
the transcription of autophagy gene MAP1LC3B (LC3B) by directly binding to the
-253 to -99 base region of the LC3B promoter, contributing to the development of 
autophagy. Collectively, these data suggest not only a novel role for the HCV
core protein in autophagy but also offer new insight into detailed molecular
mechanisms with respect to HCV-induced autophagy, specifically how downstream UPR
molecules regulate key autophagic gene expression.

PMID: 24589849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Neurochem Int. 2014 Apr;69:9-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2014.02.002. Epub 2014 Feb
28.

Fluvoxamine moderates reduced voluntary activity following chronic dexamethasone 
infusion in mice via recovery of BDNF signal cascades.

Terada K(1), Izumo N(2), Suzuki B(3), Karube Y(4), Morikawa T(5), Ishibashi Y(6),
Kameyama T(5), Chiba K(3), Sasaki N(5), Iwata K(7), Matsuzaki H(7), Manabe T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science,
Yokohama College of Pharmacy, 601 Matano-cho, Totsuka-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
245-0066, Japan; Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 
814-0180, Japan. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Science, Yokohama College of Pharmacy, 601 Matano-cho, Totsuka-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 245-0066, Japan. Electronic address: n.izumo@hamayaku.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science,
Yokohama College of Pharmacy, 601 Matano-cho, Totsuka-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
245-0066, Japan. (4)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka University,
Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan. (5)Division of Gene Expression Mechanisms, Institute for
Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, 1-98 Dengakugakubo,
Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. (6)Department of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, Yokohama College of Pharmacy, 601 Matano-cho, 
Totsuka-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 245-0066, Japan; Division of Development Higher
Brain Functions (University of Fukui), United Graduate School of Child
Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University and Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, Chiba University and University of Fukui, Fukui, Japan.
(7)Division of Development Higher Brain Functions (University of Fukui), United
Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa University and
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Chiba University and University of
Fukui, Fukui, Japan. (8)Division of Gene Expression Mechanisms, Institute for
Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, 1-98 Dengakugakubo,
Kutsukake-cho, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. Electronic address:
manabe@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

Major depression is a complex disorder characterized by genetic and environmental
interactions. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) effectively treat
depression. Neurogenesis following chronic antidepressant treatment activates
brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signaling. In this study, we analyzed
the effects of the SSRI fluvoxamine (Flu) on locomotor activity and forced-swim
behavior using chronic dexamethasone (cDEX) infusions in mice, which engenders
depression-like behavior. Infusion of cDEX decreased body weight and produced a
trend towards lower locomotor activity during darkness. In the forced-swim test, 
cDEX-mice exhibited increased immobility times compared with mice administered
saline. Flu treatment reversed decreased locomotor activity and mitigated
forced-swim test immobility. Real-time polymerase chain reactions using brain RNA
samples yielded significantly lower BDNF mRNA levels in cDEX-mice compared with
the saline group. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated X-box binding protein-1
(XBP1) gene expression was lower in cDEX-mice compared with the saline group.
However, marked expression of the XBP1 gene was observed in cDEX-mice treated
with Flu compared with mice given saline and untreated cDEX-mice. Expression of
5-HT2A and Sigma-1 receptors decreased after cDEX infusion compared with the
saline group, and these decreases normalized to control levels upon Flu
treatment. Our results indicate that the Flu moderates reductions in voluntary
activity following chronic dexamethasone infusions in mice via recovery of BDNF
signal cascades.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014 May;67:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.015. Epub 2014 Feb
18.

Protective effects of N-acetylcysteine against monosodium glutamate-induced
astrocytic cell death.

Park E(1), Yu KH(2), Kim do K(3), Kim S(4), Sapkota K(5), Kim SJ(6), Kim CS(3),
Chun HS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, Graduate School, Chosun University, Gwangju
501-759, Republic of Korea. (3)Oral Biology Research Institute, Chosun University
School of Dentistry, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Alternative Medicine, Gwangju University, Gwangju 503-703, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of
Korea; Central Department of Zoology, Tribhuvan University, Kirtipur, Kathmandu, 
Nepal. (6)Department of Biotechnology, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759,
Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical Science, Chosun University, Gwangju
501-759, Republic of Korea; Department of Life Science, Graduate School, Chosun
University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Biotechnology,
Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea; Department of Biomedical
Science, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea; Department of
Life Science, Graduate School, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: hsjeon@chosun.ac.kr.

Monosodium glutamate (MSG) is a flavor enhancer, largely used in the food
industry and it was reported to have excitotoxic effects. Higher amounts of MSG
consumption have been related with increased risk of many diseases, including
Chinese restaurant syndrome and metabolic syndromes in human. This study
investigated the protective effects of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) on MSG-induced
cytotoxicity in C6 astrocytic cells. MSG (20 mM)-induced reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) generation and apoptotic cell death were significantly attenuated by NAC
(500 µM) pretreatment. NAC effectively inhibited the MSG-induced mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP) loss and intracellular reduced glutathione (GSH)
depletion. In addition, NAC significantly attenuated MSG-induced endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress markers, such as XBP1 splicing and CHOP, PERK, and GRP78
up-regulation. Furthermore, NAC prevented the changes of MSG-induced Bcl-2
expression level. These results suggest that NAC can protect C6 astrocytic cells 
against MSG-induced oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and ER stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24556569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. BMC Vet Res. 2014 Feb 20;10:46. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-46.

Up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress induced genes of the unfolded
protein response in the liver of periparturient dairy cows.

Gessner DK, Schlegel G, Ringseis R, Schwarz FJ, Eder K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition and Nutrition Physiology,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32, Giessen D-35392,
Germany. klaus.eder@ernaehrung.uni-giessen.de.

BACKGROUND: In dairy cows, the periparturient phase is a stressful period, which 
is commonly associated with strong metabolic adaptations and the development of
pathophysiologic conditions and disorders. Some of the symptoms occurring in the 
liver, such as the development of fatty liver, are similar to those observed
under the condition of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Therefore, we
hypothesized, that in the liver of dairy cows ER stress is induced during the
periparturient phase, which in turn leads to an induction of the unfolded protein
response (UPR). In order to investigate this hypothesis, we determined relative
mRNA concentrations of 14 genes of the ER stress-induced UPR in liver biopsy
samples of 13 dairy cows at 3 wk antepartum and 1, 5 and 14 wk postpartum.
RESULTS: We found, that the mRNA concentrations of 13 out of the 14 genes
involved in the UPR in the liver were significantly increased (1.9 to 4.0 fold)
at 1 wk postpartum compared to 3 wk antepartum. From 1 wk postpartum to later
lactation, mRNA concentrations of all the genes considered were declining.
Moreover, at 1 wk postpartum, mRNA concentration of the spliced variant of XBP1
was increased in comparison to 3 wk antepartum, indicating that splicing of XBP1 
- a hallmark of ER stress - was induced following the onset of lactation.
CONCLUSION: The present study reveals, that ER stress might be induced during the
periparturient phase in the liver of dairy cows. We assume that the ER
stress-induced UPR might contribute to the pathophysiologic conditions commonly
observed in the liver of periparturient cows, such as the development of fatty
liver, ketosis or inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3936700
PMID: 24555446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Apr;9(4):1365-70. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1936. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Melittin protein inhibits the proliferation of MG63 cells by activating
inositol-requiring protein-1a and X-box binding protein 1-mediated apoptosis.

Fan Q(1), Hu Y(2), Pang H(2), Sun J(2), Wang Z(2), Li J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, People's Hospital of
Jimo, Qingdao, Shandong 266200, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to explore the pro-apoptotic effect and specific
mechanism of action of melittin (MEL) in humans. The effects of MEL on apoptosis 
in osteosarcoma and fetal osteoblast cells were investigated, and the mechanism
that induced MG63 cell growth was also explored. The effects of MEL on cell
proliferation were detected by a
2,3-bis-(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxanilide
analysis. Apoptosis was detected by flow cytometric analysis. MEL protein,
inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE-a), phosphorylated-protein kinase R-like
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) kinase, spliced X-box-1 (XBP1), eukaryotic translation
initiation factor-2a, cleaved activating transcription factor-6, caspase-12 and
C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) were detected in three groups and two cell lines by
western blot analysis. The results indicated that the expression or incubation of
MEL in the MG63 cells triggered apoptosis and the inhibition of proliferation.
One protein from the ER stress unfolded protein response pathway, IRE-a, was
involved in the MEL-induced apoptosis in MG63 cells. Furthermore, spliced XBP1
protein was significantly increased in the MEL peptide incubated and MEL
expressing groups of MG63 cells. Furthermore, CHOP protein expression was
activated in MG63 cells following being incubated with or expressing MEL. In
conclusion, MEL serves as an effective factor that inhibits the proliferation of 
MG63 cells via activating the ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway. This
activation is triggered by the IRE-a pathway mediated by inducing CHOP protein
expression.

PMID: 24535635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Apr;9(4):1395-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1935. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Naloxone induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in PC12 cells.

Seo S(1), Kwon YS(2), Yu K(3), Kim SW(4), Kwon OY(5), Kang KH(6), Kwon K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Inje University Busan-Paik Hospital, Busan 614-735, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nursing, JoongBu University, Geumsan 312-702, Republic of Korea.
(3)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience & Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Chungnam National
University Hospital, Daejeon 301-721, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Anatomy, College of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 301-747,
Republic of Korea. (6)Department of Dental Hygiene, Konyang University, Daejeon
301-832, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science,
College of Health and Welfare, Kyungwoon University, Gumi 730-739, Republic of
Korea.

Naloxone is an opioid inverse agonist used in the treatment of opiate overdose,
with well known pharmacology. In the present study, we determined the effects of 
naloxone on the unfolded protein response (UPR) in PC12 cells. Data from a
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay
indicated that naloxone may accelerate PC12 cell apoptosis in a dose-dependent
manner. We also demonstrated that naloxone upregulated gene expression of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones, including binding immunoglobulin protein
(Bip), calnexin, ER protein 29 (ERp29) and protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), and
ER stress sensors, including activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6),
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) and protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK). In
addition, naloxone also induced typical ER stress phenomena, including ART6
proteolytic cleavage, eIF2a phosphorylation and XBP1 mRNA splicing. Furthermore, 
naloxone upregulated gene expression of ER chaperones and ER stress sensors in in
vivo experiments. To the best of our knowledge, these results are the first to
indicate that naloxone induces ER stress in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 24535611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. BMC Biochem. 2014 Feb 13;15:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-15-3.

Multiple autophosphorylations significantly enhance the endoribonuclease activity
of human inositol requiring enzyme 1a.

Itzhak D, Bright M, McAndrew P, Mirza A, Newbatt Y, Strover J, Widya M, Thompson 
A, Morgan G, Collins I, Davies F(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research,
Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK. faith.davies@icr.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum stress, caused by the presence of misfolded
proteins, activates the stress sensor inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a). The
resulting increase in IRE1a RNase activity causes sequence-specific cleavage of
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, resulting in upregulation of the unfolded
protein response and cellular adaptation to stress. The precise mechanism of
human IRE1a activation is currently unclear. The role of IRE1a kinase activity is
disputed, as results from the generation of various kinase-inactivating mutations
in either yeast or human cells are discordant. Kinase activity can also be made
redundant by small molecules which bind the ATP binding site. We set out to
uncover a role for IRE1a kinase activity using wild-type cytosolic protein
constructs.
RESULTS: We show that concentration-dependent oligomerisation is sufficient to
cause IRE1a cytosolic domain RNase activity in vitro. We demonstrate a role for
the kinase activity by showing that autophosphorylation enhances RNase activity. 
Inclusion of the IRE1a linker domain in protein constructs allows
hyperphosphorylation and further enhancement of RNase activity, highlighting the 
importance of kinase activity. We show that IRE1a phosphorylation status
correlates with an increased propensity to form oligomeric complexes and that
forced dimerisation causes great enhancement in RNase activity. In addition we
demonstrate that even when IRE1a is forced to dimerise, by a GST-tag,
phospho-enhancement of activity is still observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together these experiments support the hypothesis that
phosphorylation is important in modulating IRE1a RNase activity which is achieved
by increasing the propensity of IRE1a to dimerise. This work supports the
development of IRE1a kinase inhibitors for use in the treatment of secretory
cancers.

PMCID: PMC3928614
PMID: 24524643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):9584-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.526517. Epub 2014 
Feb 11.

Toll-like receptor 4-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress in intestinal crypts
induces necrotizing enterocolitis.

Afrazi A(1), Branca MF, Sodhi CP, Good M, Yamaguchi Y, Egan CE, Lu P, Jia H,
Shaffiey S, Lin J, Ma C, Vincent G, Prindle T Jr, Weyandt S, Neal MD, Ozolek JA, 
Wiersch J, Tschurtschenthaler M, Shiota C, Gittes GK, Billiar TR, Mollen K, Kaser
A, Blumberg R, Hackam DJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Divisions of Pediatric Surgery.

The cellular cues that regulate the apoptosis of intestinal stem cells (ISCs)
remain incompletely understood, yet may play a role in diseases characterized by 
ISC loss including necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC). Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)
was recently found to be expressed on ISCs, where its activation leads to ISC
apoptosis through mechanisms that remain incompletely explained. We now
hypothesize that TLR4 induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress within ISCs,
leading to their apoptosis in NEC pathogenesis, and that high ER stress within
the premature intestine predisposes to NEC development. Using transgenic mice and
cultured enteroids, we now demonstrate that TLR4 induces ER stress within Lgr5
(leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptor 5)-positive ISCs,
resulting in crypt apoptosis. TLR4 signaling within crypts was required, because 
crypt ER stress and apoptosis occurred in TLR4(<U+0394>IEC-OVER) mice expressing TLR4
only within intestinal crypts and epithelium, but not TLR4(<U+0394>IEC) mice lacking
intestinal TLR4. TLR4-mediated ER stress and apoptosis of ISCs required PERK
(protein kinase-related PKR-like ER kinase), CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), and
MyD88 (myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88), but not ATF6
(activating transcription factor 6) or XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1). Human and 
mouse NEC showed high crypt ER stress and apoptosis, whereas genetic inhibition
of PERK or CHOP attenuated ER stress, crypt apoptosis, and NEC severity.
Strikingly, using intragastric delivery into fetal mouse intestine, prevention of
ER stress reduced TLR4-mediated ISC apoptosis and mucosal disruption. These
findings identify a novel link between TLR4-induced ER stress and ISC apoptosis
in NEC pathogenesis and suggest that increased ER stress within the premature
bowel predisposes to NEC development.

PMCID: PMC3975009
PMID: 24519940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cell Signal. 2013 Oct 24. pii: S0898-6568(13)00315-X. doi:
10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.10.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Yessotoxin Induces Er-Stress Followed By Autophagic Cell Death In Glioma Cells
Mediated By mTOR and BNIP3.

Rubiolo JA(1), López-Alonso H(2), Martínez P(3), Millán A(3), Cagide E(4),
Vieytes MR(5), Vega FV(5), Botana LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Santiago
de Compostela (USC), Campus Lugo, 27002 Lugo, Spain; Departamento de Fisiología, 
Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), Campus
Lugo, 27002 Lugo, Spain. Electronic address: ja.rubiolo@usc.es. (2)Departamento
de Farmacología, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela
(USC), Campus Lugo, 27002 Lugo, Spain. (3)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), Campus de Lugo, 27002
Lugo, Spain. (4)Laboratorio CIFGA S.A. Plaza de Santo Domingo 20, 5ta planta,
27002 Lugo, Spain. (5)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidad de Santiago de Compostela (USC), Campus Lugo, 27002 Lugo, Spain.

Yessotoxin at nanomolar concentrations can induce programmed cell death in
different model systems. Paraptosis-like cell death induced by YTX in BC3H1
cells, which are insensitive to several caspase inhibitors, has also been
reported. This makes yessotoxin of interest in the search of molecules that
target cancer cells vulnerabilities when resistance to apoptosis is observed. To 
better understand the effect of this molecule at the molecular level on tumor
cells, we conducted a transcriptomic analysis using 3 human glioma cell lines
with different sensitivities to yessotoxin. We show that the toxin induces a
deregulation of the lipid metabolism in glioma cells as a consequence of
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress. The endoplasmic reticulum stress in
turn arrests the cell cycle and inhibits the protein synthesis. In the three cell
lines used we show that YTX induces autophagy, which is involved in cell death.
The sensibility of the cell lines used towards autophagic cell death was related 
to their doubling time, being more resistant the cell line with the lowest
proliferation rate. The involvement of mTOR and BNIP3 in the autophagy induction 
was also determined.

© 2013.

PMID: 24514040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


328. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 11;14:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-78.

FOXA1 promotes tumor cell proliferation through AR involving the Notch pathway in
endometrial cancer.

Qiu M, Bao W, Wang J, Yang T, He X, Liao Y, Wan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Xinsongjiang Road, Shanghai,
China. wanxp@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests that forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is
frequently dysregulated in many types of human cancers. However, the exact
function and mechanism of FOXA1 in human endometrial cancer (EC) remains unclear.
METHODS: FOXA1 expression, androgen receptor (AR) expression, and the
relationships of these two markers with clinicopathological factors were
determined by immunohistochemistry analysis. FOXA1 and AR were up-regulated by
transient transfection with plasmids, and were down-regulated by transfection
with siRNA or short hairpin RNA (shRNA). The effects of FOXA1 depletion and FOXA1
overexpression on AR-mediated transcription as well as Notch pathway and their
impact on EC cell proliferation were examined by qRT-PCR, western blotting,
co-immunoprecipitation, ChIP-PCR, MTT, colony-formation, and xenograft
tumor-formation assays.
RESULTS: We found that the expression of FOXA1 and AR in ECs was significantly
higher than that in a typical hyperplasia and normal tissues. FOXA1 expression
was significantly correlated with AR expression in clinical tissues. High FOXA1
levels positively correlated with pathological grade and depth of myometrial
invasion in EC. High AR levels also positively correlated with pathological grade
in EC. Moreover, the expression of XBP1, MYC, ZBTB16, and UHRF1, which are
downstream targets of AR, was promoted by FOXA1 up-regulation or inhibited by
FOXA1 down-regulation. Co-immunoprecipitation showed that FOXA1 interacted with
AR in EC cells. ChIP-PCR assays showed that FOXA1 and AR could directly bind to
the promoter and enhancer regions upstream of MYC. Mechanistic investigation
revealed that over-expression of Notch1 and Hes1 proteins by FOXA1 could be
reversed by AR depletion. In addition, we showed that down-regulation of AR
attenuated FOXA1-up-regulated cell proliferation. However, AR didn't influence
the promotion effect of FOXA1 on cell migration and invasion. In vivo xenograft
model, FOXA1 knockdown reduced the rate of tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FOXA1 promotes cell proliferation by AR
and activates Notch pathway. It indicated that FOXA1 and AR may serve as
potential gene therapy in EC.

PMCID: PMC3926330
PMID: 24512546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell. 2014 Feb 20;53(4):562-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.01.004. Epub 2014 
Feb 6.

Protein disulfide isomerase A6 controls the decay of IRE1a signaling via
disulfide-dependent association.

Eletto D(1), Eletto D(1), Dersh D(1), Gidalevitz T(2), Argon Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Electronic address: tg443@drexel.edu. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and The University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
yargon@mail.med.upenn.edu.

The response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress relies on activation of
unfolded protein response (UPR) sensors, and the outcome of the UPR depends on
the duration and strength of signal. Here, we demonstrate a mechanism that
attenuates the activity of the UPR sensor inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a). A
resident ER protein disulfide isomerase, PDIA6, limits the duration of IRE1a
activity by direct binding to cysteine 148 in the lumenal domain of the sensor,
which is oxidized when IRE1 is activated. PDIA6-deficient cells hyperrespond to
ER stress with sustained autophosphorylation of IRE1a and splicing of XBP1 mRNA, 
resulting in exaggerated upregulation of UPR target genes and increased
apoptosis. In vivo, PDIA6-deficient C. elegans exhibits constitutive UPR and
fails to complete larval development, a program that normally requires the UPR.
Thus, PDIA6 activity provides a mechanism that limits UPR signaling and maintains
it within a physiologically appropriate range.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3977204
PMID: 24508390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Haematologica. 2014 Feb;99(2):e14-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.090142.

High XBP1 expression is a marker of better outcome in multiple myeloma patients
treated with bortezomib.

Gambella M(1), Rocci A, Passera R, Gay F, Omedè P, Crippa C, Corradini P, Romano 
A, Rossi D, Ladetto M, Boccadoro M, Palumbo A.

Author information: 
(1)appalumbo@yahoo.com.

PMCID: PMC3912976
PMID: 24497562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Apr;15(4):452-62. doi: 10.4161/cbt.27820. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

Targeting the unfolded protein response, XBP1, and the NLRP3 inflammasome in
fibrosis and cancer.

Overley-Adamson B(1), Artlett CM(2), Stephens C(3), Sassi-Gaha S(2), Weis RD(4), 
Thacker JD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Referral and Emergency Services (CARES); Langhorne, PA USA. 
(2)Drexel University College of Medicine; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology; Philadelphia, PA USA. (3)TherimuneX Pharmaceuticals, Inc.;
Doylestown, PA USA. (4)Doylestown Veterinary Hospital; Doylestown, PA USA.
(5)Drexel University College of Medicine; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology; Philadelphia, PA USA; TherimuneX Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Doylestown,
PA USA.

Increasing health care costs in the US are due in a large part to the increasing 
prevalence of chronic diseases in an aging population. Current therapeutic
strategies for treating chronic diseases alleviate symptoms allowing patients to 
live longer with these diseases, but they do little, however, to alter the
underlying disease course. Recent advances in molecular biology are revealing new
drug targets that may significantly alter the course of these diseases and, as a 
result, offer economic relief from burgeoning health care costs. Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated as an underlying pathology in many
chronic diseases, and, therefore, the development of therapies designed to
ameliorate ER stress may yield novel, effective treatment strategies. Herein, we 
report that X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) may be one of the earliest proteins
engaged in response to ER stress. We show that a new signaling peptide derived
from the ER-embedded transient receptor potential calcium channel protein 1
(TRPC1) engages XBP1 upstream of NLRP3 inflammasome-mediated maturation and
secretion of IL-1ß/IL-18. Moreover, we show that a synthetic homolog of this
signaling peptide (Naclynamide) administered intravenously twice weekly over a
4-week treatment course induced suppuration and evoked partial or complete
resolution of lesions associated with a fibrotic granuloma, a lymphosarcoma, and 
a colo-rectal carcinoma in canine patients. The mode of action for Naclynamide
as a first-in-class anti-cancer drug candidate is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3979823
PMID: 24496016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2029-33. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302549. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Cutting edge: Endoplasmic reticulum stress licenses macrophages to produce mature
IL-1ß in response to TLR4 stimulation through a caspase-8- and TRIF-dependent
pathway.

Shenderov K(1), Riteau N, Yip R, Mayer-Barber KD, Oland S, Hieny S, Fitzgerald P,
Oberst A, Dillon CP, Green DR, Cerundolo V, Sher A.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892;

The accumulation of improperly folded proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) generates perturbations known as ER stress that engage the unfolded protein 
response. ER stress is involved in many inflammatory pathologies that are also
associated with the production of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1ß. In this
study, we demonstrate that macrophages undergoing ER stress are able to drive the
production and processing of pro-IL-1ß in response to LPS stimulation in vitro.
Interestingly, the classical NLRP3 inflammasome is dispensable, because
maturation of pro-IL-1ß occurs normally in the absence of the adaptor protein
ASC. In contrast, processing of pro-IL-1ß is fully dependent on caspase-8.
Intriguingly, we found that neither the unfolded protein response transcription
factors XBP1 and CHOP nor the TLR4 adaptor molecule MyD88 is necessary for
caspase-8 activation. Instead, both caspase activation and IL-1ß production
require the alternative TLR4 adaptor TRIF. This pathway may contribute to
IL-1-driven tissue pathology in certain disease settings.

PMCID: PMC3935725
PMID: 24489101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Dev Neurosci. 2014;36(1):29-43. doi: 10.1159/000357496. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Molecular changes during neurodevelopment following second-trimester binge
ethanol exposure in a mouse model of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: from
immediate effects to long-term adaptation.

Mantha K(1), Laufer BI, Singh SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Ont., Canada.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is an umbrella term that refers to a wide 
range of behavioral and cognitive deficits resulting from prenatal alcohol
exposure. It involves changes in brain gene expression that underlie lifelong
FASD symptoms. How these changes are achieved from immediate to long-term
effects, and how they are maintained, is unknown. We have used the C57BL/6J mouse
to assess the dynamics of genomic alterations following binge alcohol exposure.
Ethanol-exposed fetal (short-term effect) and adult (long-term effect) brains
were assessed for gene expression and microRNA (miRNA) changes using Affymetrix
mouse arrays. We identified 48 and 68 differentially expressed genes in short-
and long-term groups, respectively. No gene was common between the 2 groups.
Short-term (immediate) genes were involved in cellular compromise and apoptosis, 
which represent ethanol's toxic effects. Long-term genes were involved in various
cellular functions, including epigenetics. Using quantitative RT-PCR, we
confirmed the downregulation of long-term genes: Camk1g, Ccdc6, Egr3, Hspa5, and 
Xbp1. miRNA arrays identified 20 differentially expressed miRNAs, one of which
(miR-302c) was confirmed. miR-302c was involved in an inverse relationship with
Ccdc6. A network-based model involving altered genes illustrates the importance
of cellular redox, stress and inflammation in FASD. Our results also support a
critical role of apoptosis in FASD, and the potential involvement of miRNAs in
the adaptation of gene expression following prenatal ethanol exposure. The
ultimate molecular footprint involves inflammatory disease, neurological disease 
and skeletal and muscular disorders as major alterations in FASD. At the cellular
level, these processes represent abnormalities in redox, stress and inflammation,
with potential underpinnings to anxiety.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24481079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 3;588(5):733-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.017. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Hepatitis B virus X increases immune cell recruitment by induction of chemokine
SDF-1.

Cho HK(1), Kim SY(1), Seong JK(2), Cheong J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735,
Republic of Korea. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Genomics, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Interdisciplinary Program for Bioinformatics, and Program
for Cancer Biology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: molecule85@pusan.ac.kr.

Hepatitis B virus X protein is a major factor in the HBV-induced disease
developments. Stromal cell-derived factor-1 is a small cytokine that is strongly 
chemotactic for lymphocytes. We explored the role of HBx on recruitment of
HBV-induced virus-nonspecific immune cells into liver. Immune cell recruitment
and SDF-1 expression level significantly increased in livers of HBx-transgenic
mice and X-box binding protein-1 significantly increased SDF-1 gene expression.
Finally, we confirmed that immune cell recruitment into liver tissues of HBx-TG
mice was diminished by a chemokine receptor antagonist. Therefore, HBx increases 
ER stress-dependent SDF-1 expression and induces HBV-induced immune cell
recruitment into liver.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2013 Dec;78(12):1333-41. doi: 10.1134/S0006297913120031.

Human leptin triggers proliferation of A549 cells via blocking endoplasmic
reticulum stress-related apoptosis.

Wang W(1), Yan H, Dou C, Su Y.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 510120,
China.

Retraction in
    Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Dec;79(12):1423.

Lung cancer is a disease characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of 
the lung. Leptin is a pleiotropic hormone with antiapoptotic and proliferative
roles involved in several systems. However, there is no known antiapoptotic
mechanism of leptin in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). So, we investigated
the antiapoptotic mechanism of leptin in NSCLC. Proliferation, apoptosis, and the
specific mechanism of leptin-transfected cells were analyzed in this study.
Leptin, p-Perk, IRE1, cleaved ATF6, spliced XBP1, eIF2-a, TRAF2, CHOP, and
caspase 12 proteins were detected by Western blot, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-related mRNA was detected by semi-quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR). Leptin in A549 and transfected cells inhibited cisplatin-activated ER
stress-associated mRNA transcription and activation of proteins. ER stress
unfolded protein response (UPR) proteins, PERK and ATF6, were involved in
leptin-triggered apoptosis. XBP1 and TRAF2 were increased significantly when
treated with cisplatin in A549-siLPT and non-transfected cells. CHOP expression
was blocked in A549 and transfected cells (LPT-PeP and LPT-EX cells). In
conclusion, leptin can promote the proliferation of A549 cells through blocking
ER stress-mediated apoptosis. This blocking is mediated by the p-Perk and ATF6
pathway through blocking activation of CHOP.

PMID: 24460967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jan 14;15:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-24.

Transcriptome profiling of granulosa cells of bovine ovarian follicles during
growth from small to large antral sizes.

Hatzirodos N, Irving-Rodgers HF, Hummitzsch K, Harland ML, Morris SE, Rodgers
RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Institute,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.
ray.rodgers@adelaide.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: At later stages of folliculogenesis, the mammalian ovarian follicle
contains layers of epithelial granulosa cells surrounding an antral cavity.
During follicle development granulosa cells replicate, secrete hormones and
support the growth of the oocyte. In cattle, the follicle needs to grow > 10 mm
in diameter to allow an oocyte to ovulate, following which the granulosa cells
cease dividing and differentiate into the specialised cells of the corpus luteum.
To better understand the molecular basis of follicular growth and granulosa cell 
maturation, we undertook transcriptome profiling of granulosa cells from small (<
5 mm; n = 10) and large (> 10 mm, n = 4) healthy bovine follicles using
Affymetrix microarrays (24,128 probe sets).
RESULTS: Principal component analysis for the first two components and
hierarchical clustering showed clustering into two groups, small and large, with 
the former being more heterogeneous. Size-frequency distributions of the
coefficient of variation of the signal intensities of each probe set also
revealed that small follicles were more heterogeneous than the large. IPA and GO 
enrichment analyses revealed that processes of axonal guidance, immune signalling
and cell rearrangement were most affected in large follicles. The most important 
networks were associated with: (A) Notch, SLIT/ROBO and PI3K signalling, and (B) 
ITGB5 and extracellular matrix signalling through extracellular signal related
kinases (ERKs). Upstream regulator genes which were predicted to be active in
large follicles included STAT and XBP1. By comparison, developmental processes
such as those stimulated by KIT, IHH and MEST were most active in small
follicles. MGEA5 was identified as an upstream regulator in small follicles. It
encodes an enzyme that modifies the activity of many target proteins, including
those involved in energy sensing, by removal of N-acetylglucosamine from serine
and threonine residues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that as follicles enlarge more genes and/or
pathways are activated than are inactivated, and gene expression becomes more
uniform. These findings could be interpreted that either the cells in large
follicles are more uniform in their gene expression, or that follicles are more
uniform or a combination of both and that additional factors, such as LH, are
additionally controlling the granulosa cells.

PMCID: PMC3898003
PMID: 24422759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Nutr Res. 2014 Jan;34(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2013.10.010. Epub 2013 Oct 
29.

Acute exposure to high-fat diets increases hepatic expression of genes related to
cell repair and remodeling in female rats.

Miller CN(1), Morton HP(2), Cooney PT(3), Winters TG(3), Ramseur KR(3), Rayalam
S(4), Della-Fera MA(5), Baile CA(6), Brown LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(3)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
Greensboro, NC. (4)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Philadelphia College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Suwanee, GA. (5)Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. (6)Department of Foods and Nutrition,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA; Department of Animal and Dairy Science,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA. Electronic address: cbaile@uga.edu.

High-fat diets (HFD) promote the development of both obesity and fatty liver
disease through the up-regulation of hepatic lipogenesis. Insulin resistance, a
hallmark of both conditions, causes dysfunctional fuel partitioning and increases
in lipogenesis. Recent work has demonstrated that systemic insulin resistance
occurs in as little as the first 72 hours of an HFD, suggesting the potential for
hepatic disruption with HFD at this time point. The current study sought to
determine differences in expression of lipogenic genes between sexes in
3-month-old male and female Long-Evans rats after 72 hours of a 40% HFD or a 17% 
fat (chow) diet. Owing to the response of estrogen on hepatic signaling, we
hypothesized that a sexual dimorphic response would occur in the expression of
lipogenic enzymes, inflammatory cytokines, apoptotic, and cell repair and
remodeling genes. Both sexes consumed more energy when fed an HFD compared with
their low fat-fed controls. However, only the males fed the HFD had a significant
increase in body fat. Regardless of sex, HFD caused down-regulation of lipogenic 
and inflammatory genes. Interestingly, females fed an HFD had up-regulated
expression of apoptotic and cell repair-related genes compared with the males.
This may suggest that females are more responsive to the acute hepatic injury
effects caused by HFDs. In summary, neither male nor female rats displayed
disrupted hepatic metabolic pathways after 72 hours of the HFD treatment. In
addition, female rats appear to have protection from increases in fat deposition,
possibly due to increased caloric expenditure; male rats fed an HFD were less
active, as demonstrated by distance traveled in their home cage.

© 2013.

PMID: 24418250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 8;9(1):e85318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085318. eCollection 
2014.

Overexpression of endothelin 1 triggers hepatocarcinogenesis in zebrafish and
promotes cell proliferation and migration through the AKT pathway.

Lu JW(1), Liao CY(2), Yang WY(3), Lin YM(4), Jin SL(5), Wang HD(6), Yuh CH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan ; Department of Life Sciences, National
Central University, Jhongli City, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Molecular and 
Genomic Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan ;
Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, Changhua
Christian Hospital, Changhua City, Changhua County, Taiwan ; Department of
Medical Technology, Jen-Teh Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management,
Miaoli, Taiwan. (5)Department of Life Sciences, National Central University,
Jhongli City, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (7)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine,
National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan ; Institute of
Bioinformatics and Structural Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan ; Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.

Hepatocarcinogenesis commonly involves the gradual progression from hepatitis to 
fibrosis and cirrhosis, and ultimately to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Endothelin 1 (Edn1) has been identified as a gene that is significantly
up-regulated in HBx-induced HCC in mice. In this study, we further investigated
the role of edn1 in hepatocarcinogenesis using a transgenic zebrafish model and a
cell culture system. Liver-specific edn1 expression caused steatosis, fibrosis,
glycogen accumulation, bile duct dilation, hyperplasia, and HCC in zebrafish.
Overexpression of EDN1 in 293T cells enhanced cell proliferation and cell
migration in in vitro and xenotransplantation assays and was accompanied with
up-regulation of several cell cycle/proliferation- and migration-specific genes. 
Furthermore, expression of the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway-related
mediators, such as spliced XBP1, ATF6, IRE1, and PERK, was also up-regulated at
both the RNA and protein levels. In the presence of an EDN1 inhibitor or an AKT
inhibitor, these increases were diminished and the EDN1-induced migration ability
also was disappeared, suggesting that the EDN1 effects act through activation of 
the AKT pathway to enhance the UPR and subsequently activate the expression of
downstream genes. Additionally, p-AKT is enhanced in the edn1 transgenic fish
compared to the GFP-mCherry control. The micro RNA miR-1 was found to inhibit the
expression of EDN1. We also observed an inverse correlation between EDN1 and
miR-1 expression in HCC patients. In conclusion, our data suggest that EDN1 plays
an important role in HCC progression by activating the PI3K/AKT pathway and is
regulated by miR-1.

PMCID: PMC3885696
PMID: 24416389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Autoimmun. 2014 May;50:59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.11.002. Epub 2013 Dec
31.

TLR dependent XBP-1 activation induces an autocrine loop in rheumatoid arthritis 
synoviocytes.

Savic S(1), Ouboussad L(1), Dickie LJ(1), Geiler J(1), Wong C(1), Doody GM(2),
Churchman SM(1), Ponchel F(1), Emery P(3), Cook GP(2), Buch MH(1), Tooze RM(2),
McDermott MF(4).

Author information: 
(1)NIHR-Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit (NIHR-LMBRU), Leeds
Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine (LIRMM), Wellcome Trust
Brenner Building, St James's University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds LS9 7TF, 
UK. (2)Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, University of Leeds, Wellcome
Trust Brenner Building, St James's University Hospital, Leeds LS9 7TF, UK.
(3)Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine, University of
Leeds, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Chapeltown Road, Leeds LS7 4SA, UK; NIHR Leeds
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust,
Leeds, UK. (4)NIHR-Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit (NIHR-LMBRU),
Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine (LIRMM), Wellcome Trust
Brenner Building, St James's University Hospital, Beckett Street, Leeds LS9 7TF, 
UK. Electronic address: M.McDermott@leeds.ac.uk.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a central regulator of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response. It is induced via activation of the IRE1 stress
sensor as part of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and has been implicated in 
several diseases processes. XBP1 can also be activated in direct response to
Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligation independently of the UPR but the pathogenic
significance of this mode of XBP1 activation is not well understood. Here we show
that TLR-dependent XBP1 activation is operative in the synovial fibroblasts (SF) 
of patients with active rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We investigated the expression
of ER stress response genes in patients with active RA and also in patients in
remission. The active (spliced) form of (s)XBP1 was significantly overexpressed
in the active RA group compared to healthy controls and patients in remission.
Paradoxically, expression of nine other ER stress response genes was reduced in
active RA compared to patients in remission, suggestive of a UPR-independent
process. However, sXBP1 was induced in SF by TLR4 and TLR2 stimulation, resulting
in sXBP1-dependent interleukin-6 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF) production. We 
also show that TNF itself induces sXBP1 in SF, thus generating a potential
feedback loop for sustained SF activation. These data confirm the first link
between TLR-dependent XBP1 activation and human inflammatory disease. sXBP1
appears to play a central role in this process by providing a convergence point
for two different stimuli to maintain activation of SF.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4012140
PMID: 24387801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1978-93. doi: 10.2337/db13-1383. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

RNA sequencing identifies dysregulation of the human pancreatic islet
transcriptome by the saturated fatty acid palmitate.

Cnop M(1), Abdulkarim B(2), Bottu G(2), Cunha DA(2), Igoillo-Esteve M(2), Masini 
M(3), Turatsinze JV(2), Griebel T(4), Villate O(2), Santin I(2), Bugliani M(3),
Ladriere L(2), Marselli L(3), McCarthy MI(5), Marchetti P(3), Sammeth M(6),
Eizirik DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, ULB Center for Diabetes Research,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, BelgiumDivision of Endocrinology,
Erasmus Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
mcnop@ulb.ac.be. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, ULB Center for Diabetes 
Research, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. (3)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (4)Functional
Bioinformatics, Centre Nacional d'Anàlisi Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford, U.K.Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (6)Functional Bioinformatics, Centre Nacional 
d'Anàlisi Genòmica, Barcelona, SpainLaboratório Nacional de Computação
Cientifica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1823-5.

Pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction and death are central in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes (T2D). Saturated fatty acids cause ß-cell failure and contribute to
diabetes development in genetically predisposed individuals. Here we used RNA
sequencing to map transcripts expressed in five palmitate-treated human islet
preparations, observing 1,325 modified genes. Palmitate induced fatty acid
metabolism and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Functional studies identified
novel mediators of adaptive ER stress signaling. Palmitate modified genes
regulating ubiquitin and proteasome function, autophagy, and apoptosis.
Inhibition of autophagic flux and lysosome function contributed to lipotoxicity. 
Palmitate inhibited transcription factors controlling ß-cell phenotype, including
PAX4 and GATA6. Fifty-nine T2D candidate genes were expressed in human islets,
and 11 were modified by palmitate. Palmitate modified expression of 17 splicing
factors and shifted alternative splicing of 3,525 transcripts. Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis of modified transcripts and genes confirmed that top changed functions
related to cell death. Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery (DAVID) analysis of transcription factor binding sites in
palmitate-modified transcripts revealed a role for PAX4, GATA, and the ER stress 
response regulators XBP1 and ATF6. This human islet transcriptome study
identified novel mechanisms of palmitate-induced ß-cell dysfunction and death.
The data point to cross talk between metabolic stress and candidate genes at the 
ß-cell level.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMID: 24379348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;85(3):451-9. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.090605. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

Triapine and a more potent dimethyl derivative induce endoplasmic reticulum
stress in cancer cells.

Trondl R(1), Flocke LS, Kowol CR, Heffeter P, Jungwirth U, Mair GE, Steinborn R, 
Enyedy ÉA, Jakupec MA, Berger W, Keppler BK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (R.T.,
L.S.F., C.R.K., M.A.J., B.K.K.); Research Platform "Translational Cancer Therapy 
Research" (R.T., C.R.K., P.H., U.J., M.A.J., W.B., B.K.K.), Institute of Cancer
Research (P.H., U.J., W.B.), and Comprehensive Cancer Centre (P.H., U.J., W.B.), 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Genomics Core Facility, VetCore,
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria (G.E.M., R.S.); Department of 
Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary
(E.A.E.); and Hungarian Academy of Science-USZ Bioinorganic Chemistry Research
Group, Szeged, Hungary (E.A.E.).

Triapine (3-AP; 3-aminopyridine-2-carboxaldehyde thiosemicarbazone), a
ribonucleotide reductase inhibitor, has been extensively evaluated in clinical
trials in the last decade. This study addresses the role of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress in the anticancer activity of 3-AP and the derivative
N(4),N(4)-dimethyl-triapine (3-AP-Me), differing from 3-AP only by dimethylation 
of the terminal nitrogen. Treatment of colon cancer cells with 3-AP or 3-AP-Me
activated all three ER stress pathways (PERK, IRE1a, ATF6) by phosphorylation of 
eIF2a and upregulation of gene expression of activating transcription factors
ATF4 and ATF6. In particular, 3-AP-Me led to an upregulation of the alternatively
spliced mRNA variant XBP1 (16-fold). Moreover, 3-AP and 3-AP-Me activated the
cellular stress kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinases, and inhibition of JNK activity antagonized the cytotoxic effect 
of both compounds. Subsequent to induction of the unfolded protein response, a
significant upregulation of proapoptotic proteins was detected, including the
transcription factor CHOP and Bim, an essential factor for ER stress-related
apoptosis. In correlation with the higher degree of ER stress after 3-AP-Me
treatment, also a more potent depolarization of mitochondrial membranes was
found. These data suggest that 3-AP and 3-AP-Me induce apoptosis via ER stress.
This was further corroborated by showing that inhibition of protein biosynthesis 
with cycloheximide prior to 3-AP and 3-AP-Me treatment leads to a significant
reduction of the antiproliferative properties of both compounds. Taken together, 
this study demonstrates that induction of ER stress contributes to the mode of
action of 3-AP and that terminal dimethylation leads to an even more pronounced
manifestation of this effect.

PMID: 24378333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 2;3(12):e970914.

Heteroclitic XBP1 peptides evoke tumor-specific memory cytotoxic T lymphocytes
against breast cancer, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer cells.

Bae J(1), Samur M(1), Munshi A(1), Hideshima T(1), Keskin D(1), Kimmelman A(1),
Lee AH(2), Dranoff G(1), Anderson KC(1), Munshi NC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ; Boston, MA USA ; Harvard Medical School ;
Boston, MA USA. (2)Weill Cornell Medical College ; New York, NY USA.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ; Boston, MA USA ; Harvard Medical School ;
Boston, MA USA ; VA Boston Healthcare System ; Boston, MA USA.

XBP1 is a critical transcriptional activator of the unfolded protein response
(UPR), which increases tumor cell survival under prolonged endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and hypoxic conditions.This study was designed to evaluate the
immunogenicity of heteroclitic XBP1 unspliced (US)184-192 (YISPWILAV) and
heteroclictic XBP1 spliced (SP)367-375 (YLFPQLISV) HLA-A2 peptides, and to
characterize the specific activities of XBP1 peptides-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (XBP1-CTL) against breast cancer, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer
cells.The XBP1-CTL had upregulated expression of critical T cell markers and
displayed HLA-A2-restricted and antigen-specific activities against breast
cancer, colon cancer and pancreatic cancer cells. XBP1-CTL were enriched
withCD45RO(+) memory CTL, which showed high expression of critical T cell markers
(CD28, ICOS, CD69, CD40L), cell proliferation and antitumor activities as
compared to CD45RO(-) non-memory CTL. The effector memory (EM: CD45RO(+)CCR7(-)) 
subset had the highest level of cell proliferation while the central memory (CM: 
CD45RO(+)CCR7(+)) subset demonstrated enhanced functional activities (CD107a
degranulation, IFN<U+03B3>/IL-2 production) upon recognition of the respective tumor
cells. Furthermore, both the EM and CM XBP1-CTL subsets expressed high levels of 
Th1 transcription regulators Tbet and Eomes. The highest frequencies of IFN<U+03B3> or
granzyme B producing cells were detected within CM XBP1-CTL subset that were
either Tbet(+) or Eomes(+) in responding to the tumor cells.These results
demonstrate the immunotherapeutic potential of a cocktail of immunogenic HLA-A2
specific heteroclitic XBP1 US184-192 and heteroclictic XBP1 SP367-375 peptides to
induce CD3(+)CD8(+) CTL enriched for CM and EM cells with specific antitumor
activities against a variety of solid tumors.

PMCID: PMC4356023
PMID: 25941601  [PubMed]


343. Cell Biosci. 2014 Nov 25;4:71. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-4-71. eCollection 2014.

Induction of ER stress-mediated apoptosis by ceramide via disruption of ER Ca(2+)
homeostasis in human adenoid cystic carcinoma cells.

Liu Z(1), Xia Y(1), Li B(1), Xu H(2), Wang C(1), Liu Y(1), Li Y(1), Li C(1), Gao 
N(1), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Oncology, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China ; State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases,
West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Ceramides are a class of sphingolipids that form the structural
component of the cell membrane and also act as second messengers in cell
signaling pathways. Emerging results suggest that ceramide induces growth arrest 
and apoptosis in various human cancer cells. However, the mechanisms underlying
its antitumor activity are yet to be identified. Endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER
stress), a cellular adaptive response, is believed to initially compensate for
damage but can eventually trigger cell death if the stimulus is severe or
prolonged. In this study, we investigated whether ceramide induces cell death in 
human salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACCs) through activation of the
apoptotic ER stress.
RESULTS: RT-PCR, real-time PCR and western blot demonstrated that exogenous
ceramide treatment up-regulated GRP78 and p-eIF2a expression and XBP1 splicing.
Moreover, the ceramide synthase inhibitor FB1 abolished ceramide-induced ER
stress. Up-regulation of the ER stress-associated apoptosis promoting
transcription factor CHOP and p-JNK suggested that the antitumor activity of
ceramide is owing to activation of apoptotic ER stress. Mechanistically,
[Ca(2+)]ER depletion and SERCA inhibition by ceramide treatment suggested that it
induces ER stress by disrupting [Ca(2+)]ER homeostasis. The chemical chaperone
TUDCA inhibited ceramide-induced ER stress and cell death. In addition, the
downstream metabolite of ceramide, S1P, cannot activate ER stress.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated that exogenous ceramide induces cancer
cell death through a mechanism involving severe ER stress triggered by the
disruption of ER Ca(2+) homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4417540
PMID: 25937892  [PubMed]


344. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 6;16(6):471. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0471-1.

An unexpected alliance between stress responses to drive oncogenesis.

Keenan MM(1,)(2), Ding CK(3,)(4), Chi JT(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, 268 CARL Building, Research Drive, Box 3054 DUMC, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
melissa.keenan@duke.edu. (2)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
Medical Center, 2177A CIEMAS Building, 101 Research Drive, DUMC 3382, Durham, NC,
27708, USA. melissa.keenan@duke.edu. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, 268 CARL Building, Research Drive, 
Box 3054 DUMC, Durham, NC, 27710, USA. chienkuang.ding@gmail.com. (4)Center for
Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke Medical Center, 2177A CIEMAS Building,
101 Research Drive, DUMC 3382, Durham, NC, 27708, USA. chienkuang.ding@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University Medical
Center, 268 CARL Building, Research Drive, Box 3054 DUMC, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
jentsan.chi@duke.edu. (6)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
Medical Center, 2177A CIEMAS Building, 101 Research Drive, DUMC 3382, Durham, NC,
27708, USA. jentsan.chi@duke.edu.

Comment on
    Nature. 2014 Apr 3;508(7494):103-7.

XBP1 is a well-characterized regulator of the unfolding protein response that is 
activated in response to unfolded or misfolded proteins or nutrient deprivation. 
The conventional wisdom is that XBP1 is activated to coordinate the unfolded
protein response and promote cellular survival under stresses. A recent study
provides intriguing evidence that, in triple-negative breast cancer, XBP1 plays a
major role in promoting oncogenesis and cancer stem cell properties.
Unexpectedly, XBP1 accomplishes this by recruiting hypoxia-inducible factor 1a
and activating oncogenic transcriptional programs. This study reveals a
surprising hierarchy and alliance between two stress regulators with distinct
transcriptional outputs to promote an aggressive oncogenic state.

PMCID: PMC4429501
PMID: 25927911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biomol Screen. 2014 Apr;19(4):575-84. doi: 10.1177/1087057113517549. Epub 2013 
Dec 26.

Identification of agents that promote endoplasmic reticulum stress using an assay
that monitors luciferase secretion.

Doudican NA(1), Wen SY, Mazumder A, Orlow SJ.

Author information: 
(1)1The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School 
of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Disruption of protein processing in the secretory pathway is a measurable
hallmark of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Activation of ER stress-mediated
pathways has been implicated in numerous diseases, including cancer. To identify 
agents that induce ER stress, we established a screen for compounds that reduce
secretion of the reporter protein Gaussia luciferase (GLUC). Given the clinically
validated importance of targeting ER stress-mediated pathways in the treatment of
multiple myeloma (MM), we used this hematological malignancy as a model for
validating our screening system. From a screen of 2000 marketed drugs and natural
compounds in KMS11 and ARP1 MM cells, we identified 97 agents that reduced GLUC
secretion in both cell lines by at least 30%. To confirm inducers of ER stress,
we applied a secondary screen that assessed splicing of the unfolded protein
response (UPR) transcription factor XBP1. One agent, theaflavin-3,3'-digallate
(TF-3), was chosen based on its history of safe human consumption and further
validated through studies of ER stress-related pathways, including the UPR and
apoptosis. Given these promising results, this screen could be a useful tool to
identify agents targeting ER stress-related mechanisms in other cellular systems 
wherein ER stress plays a role in disease etiology.

PMCID: PMC4338999
PMID: 24371212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Apoptosis. 2014 May;19(5):801-15. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0961-0.

ERp29 deficiency affects sensitivity to apoptosis via impairment of the ATF6-CHOP
pathway of stress response.

Hirsch I(1), Weiwad M, Prell E, Ferrari DM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Research Unit for Enzymology of Protein Folding, Weinbergweg 22,
06120, Halle/Saale, Germany, irina-hirsch@gmx.de.

Endoplasmic reticulum protein 29 (ERp29) belongs to the redox-inactive
PDI-Dß-subfamily of PDI-proteins. ERp29 is expressed in all mammalian tissues
examined. Especially high levels of expression were observed in secretory tissues
and in some tumors. However, the biological role of ERp29 remains unclear. In the
present study we show, by using thyrocytes and primary dermal fibroblasts from
adult ERp29(-/-) mice, that ERp29 deficiency affects the activation of the
ATF6-CHOP-branch of unfolded protein response (UPR) without influencing the
function of other UPR branches, like the ATF4-eIF2a-XBP1 signaling pathway. As a 
result of impaired ATF6 activation, dermal fibroblasts and adult thyrocytes from 
ERp29(-/-) mice display significantly lower apoptosis sensitivities when treated 
with tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide. However, in contrast to previous reports,
we could demonstrate that ERp29 deficiency does not alter thyroglobulin
expression levels. Therefore, our study suggests that ERp29 acts as an escort
factor for ATF6 and promotes its transport from ER to Golgi apparatus under ER
stress conditions.

PMID: 24370996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e84436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084436.
eCollection 2013.

Heat shock modulates neutrophil motility in zebrafish.

Lam PY(1), Harvie EA(2), Huttenlocher A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ; Department of Medical Microbiology
and Immunology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United
States of America. (2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America ;
Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (3)Department of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of
America ; Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

Heat shock is a routine method used for inducible gene expression in animal
models including zebrafish. Environmental temperature plays an important role in 
the immune system and infection progression of ectotherms. In this study, we
analyzed the impact of short-term heat shock on neutrophil function using
zebrafish (Danio rerio) as an animal model. Short-term heat shock decreased
neutrophil recruitment to localized Streptococcus iniae infection and tail fin
wounding. Heat shock also increased random neutrophil motility transiently and
increased the number of circulating neutrophils. With the use of the translating 
ribosome affinity purification (TRAP) method for RNA isolation from specific cell
types such as neutrophils, macrophages and epithelial cells, we found that heat
shock induced the immediate expression of heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) and a
prolonged expression of heat shock protein 27 (hsp27). Heat shock also induced
cell stress as detected by the splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (xbp1) mRNA, a
marker for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Exogenous expression of Hsp70,
Hsp27 and spliced Xbp1 in neutrophils or epithelial cells did not reproduce the
heat shock induced effects on neutrophil recruitment. The effect of heat shock on
neutrophils is likely due to a combination of complex changes, including, but not
limited to changes in gene expression. Our results indicate that routine heat
shock can alter neutrophil function in zebrafish. The findings suggest that
caution should be taken when employing a heat shock-dependent inducible system to
study the innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC3868611
PMID: 24367659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):4032-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.524512. Epub 2013 
Dec 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress promotes macrophage-derived foam cell formation by
up-regulating cluster of differentiation 36 (CD36) expression.

Yao S(1), Miao C, Tian H, Sang H, Yang N, Jiao P, Han J, Zong C, Qin S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Atherosclerosis in Universities of Shandong,
Institute of Atherosclerosis and.

Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) up-regulates CD36, a scavenger receptor
responsible for macrophage uptake of ox-LDL without limitation. However, the
precise underlying mechanism is not completely understood. Our previous study has
demonstrated that ox-LDL induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
macrophages. The goal of this study was to explore the exact relationship between
ER stress and macrophage-derived foam cell formation and whether ER stress would 
be involved in ox-LDL-induced CD36 up-regulation. Our results showed that
ox-LDL-induced lipid accumulation in macrophages was promoted synergistically by 
ER stress inducer tunicamycin (TM), while attenuated by ER stress inhibitor
4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA). Ox-LDL caused CD36 up-regulation with concomitant
activation of ER stress as assessed by phosphorylation of inositol-requiring
kinase/endonuclease-1 (IRE-1) and protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK),
up-regulation of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) and glucose-regulated protein 78 
(GRP 78), and nuclear translocation of activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). 
TM not only up-regulated CD36 alone but also synergized with ox-LDL to increase
CD36 expression. Alleviation of ER stress with PBA and siRNA against ATF6, IRE1, 
and GRP78 mitigated ox-LDL-induced CD36 protein up-regulation. Moreover,
administration of apoE(-/-) mice with PBA suppressed the up-regulation of CD36,
phospho-IRE1, and GRP78 in macrophage-dense atherosclerotic lesions and in
peritoneal macrophages. Additionally, CD36 silencing attenuated ox-LDL-induced
nuclear translocation of ATF6, phosphorylation of IRE1 and up-regulation of XBP1 
and GRP78. These data indicate that CD36-mediated ox-LDL uptake in macrophages
triggers ER stress response, which, in turn, plays a critical role in CD36
up-regulation, enhancing the foam cell formation by uptaking more ox-LDL.

PMCID: PMC3924270
PMID: 24366867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Dec 19;4:e968. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.502.

ERO1a-dependent endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondrial calcium flux contributes to
ER stress and mitochondrial permeabilization by procaspase-activating compound-1 
(PAC-1).

Seervi M(1), Sobhan PK(1), Joseph J(1), Ann Mathew K(1), Santhoshkumar TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program-1, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

Procaspase-activating compound-1 (PAC-1) is the first direct caspase-activating
compound discovered; using an in vitro cell-free system of caspase activation.
Subsequently, this compound was shown to induce apoptosis in a variety of cancer 
cells with promising in vivo antitumor activity in canine lymphoma model.
Recently, we have reported its ability to kill drug-resistant, Bcl-2/Bcl-xL
overexpressing and Bax/Bak-deficient cells despite the essential requirement of
mitochondrial cytochrome c (cyt. c) release for caspase activation, indicating
that the key molecular targets of PAC-1 in cancer cells are yet to be identified.
Here, we have identified Ero1a-dependent endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium
leakage to mitochondria through mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAM) and ER
luminal hyper-oxidation as the critical events of PAC-1-mediated cell death.
PAC-1 treatment upregulated Ero1a in multiple cell lines, whereas silencing of
Ero1a significantly inhibited calcium release from ER and cell death. Loss of ER 
calcium and hyper-oxidation of ER lumen by Ero1a collectively triggered ER
stress. Upregulation of GRP78 and splicing of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA
in multiple cancer cells suggested ER stress as the general event triggered by
PAC-1. XBP1 mRNA splicing and GRP78 upregulation confirmed ER stress even in
Bax/Bak double knockout and PAC-1-resistant Apaf-1-knockout cells, indicating an 
induction of ER stress-mediated mitochondrial apoptosis by PAC-1. Furthermore, we
identified BH3-only protein p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) as the 
key molecular link that orchestrates overwhelmed ER stress to
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis, involving mitochondrial reactive oxygen species,
in a p53-independent manner. Silencing of PUMA in cancer cells effectively
reduced cyt. c release and cell death by PAC-1.

PMCID: PMC3877569
PMID: 24357799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013;15(6):R218.

C/EBP homologous protein drives pro-catabolic responses in chondrocytes.

Husa M, Petursson F, Lotz M, Terkeltaub R, Liu-Bryan R.

INTRODUCTION: Excess C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) expression is one feature of
the unfolded protein response (UPR) to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Here,
we focused on CHOP expression and function in chondrocytes.
METHODS: We studied human knee osteoarthritis (OA) cartilage, bovine chondrocytes
cultured in alginate and subjected to sub-lethal biomechanical injury, and knee
chondrocytes of human autopsy donors. We performed siRNA knockdown and
transfection.
RESULTS: UPR activation was increased in human knee OA cartilage in situ, and in 
biomechanically injured cultured chondrocytes in vitro. In normal human
chondrocytes, CHOP gain of function sensitized chondrocytes to IL-1ß induced
nitric oxide (NO) and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 release without inducing
these responses by itself. Excess CHOP expression, by itself, induced superoxide 
production and apoptosis. Conversely, siRNA knockdown of CHOP and the
UPR-specific mediator X-box binding protein (XBP1) inhibited NO release by >80%
(P <0.0005) in response to IL-1ß, and blunted MMP-3 release, whereas there were
only minimal effects of the UPR mediator GRP78 on these responses. The
anti-inflammatory metabolic super-regulator AMP kinase (AMPK) is known to limit
UPR activation in vascular muscle cells. Here, CHOP supported the capacity of
IL-1ß to suppress AMPK activity in chondrocytes. We also observed that inhibition
of AMPK activity promoted an increase in chondrocyte CHOP expression. Conversely,
pharmacologic activation of AMPK by 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide
(AICAR) blunted chondrocyte CHOP expression in response to biomechanical injury.
CONCLUSIONS: Biomechanical injury and IL-1 signaling stimulate UPR activation in 
chondrocytes. CHOP mediates chondrocyte catabolic and apoptotic responses to
IL-1ß, and does so partly by inhibiting AMPK activity. Conversely, development of
excess CHOP activity is limited by AMPK activity in chondrocytes. Our findings
suggest a mechanism for potential chondroprotection by AICAR and other AMPK
activators. The work is of translational relevance for OA, since several drugs
that activate AMPK are already in the clinic for arthritis (for example,
allosteric AMPK activators sodium salicylate and high dose aspirin, and
methotrexate, which activates AMPK by generating AICAR).

PMCID: PMC3978428
PMID: 24351550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2013 Dec 25;65(6):600-6.

[Palmitate induces apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum stress in human umbilical 
cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu J(1), Dong HY, Lin LJ, Wang QH, Huang LH, Tan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General
Hospital, Fuzhou 350025, China. hlhtiger@163.com, tanjm156@gmail.com.

The saturated free fatty acid (FFA), palmitate, could induce apoptosis in various
cell types, but little is known about its effects on human umbilical cord-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs). Here, we investigated whether palmitate
induced apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in hUC-MSCs. hUC-MSCs
were stained by labeled antibodies and identified by flow cytometry. After
administration with palmitate, apoptotic cell was assessed by flow cytometry
using the Annexin V-FITC/7-AAD apoptosis detection kit. Relative spliced XBP1
levels were analyzed using semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The mRNA of BiP, GRP94, ATF4
and CHOP were analyzed by real-time PCR. Relative BiP and CHOP protein were
analyzed using Western blot analysis. The results showed that hUC-MSCs were
homogeneously positive for MSC markers; palmitate increased apoptosis of hUC-MSCs
and activated XBP1 splicing, BiP, GRP94, ATF4 and CHOP transcription. These
findings suggest that palmitate induces apoptosis and ER stress in hUC-MSCs.

PMID: 24343717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(12):e1003785. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003785. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Brucella induces an unfolded protein response via TcpB that supports
intracellular replication in macrophages.

Smith JA(1), Khan M, Magnani DD, Harms JS, Durward M, Radhakrishnan GK, Liu YP,
Splitter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Brucella melitensis is a facultative intracellular bacterium that causes
brucellosis, the most prevalent zoonosis worldwide. The Brucella intracellular
replicative niche in macrophages and dendritic cells thwarts immune surveillance 
and complicates both therapy and vaccine development. Currently, host-pathogen
interactions supporting Brucella replication are poorly understood. Brucella
fuses with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to replicate, resulting in dramatic
restructuring of the ER. This ER disruption raises the possibility that Brucella 
provokes an ER stress response called the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). In
this study, B. melitensis infection up regulated expression of the UPR target
genes BiP, CHOP, and ERdj4, and induced XBP1 mRNA splicing in murine macrophages.
These data implicate activation of all 3 major signaling pathways of the UPR.
Consistent with previous reports, XBP1 mRNA splicing was largely MyD88-dependent.
However, up regulation of CHOP, and ERdj4 was completely MyD88 independent. Heat 
killed Brucella stimulated significantly less BiP, CHOP, and ERdj4 expression,
but induced XBP1 splicing. Although a Brucella VirB mutant showed relatively
intact UPR induction, a TcpB mutant had significantly compromised BiP, CHOP and
ERdj4 expression. Purified TcpB, a protein recently identified to modulate
microtubules in a manner similar to paclitaxel, also induced UPR target gene
expression and resulted in dramatic restructuring of the ER. In contrast,
infection with the TcpB mutant resulted in much less ER structural disruption.
Finally, tauroursodeoxycholic acid, a pharmacologic chaperone that ameliorates
the UPR, significantly impaired Brucella replication in macrophages. Together,
these results suggest Brucella induces a UPR, via TcpB and potentially other
factors, that enables its intracellular replication. Thus, the UPR may provide a 
novel therapeutic target for the treatment of brucellosis. These results also
have implications for other intracellular bacteria that rely on host physiologic 
stress responses for replication.

PMCID: PMC3855547
PMID: 24339776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):581-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2921. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Capsaicin induces apoptosis in PC12 cells through ER stress.

Krizanova O(1), Steliarova I(1), Csaderova L(2), Pastorek M(3), Hudecova S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences,
833 34 Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (2)Molecular Medicine Center, Slovak Academy 
of Sciences, 831 01 Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (3)Cancer Research Institute,
Slovak Academy of Sciences, 833 91 Bratislava, Slovak Republic.

Capsaicin, the pungent agent in chili peppers, has been shown to act as a
tumor-suppressor in cancer. In our previous study, capsaicin was shown to induce 
apoptosis in the rat pheochromocytoma cell line (PC12 cells). Thus, the aim of
the present study was to determine the potential mechanism by which capsaicin
induces apoptosis. We treated PC12 cells with 50, 100 and 500 µM capsaicin and
measured the reticular calcium content and expression of the reticular calcium
transport systems. These results were correlated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress markers CHOP, ATF4 and X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), as well as with
apoptosis induction. We observed that capsaicin decreased reticular calcium in a 
concentration-dependent manner. Simultaneously, expression levels of the
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum pump and ryanodin receptor of type 2 were modified.
These changes were accompanied by increased ER stress, as documented by increased
stress markers. Thus, from these results we propose that in PC12 cells capsaicin 
induces apoptosis through increased ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3896516
PMID: 24337105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. BMC Cancer. 2013 Dec 13;13:597. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-597.

High epiregulin expression in human U87 glioma cells relies on IRE1a and promotes
autocrine growth through EGF receptor.

Auf G, Jabouille A, Delugin M, Guérit S, Pineau R, North S, Platonova N, Maitre
M, Favereaux A, Vajkoczy P, Seno M, Bikfalvi A, Minchenko D, Minchenko O(1),
Moenner M.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, LAMC, UMR 1029, Talence F-33400, France. ominchenko@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors contribute to the development
of malignant glioma. Here we considered the possible implication of the EGFR
ligand epiregulin (EREG) in glioma development in relation to the activity of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) sensor IRE1a. We also examined EREG status in
several glioblastoma cell lines and in malignant glioma.
METHODS: Expression and biological properties of EREG were analyzed in human
glioma cells in vitro and in human tumor xenografts with regard to the presence
of ErbB proteins and to the blockade of IRE1a. Inactivation of IRE1a was achieved
by using either the dominant-negative strategy or siRNA-mediated knockdown.
RESULTS: EREG was secreted in high amounts by U87 cells, which also expressed its
cognate EGF receptor (ErbB1). A stimulatory autocrine loop mediated by EREG was
evidenced by the decrease in cell proliferation using specific blocking
antibodies directed against either ErbB1 (cetuximab) or EREG itself. In
comparison, anti-ErbB2 antibodies (trastuzumab) had no significant effect.
Inhibition of IRE1a dramatically reduced EREG expression both in cell culture and
in human xenograft tumor models. The high-expression rate of EREG in U87 cells
was therefore linked to IRE1a, although being modestly affected by chemical
inducers of the endoplasmic reticulum stress. In addition, IRE1-mediated
production of EREG did not depend on IRE1 RNase domain, as neither the selective 
dominant-negative invalidation of the RNase activity (IRE1 kinase active) nor the
siRNA-mediated knockdown of XBP1 had significant effect on EREG expression.
Finally, chemical inhibition of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) using the SP600125
compound reduced the ability of cells to express EREG, demonstrating a link
between the growth factor production and JNK activation under the dependence of
IRE1a.
CONCLUSION: EREG may contribute to glioma progression under the control of IRE1a,
as exemplified here by the autocrine proliferation loop mediated in U87 cells by 
the growth factor through ErbB1.

PMCID: PMC3878670
PMID: 24330607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2014 Apr;34(2):119-24. doi:
10.3109/10799893.2013.863920. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

RNF13 protein regulates endoplasmic reticulum stress induced apoptosis in
dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells by enhancing IRE1a stability.

Arshad A(1), Gu X, Arshad M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Beijing Institute of Technology , Beijing , China .

Any interruption in the folding capacity of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) may result
in inducing ER stress which would initiate an adaptive signaling mechanism called
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) in order to restore homeostasis, failing to which
would initiate signaling pathway leading to death of the cell. Finding new
mediators could help better understand the molecular mechanisms of ER
stress-induced apoptosis. Our lab initiated a genetic screen method using
retroviral insertion mutation system to look for genes whose inactivation would
confer resistance to apoptosis. In our previous findings, Ring finger protein 13 
(RNF13) was identified whose down-regulation conferred survival against ER
stress-induced apoptosis. Our previous results also showed important role of
RNF13 in apoptotic signaling in 293T cells as a result of strong RNF13-IRE1a
interaction. In current study, using SH-SY5Y cells, overexpression of RNF13 in
apoptosis assays and RT-PCR analysis has shown to induce apoptosis as well as
splicing of X-box binding Protein 1 (XBP1) confirming its role in ER stress
mediated cell death in this cell line as well. Western blot analysis has revealed
that overexpression of both N-terminal as well as C-terminal tagged RNF13
resulted in activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) in SH-SY5Y cells. Our
co-immunoprecipitation assays in SH-SY5Y cells also showed a strong interaction
of RNF13 with IRE1a. Finally, Cycloheximide chase experiment exhibited that
RNF13-IRE1a interaction increased the stability of IRE1a. Altogether, our data
suggest that RNF13 may act as an important regulator of IRE1a, mediating ER
stress-mediated apoptosis in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.

PMID: 24303962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jul 1;135(1):61-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28649. Epub 2013 Dec 21.

A missense polymorphism in ATF6 gene is associated with susceptibility to
hepatocellular carcinoma probably by altering ATF6 level.

Wu X(1), Xin Z, Zhang W, Zheng S, Wu J, Chen K, Wang H, Zhu X, Li Z, Duan Z, Li
H, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of
China; School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China.

Accumulated evidences indicate that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are
associated with risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Activating transcription 
factor 6 (ATF6) is an important modulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR),
which is regarded to be involved in carcinogenesis. So we speculate that SNPs in 
ATF6 may be associated with susceptibility to HCC. We carried out a two-stage
association study in three independent case-control groups in a total of 1,082
chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients and 816 hepatitis B virus (HBV) related HCC
patients in Han Chinese. Four SNPs which can represent all potential functional
SNPs with MAF<U+2009>><U+2009>0.1 recorded in HapMap database in ATF6 gene were genotyped using
TaqMan methods. Functional analyses were conducted to verify the biological
significances of the associated SNP. We identified a missense SNP (rs2070150) was
significantly associated with susceptibility to HCC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008, 0.001 and 0.007
in Beijing_302, Beijing_You'an and Guangxi samples, respectively). This SNP was
further validated in four independent groups of major HBV outcomes, indicating it
may associate exclusively to HCC. ATF6 mRNA expression was significantly
decreased as the disease progressed (p <0.001). Functional analyses show that the
protective allele of rs2070150 could significantly increase the expression levels
of ATF6 mRNA, as well as ATF6 regulated genes such as GRP78, XBP1 and CHOP. These
findings indicate that a common missense SNP in ATF6 may contribute to
susceptibility of HCC functionally.

© 2013 UICC.

PMID: 24302549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Carcinog. 2015 May;54(5):393-404. doi: 10.1002/mc.22109. Epub 2013 Nov 30.

PPAR<U+03B3>-inactive <U+0394>2-troglitazone independently triggers ER stress and apoptosis in 
breast cancer cells.

Colin-Cassin C(1), Yao X, Cerella C, Chbicheb S, Kuntz S, Mazerbourg S, Boisbrun 
M, Chapleur Y, Diederich M, Flament S, Grillier-Vuissoz I.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lorraine, CRAN, UMR 7039, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France; CNRS,
CRAN, UMR 7039, Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Our aim was to better understand peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR<U+03B3>)-independent pathways involved in anti-cancer effects of
thiazolidinediones (TZDs). We focused on <U+0394>2-troglitazone (<U+0394>2-TGZ), a PPAR<U+03B3>
inactive TZD that affects breast cancer cell viability. Appearance of TUNEL
positive cells, changes in mitochondrial membrane potential, cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 and caspase-7 revealed that apoptosis
occurred in both hormone-dependent MCF7 and hormone-independent MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells after 24 and 48 h of treatment. A microarray study identified
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress as an essential cellular function since many
genes involved in ER stress were upregulated in MCF7 cells following <U+0394>2-TGZ
treatment. <U+0394>2-TGZ-induced ER stress was further confirmed in MCF7 cells by
phosphorylation of pancreatic endoplasmic reticulum kinase-like endoplasmic
reticulum kinase (PERK) and its target eIF2a after 1.5 h, rapid increase in
activating transcription factor (ATF) 3 mRNA levels, splicing of X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) after 3 h, accumulation of binding immunogloblulin protein (BiP)
and CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) after 6 h.
Immunofluorescence microscopy indicated that CHOP was relocalized to the nucleus 
of treated cells. Similarly, in MDA-MB-231 cells, overexpression of ATF3,
splicing of XBP1, and accumulation of BiP and CHOP were observed following <U+0394>2-TGZ
treatment. In MCF7 cells, knock-down of CHOP or the inhibition of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) did not impair cleavage of PARP-1 and caspase-7.
Altogether, our results show that ER stress is an early response of major types
of breast cancer cells to <U+0394>2-TGZ, prior to, but not causative of apoptosis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24293218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Toxicology. 2014 Jan 6;315:24-37. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Nov
28.

Lipid peroxidation end product 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal triggers unfolded
protein response and heme oxygenase-1 expression in PC12 cells: Roles of ROS and 
MAPK pathways.

Lin MH(1), Yen JH(2), Weng CY(1), Wang L(3), Ha CL(4), Wu MJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan 717, Taiwan. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu
Chi University, Hualien 970, Taiwan. (3)Department of Food Science and
Technology, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Health and Nutrition, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and
Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Chia Nan University 
of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan 717, Taiwan. Electronic address:
imwu@mail.chna.edu.tw.

This study investigates the roles of ROS overproduction and MAPK signaling
pathways in the induction of unfolded protein response (UPR) and the expression
of Phase II enzymes in response to 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal (4-HNE) in a
neuronal-like catecholaminergic PC12 cells. Our results showed that 4-HNE
triggered three canonical pathways of UPR, namely IRE1-XBP1, PERK-eIF2a-ATF4 and 
ATF6, and induced the expression of UPR-targeted genes, GRP78, CHOP, TRB3, PUMA, 
and GADD34, as well as Phase II enzymes, HO-1 and GCLC. 4-HNE also induced
apoptosis, intracellular calcium accumulation, caspase-3 activation, and G0/G1
cell cycle arrest, which was correlated with the increased expression of GADD45a.
The addition of tiron, a cellular permeable superoxide scavenger, scavenged
4-HNE-mediated ROS formation, but did not alleviate cytotoxicity, or the
expression of UPR-targeted genes or Phase II enzymes, indicating that ROS
overproduction per se did not play a major role in 4-HNE-caused deleterious
effects. HO-1 expression was attenuated by Nrf2 siRNA and chemical chaperone
4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA), suggesting HO-1 expression was regulated by Nrf2-ARE,
which may work downstream of ER stress. 4-HNE treatment promptly induced ERK, JNK
and p38 MAPK activation. Addition of p38 MAPK specific inhibitor SB203580
attenuated HO-1 upregulation, but enhanced expression of CHOP, PUMA and TRB3, and
cytotoxicity. These results indicate that 4-HNE-induced transient p38 MAPK
activation may serve as an upstream negative regulator of ER stress and confer
adaptive cytoprotection against 4-HNE-mediated cell injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24291486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Genetics. 2014 Feb;196(2):539-55. doi: 10.1534/genetics.113.157602. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Genetic complexity in a Drosophila model of diabetes-associated misfolded human
proinsulin.

Park SY(1), Ludwig MZ, Tamarina NA, He BZ, Carl SH, Dickerson DA, Barse L, Arun
B, Williams CL, Miles CM, Philipson LH, Steiner DF, Bell GI, Kreitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637.

Erratum in
    Genetics. 2014 Dec;198(4):1773.

Drosophila melanogaster has been widely used as a model of human Mendelian
disease, but its value in modeling complex disease has received little attention.
Fly models of complex disease would enable high-resolution mapping of
disease-modifying loci and the identification of novel targets for therapeutic
intervention. Here, we describe a fly model of permanent neonatal diabetes
mellitus and explore the complexity of this model. The approach involves the
transgenic expression of a misfolded mutant of human preproinsulin, hINS(C96Y),
which is a cause of permanent neonatal diabetes. When expressed in fly imaginal
discs, hINS(C96Y) causes a reduction of adult structures, including the eye,
wing, and notum. Eye imaginal discs exhibit defects in both the structure and the
arrangement of ommatidia. In the wing, expression of hINS(C96Y) leads to ectopic 
expression of veins and mechano-sensory organs, indicating disruption of
wild-type signaling processes regulating cell fates. These readily measurable
"disease" phenotypes are sensitive to temperature, gene dose, and sex. Mutant
(but not wild-type) proinsulin expression in the eye imaginal disc induces
IRE1-mediated XBP1 alternative splicing, a signal for endoplasmic reticulum
stress response activation, and produces global change in gene expression. Mutant
hINS transgene tester strains, when crossed to stocks from the Drosophila Genetic
Reference Panel, produce F1 adults with a continuous range of disease phenotypes 
and large broad-sense heritability. Surprisingly, the severity of mutant
hINS-induced disease in the eye is not correlated with that in the notum in these
crosses, nor with eye reduction phenotypes caused by the expression of two
dominant eye mutants acting in two different eye development pathways, Drop (Dr) 
or Lobe (L), when crossed into the same genetic backgrounds. The tissue
specificity of genetic variability for mutant hINS-induced disease has,
therefore, its own distinct signature. The genetic dominance of disease-specific 
phenotypic variability in our model of misfolded human proinsulin makes this
approach amenable to genome-wide association study in a simple F1 screen of
natural variation.

PMCID: PMC3914625
PMID: 24281154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):1012-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-518605. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Cooperative transcriptional repression by BCL6 and BACH2 in germinal center
B-cell differentiation.

Huang C(1), Geng H, Boss I, Wang L, Melnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 
NY; and.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 13;123(7):950.

The transcriptional repressors BCL6 and BACH2 are crucial regulators of germinal 
center (GC) B-cell fate, and are known to interact and repress transcription of
PRDM1, a key driver of plasma cell differentiation. How these factors cooperate
is not fully understood. Herein, we show that GC formation is only minimally
impaired in Bcl6(+/-) or Bach2(+/-) mice, although double heterozygous
Bcl6(+/-)Bach2(+/-) mice exhibit profound reduction in GC formation. Splenic B
cells from Bcl6(+/-) Bach2(+/-) mice display accelerated plasmacytic
differentiation and high expression of key plasma cell genes such as Prdm1, Xbp1,
and CD138. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed that in B cells,
BACH2 is mostly bound to genes together with its heterodimer partner MAFK. The
BACH2-MAFK complex binds to sets of genes known to be involved in the GC
response, 60% of which are also targets of BCL6. Approximately 30% of BACH2 peaks
overlap with BCL6, including cis-regulatory sequences of the PRDM1 gene. BCL6
also modulates BACH2 protein stability and their protein levels are positively
correlated in GC B cells. Therefore, BCL6 and BACH2 cooperate to orchestrate gene
expression patterning in GC B cells through both transcriptional and biochemical 
mechanisms, which collectively determine the proper initiation and timing of
terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3924924
PMID: 24277074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell Signal. 2014 Feb;26(2):332-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.11.018. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

ATF6 upregulates XBP1S and inhibits ER stress-mediated apoptosis in
osteoarthritis cartilage.

Guo FJ(1), Xiong Z(2), Lu X(3), Ye M(4), Han X(2), Jiang R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address:
guo.fengjin@gmail.com. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility 
of Development Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. (4)Department of Health Statistics, 
College of Public Health and Management, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 
400016, China. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cells and Tissue Engineering, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

As we previously reported, transcription factor XBP1S enhances BMP2-induced
chondrocyte differentiation and acts as a positive mediator of chondrocyte
hypertrophy. The purpose of this study was to determine (1) whether XBP1S
influences ER stress-mediated apoptosis in osteoarthritis (OA); (2) whether ATF6 
regulates IRE1/XBP1 signal pathway in OA cartilage; (3) what are the associated
molecules affecting apoptosis in osteoarthritis and the molecular events
underlying this process. Herein, we examined and found that ER stress-associated 
molecules were activated in OA patients, specifically XBP1S splice and expression
were increased markedly by TNF-a and IL-1ß treatments. Transcription factor ATF6 
can specifically bind to the promoter of XBP1 gene and enhance the expression of 
XBP1S spliced by IRE1a in osteoarthritis cartilage. Furthermore, siXBP1S can
enhance ER stress-mediated apoptosis and main matrix degradation in
osteoarthritis. Whereas AdXBP1S can inhibit ER stress-mediated apoptosis and TNFa
induced nitrite production in OA cartilage. In a word, our observations
demonstrate the importance of XBP1S in osteoarthritis. ATF6 and IRE1a can
regulate endogenous XBP1S gene expression synergistically in OA cartilage. More
significantly, XBP1S was a negative regulator of apoptosis in osteoarthritis by
affecting caspase 3, caspase 9, caspase 12, p-JNK1, and CHOP.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24269637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jul;52(7):574-7.

[The expression and significance of unfolded protein response-related gene in
synovial fluid macrophages in patients with spondyloarthritis and other
arthritis].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Zhu J, Huang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China. Email: fhuang1964@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE To investigate whether unfolded protein response (UPR) plays a role in 
the pathogenesis of spondyloarthritis (SpA), and to assess UPR-related gene
expression in SpA and other arthritis patients.METHODS: Eighteen patients with
SpA, 12 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 6 with osteoarthritis (OA) were
recruited. Macrophages were isolated from synovial fluid samples by
immunomagnetic separation. The expression of UPR-regulated genes, including
binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP), glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94), C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), growth arrested and DNA damage-inducible 34 (GADD34), 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1) and endoplasmic reticulum DnaJ homolog 4 (ERdj4),
was tested by real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) .
RESULTS: Compared with macrophages in OA patients, the expression of BiP and
GRP94 mRNA[ (6.06 ± 2.08) ×10(-2) vs (1.11 ± 0.72) ×10(-2) for BiP mRNA,
11.80(7.30-38.40)×10(-3) vs 1.27(1.02-4.18)×10(-3) for GRP94 mRNA, both P values 
<0.01] was significantly increased in macrophages in SpA patients.XBP1 mRNA was
up-regulated [(12.70 ± 5.20) ×10(-3) vs (4.14 ± 2.56) ×10(-3), P < 0.01] in SpA
group as well. UPR-regulated gene expression in SpA patients with HLA-B27
positive or HLA-B27 negative was similar.However, none of UPR-regulated genes
showed different expression between the SpA group and RA group except for GADD34 
mRNA[7.30(5.56-15.40)×10(-3) vs 21.30 (12.20-27.60) ×10(-3), P = 0.009].
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that UPR possibly participates in the pathogenesis 
of SpA, although the relationship between HLA-B27 and UPR still needs further
investigation.

PMID: 24266999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 Jul 15;1:37. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-37.

Calreticulin and other components of endoplasmic reticulum stress in rat and
human inflammatory demyelination.

Ní Fhlathartaigh M(1), McMahon J, Reynolds R, Connolly D, Higgins E, Counihan T, 
Fitzgerald U.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Biomedical Engineering Science, Galway Neuroscience
Centre, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
una.fitzgerald@nuigalway.ie.

BACKGROUND: Calreticulin (CRT) is a chaperone protein, which aids correct folding
of glycosylated proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Under conditions of
ER stress, CRT is upregulated and may be displayed on the surface of cells or be 
secreted. This 'ecto-CRT' may activate the innate immune response or it may aid
clearance of apoptotic cells. Our and other studies have demonstrated
upregulation of ER stress markers CHOP, BiP, ATF4, XBP1 and phosphorylated e-IF2 
alpha (p-eIF2 alpha) in biopsy and post-mortem human multiple sclerosis (MS)
samples. We extend this work by analysing changes in expression of CRT, BiP,
CHOP, XBP1 and p-eIF2 alpha in a rat model of inflammatory demyelination.
Demyelination was induced in the spinal cord by intradermal injection of
recombinant mouse MOG mixed with incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA) at the base
of the tail. Tissue samples were analysed by semi-quantitative scoring of
immunohistochemically stained frozen tissue sections. Data generated following
sampling of tissue from animals with spinal cord lesions, was compared to that
obtained using tissue derived from IFA- or saline-injected controls. CRT present 
in rat serum and in a cohort of human serum derived from 14 multiple sclerosis
patients and 11 healthy controls was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Stained tissue scores revealed significantly (p<0.05) increased amounts 
of CRT, CHOP and p-eIF2 alpha in the lesion, lesion edge and normal-appearing
white matter when compared to controls. CHOP and p-eIF2 alpha were also
significantly raised in regions of grey matter and the central canal (p<0.05).
Immunofluorescent dual-label staining confirmed expression of these markers in
astrocytes, microglia or neurons. Dual staining of rat and human spinal cord
lesions with Oil Red O and CRT antibody showed co-localisation of CRT with the
rim of myelin fragments. ELISA testing of sera from control and EAE rats
demonstrated significant down-regulation (p<0.05) of CRT in the serum of EAE
animals, compared to saline and IFA controls. This contrasted with significantly 
increased amounts of CRT detected in the sera of MS patients (p<0.05), compared
to controls.
CONCLUSION: This data highlights the potential importance of CRT and other ER
stress proteins in inflammatory demyelination.

PMCID: PMC3893522
PMID: 24252779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Redox Biol. 2013 Oct 28;1:508-13. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2013.10.005. eCollection
2013.

Intracellular glutathione pools are heterogeneously concentrated.

Montero D(1), Tachibana C, Rahr Winther J, Appenzeller-Herzog C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular & Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Glutathione is present in millimolar concentrations in the cell, but its relative
distribution among cellular compartments remains elusive. We have chosen the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as an example organelle to study compartment-specific 
glutathione levels. Using a glutaredoxin sensor (sCGrx1pER), which rapidly and
specifically equilibrates with the reduced glutathione (GSH)-glutathione
disulfide (GSSG) redox couple with known equilibrium constant, we showed that the
[GSH]:[GSSG] ratio in the ER of intact HeLa cells is less than 7:1. Taking into
consideration the previously determined value for [GSH](2):[GSSG] in the ER of
83 mM, this translates into a total glutathione concentration in the ER
([GStot]=[GSH]+2[GSSG]) of greater than 15 mM. Since the integrated,
intracellular [GStot] was measured as ~7 mM, we conclude the existence of a
[GStot] gradient across the ER membrane. A possible homeostatic mechanism by
which cytosol-derived glutathione is trapped in the ER is discussed. We propose a
high [GStot] as a distinguishing feature of the ER environment compared to the
extracellular space.

PMCID: PMC3830055
PMID: 24251119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Autophagy. 2013 Dec;9(12):2046-55. doi: 10.4161/auto.26337. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Genetic association and functional role of Crohn disease risk alleles involved in
microbial sensing, autophagy, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.

Hoefkens E(1), Nys K, John JM, Van Steen K, Arijs I, Van der Goten J, Van Assche 
G, Agostinis P, Rutgeerts P, Vermeire S, Cleynen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine; Translational Research
Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders (TARGID); KU Leuven; Leuven, Belgium.

Genome-wide association studies have identified several genes implicated in
autophagy (ATG16L1, IRGM, ULK1, LRRK2, and MTMR3), intracellular bacterial
sensing (NOD2), and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress (XBP1 and ORMDL3) to be
associated with Crohn disease (CD). We studied the known CD-associated variants
in these genes in a large cohort of 3451 individuals (1744 CD patients, 793
ulcerative colitis (UC) patients and 914 healthy controls). We also investigated 
the functional phenotype linked to these genetic variants. Association with CD
was confirmed for NOD2, ATG16L1, IRGM, MTMR3, and ORMDL3. The risk for developing
CD increased with an increasing number of risk alleles for these genes (P<0.001, 
OR 1.26 [1.20 to 1.32]). Three times as many (34.8%) CD patients carried a risk
allele in all three pathways, in contrast to 13.3% of the controls (P<0.0001, OR 
= 3.46 [2.77 to 4.32]). For UC, no significant association for one single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was found, but the risk for development of UC
increased with an increasing total number of risk alleles (P = 0.001, OR = 1.10
[1.04 to 1.17]). We found a genetic interaction between reference SNP (rs)2241880
(ATG16L1) and rs10065172 (IRGM) in CD. Functional experiments hinted toward an
association between an increased genetic risk and an augmented inflammatory
status, highlighting the relevance of the genetic findings.

PMID: 24247223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Sci Transl Med. 2013 Nov 13;5(211):211ra156. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3006534.

Restoration of the unfolded protein response in pancreatic ß cells protects mice 
against type 1 diabetes.

Engin F(1), Yermalovich A, Nguyen T, Hummasti S, Fu W, Eizirik DL, Mathis D,
Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Sci Transl Med. 2013 Dec 4;5(214):214er11. Ngyuen, Truc [corrected to Nguyen,
Truc].

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Mar;10(3):129-30.
    Islets. 2014;6(2):e28778.

Perturbations in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis can evoke stress
responses leading to aberrant glucose and lipid metabolism. ER dysfunction is
linked to inflammatory disorders, but its role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune 
type 1 diabetes (T1D) remains unknown. We identified defects in the expression of
unfolded protein response (UPR) mediators ATF6 (activating transcription factor
6) and XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1) in ß cells from two different T1D mouse
models and then demonstrated similar defects in pancreatic ß cells from T1D
patients. Administration of a chemical ER stress mitigator, tauroursodeoxycholic 
acid (TUDCA), at the prediabetic stage resulted in a marked reduction of diabetes
incidence in the T1D mouse models. This reduction was accompanied by (i) a
significant decrease in aggressive lymphocytic infiltration in the pancreas, (ii)
improved survival and morphology of ß cells, (iii) reduced ß cell apoptosis, (iv)
preserved insulin secretion, and (v) restored expression of UPR mediators.
TUDCA's actions were dependent on ATF6 and were lost in mice with ß cell-specific
deletion of ATF6. These data indicate that proper maintenance of the UPR is
essential for the preservation of ß cells and that defects in this process can be
chemically restored for preventive or therapeutic interventions in T1D.

PMCID: PMC4169117
PMID: 24225943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Semin Liver Dis. 2013 Nov;33(4):321-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1358522. Epub 2013 Nov
12.

The unfolded protein response in fatty liver disease.

Henkel A(1), Green RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Section of Hepatology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a protective cellular response activated
under conditions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The hepatic UPR is
activated in several forms of liver disease including nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD). Recent data defining the role of the UPR in hepatic lipid
metabolism have identified molecular mechanisms that may underlie the association
between UPR activation and NAFLD. It has become increasingly evident that the
IRE1a/Xbp1 pathway of the UPR is critical for hepatic lipid homeostasis, and
dysregulation of this evolutionarily conserved pathway is associated with human
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Although increasing evidence has delineated 
the importance of UPR pathway signaling in fatty liver disorders, the regulation 
of the hepatic UPR in normal physiology and fatty liver disorders remains
incompletely understood. Understanding the role of the UPR in hepatic lipid
metabolism may lead to the identification of novel therapeutic targets for the
treatment of NAFLD.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMCID: PMC4110953
PMID: 24222090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Life Sci. 2014 Jan 14;94(1):37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.030. Epub 2013 Nov 
10.

Blockage of TRPM7 channel induces hepatic stellate cell death through endoplasmic
reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis.

Zhu Y(1), Men R(1), Wen M(1), Hu X(2), Liu X(3), Yang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China; Department of Internal Medicine,
Hospital of Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. (3)Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041,
China. (4)Division of Digestive Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041, China. Electronic address: linayang63@gmail.com.

AIMS: Proliferation is a 'multiplier' for extracellular matrix production and
contraction of activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC) in fibrotic liver.
Transient receptor potential melastatin-like 7 channels (TRPM7) are implicated in
the survival and proliferation of several kinds of cells. This study was aimed to
investigate the effect of TRPM7 blocker 2-APB on survival and proliferation of
HSC and the underlying mechanisms.
MAIN METHODS: Rat HSC were stimulated by 2-APB for 24 h and then collected for
further use. Cell viability was detected by MTT, and apoptosis was determined by 
AnnexinV/PI staining and TUNEL assay. Gene expressions of TRPM7, a-SMA, bcl-2,
bax, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress key members CHOP, caspase-12, ATF4,
ATF6, Xbp1, GRP78 and calnexin were evaluated with quantitative RT-PCR.
Quantifications of a-SMA, TRPM7, CHOP and GRP78 proteins were carried out by
Western blot. Transmission electron microscopy and Xbp1 mRNA splicing analysis
were also used for detection of ER stress.
KEY FINDINGS: 2-APB decreased TRPM7 and a-SMA expressions in primary HSC, and
inhibited proliferation of activated HSC in a dose-dependent manner. 2-APB also
decreased total count of activated HSC and increased the number of apoptotic
cells. 2-APB increased expressions of bax and ER stress key factors CHOP,
caspase-12, ATF4, ATF6, Xbp1, GRP78 and calnexin. Meanwhile, ultra-structural ER 
changes and spliced Xbp1 mRNA were also observed in 2-APB treated HSC.
SIGNIFICANCE: Blockage of TRPM7 could inhibit activation and proliferation of
primary HSC and induce apoptotic death of activated cells, in which ER stress was
identified as one of possible underlying molecular bases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24220678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 8;15(6):R107. doi: 10.1186/bcr3574.

Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) regulates the response to oxidative stress and
migration of breast cancer cells.

Leung T, Rajendran R, Singh S, Garva R, Krstic-Demonacos M, Demonacos C.

INTRODUCTION: The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are a class of heme-containing
enzymes involved in phase I metabolism of a large number of xenobiotics. The CYP 
family member CYP2E1 metabolises many xenobiotics and pro-carcinogens, it is not 
just expressed in the liver but also in many other tissues such as the kidney,
the lung, the brain, the gastrointestinal tract and the breast tissue. It is
induced in several pathological conditions including cancer, obesity, and type II
diabetes implying that this enzyme is implicated in other biological processes
beyond its role in phase I metabolism. Despite the detailed description of the
role of CYP2E1 in the liver, its functions in other tissues have not been
extensively studied. In this study, we investigated the functional significance
of CYP2E1 in breast carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Cellular levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured by
H2DCFDA (2 2.9.2 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate) staining and
autophagy was assessed by tracing the cellular levels of autophagy markers using 
western blot assays. The endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein
response (UPR) were detected by luciferase assays reflecting the splicing of mRNA
encoding the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) transcription factor and cell
migration was evaluated using the scratch wound assay. Gene expression was
recorded with standard transcription assays including luciferase reporter and
chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Ectopic expression of CYP2E1 induced ROS generation, affected autophagy,
stimulated endoplasmic reticulum stress and inhibited migration in breast cancer 
cells with different metastatic potential and p53 status. Furthermore, evidence
is presented indicating that CYP2E1 gene expression is under the transcriptional 
control of the p53 tumor suppressor.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the notion that CYP2E1 exerts an important
role in mammary carcinogenesis, provide a potential link between ethanol
metabolism and breast cancer and suggest that progression, and metastasis, of
advanced stages of breast cancer can be modulated by induction of CYP2E1
activity.

PMCID: PMC3979157
PMID: 24207099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS Genet. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003854. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

Xbp1 directs global repression of budding yeast transcription during the
transition to quiescence and is important for the longevity and reversibility of 
the quiescent state.

Miles S(1), Li L, Davison J, Breeden LL.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

Pure populations of quiescent yeast can be obtained from stationary phase
cultures that have ceased proliferation after exhausting glucose and other carbon
sources from their environment. They are uniformly arrested in the G1 phase of
the cell cycle, and display very high thermo-tolerance and longevity. We find
that G1 arrest is initiated before all the glucose has been scavenged from the
media. Maintaining G1 arrest requires transcriptional repression of the G1
cyclin, CLN3, by Xbp1. Xbp1 is induced as glucose is depleted and it is among the
most abundant transcripts in quiescent cells. Xbp1 binds and represses CLN3
transcription and in the absence of Xbp1, or with extra copies of CLN3, cells
undergo ectopic divisions and produce very small cells. The Rad53-mediated
replication stress checkpoint reinforces the arrest and becomes essential when
Cln3 is overproduced. The XBP1 transcript also undergoes metabolic oscillations
under glucose limitation and we identified many additional transcripts that
oscillate out of phase with XBP1 and have Xbp1 binding sites in their promoters. 
Further global analysis revealed that Xbp1 represses 15% of all yeast genes as
they enter the quiescent state and over 500 of these transcripts contain Xbp1
binding sites in their promoters. Xbp1-repressed transcripts are highly enriched 
for genes involved in the regulation of cell growth, cell division and
metabolism. Failure to repress some or all of these targets leads xbp1 cells to
enter a permanent arrest or senescence with a shortened lifespan.

PMCID: PMC3814307
PMID: 24204289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 Jul;19(4):465-77. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0473-4.
Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Oxytocin modulates markers of the unfolded protein response in Caco2BB gut cells.

Klein BY(1), Tamir H, Hirschberg DL, Glickstein SB, Ludwig RJ, Welch MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY, 10032, USA, bk2348@columbia.edu.

We have shown that oxytocin receptor (OTR) expression in neonatal rat enterocytes
is robust from birth to weaning, but OTR function during this period is unknown. 
We previously reported that oxytocin (OT) stimulation of Caco2BB cells
(enterocytes in vitro) inhibits the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
(mTORC1) signaling. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is known to protectively 
reduce translation during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Because the mTORC1
pathway is linked to cellular stress, we investigated markers of UPR in
OT-stimulated Caco2BB cells. We report that OT modulates several factors involved
in sensing and translation of ER stress. High OT (62.5 nM) reduced translation
initiation factor 4E-BP1 phosphorylation (Ser65), which is known to inhibit
cap-dependent translation via its rate-limiting eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E (eIF4E). Importantly, high OT increased phosphorylation of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phospho-Ser51, which inhibits eIF2a.
High OT also increased protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
phosphorylation, a sensor of ER stress and a kinase of eIF2a. Both high and low
OT activated inositol requiring enzyme1 (IRE1), which generates the transcription
factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and induces the UPR. We also show that OT
modulates XBP1 splicing and induces tribbles 3 (TRIB3; a negative regulator of
Akt and protein involved in autophagy) and immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP;
ER-chaperone). Taken together, these results indicate that OT modulates sensors
of ER stress and autophagy. These findings support our hypothesis that
transiently elevated OTR expression in neonatal gut may serve a protective
function during a critical postnatal developmental period.

PMCID: PMC4041945
PMID: 24198165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078491.
eCollection 2013.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress, unfolded protein response and altered T cell
differentiation in necrotizing enterocolitis.

Lu P(1), Struijs MC, Mei J, Witte-Bouma J, Korteland-van Male AM, de Bruijn AC,
van Goudoever JB, Renes IB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC-Sophia,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands ; Department of Pediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital -
AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) play important roles in chronic intestinal inflammation.
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the most common gastrointestinal emergency in 
preterm infants and is characterized by acute intestinal inflammation and
necrosis. The objective of the study is to investigate the role of ER stress and 
the UPR in NEC patients.
METHODS: Ileal tissues from NEC and control patients were obtained during
surgical resection and/or at stoma closure. Splicing of XBP1 was detected using
PCR, and gene expression was quantified using qPCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: Splicing of XBP1 was only detected in a subset of acute NEC (A-NEC)
patients, and not in NEC patients who had undergone reanastomosis (R-NEC). The
other ER stress and the UPR pathways, PERK and ATF6, were not activated in NEC
patients. A-NEC patients showing XBP1 splicing (A-NEC-XBP1s) had increased
mucosal expression of GRP78, CHOP, IL6 and IL8. Similar results were obtained by 
inducing ER stress and the UPR in vitro. A-NEC-XBP1s patients showed altered T
cell differentiation indicated by decreased mucosal expression of RORC, IL17A and
FOXP3. A-NEC-XBP1s patients additionally showed more severe morphological damage 
and a worse surgical outcome. Compared with A-NEC patients, R-NEC patients showed
lower mucosal IL6 and IL8 expression and higher mucosal FOXP3 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: XBP1 splicing, ER stress and the UPR in NEC are associated with
increased IL6 and IL8 expression levels, altered T cell differentiation and
severe epithelial injury.

PMCID: PMC3806824
PMID: 24194940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 29;441(4):770-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.130. Epub 2013 Nov 1.

Oleate rescues INS-1E ß-cells from palmitate-induced apoptosis by preventing
activation of the unfolded protein response.

Sommerweiss D(1), Gorski T, Richter S, Garten A, Kiess W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig (CPL), Hospital for Children and
Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Saturated free fatty acids (FFAs), such as palmitate, cause ß-cell
apoptosis whereas unsaturated FFAs, e.g. oleate, are not harmful. The toxicity of
palmitate could be mediated through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress which
triggers the activation of a signal responding cascade also called unfolded
protein response (UPR). We investigated whether or not palmitate induced ß-cell
apoptosis through UPR activation and whether or not oleate as a monounsaturated
fatty acid could counteract these effects.
METHODS: INS-1E ß-cells were incubated with palmitate [0.5mM], oleate [1mM] or
the combination [0.5/1mM] for 1, 6 and 24h. Viability and induction of apoptosis 
were measured by WST-1 assay and FITC-Annexin/PI-staining, respectively. Western 
blot analyses were performed for UPR specific proteins and mRNA expression of
target molecules was determined by qPCR.
RESULTS: Palmitate significantly decreased viability (29±8.8%) of INS-1E ß-cells 
compared to controls after 24h. Stimulation with oleate showed no effect on
viability but the combination of oleate and palmitate improved viability compared
to palmitate treated cells (55±9.3%) or controls (26±5.3%). The number of
apoptotic cells was increased 2-fold after 24h incubation with palmitate compared
to controls. Again, oleate showed no effect but in combination ameliorated the
effect of palmitate to control level. Phosphorylation of eIF2a was increased
after 6 and 24h incubation with palmitate. In contrast, oleate had no effect and 
in combination prevented phosphorylation of eIF2a. Increased Xbp1 splicing was
visible already 6h after palmitate treatment and remained elevated at 24h. The
combination with oleate abolished Xbp1 splicing. Interestingly, mRNA expression
of the chaperones Bip, Pdi, Calnexin and Grp94 was not altered by FFA treatment. 
Only the proapoptotic transcription factor Chop was significantly enhanced by
palmitate incubation. In accordance with sustained cell survival the combination 
as well as oleate alone, did not result in increased Chop levels compared to
controls. In summary, we showed that oleate protects INS-1E ß-cells from
palmitate-induced apoptosis by the suppression of ER stress which was independent
of chaperone activation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24189472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cell Rep. 2013 Nov 14;5(3):791-801. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.046. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Xbp1-independent Ire1 signaling is required for photoreceptor differentiation and
rhabdomere morphogenesis in Drosophila.

Coelho DS(1), Cairrão F, Zeng X, Pires E, Coelho AV, Ron D, Ryoo HD, Domingos PM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa,
Avenida da República, 2780-157 Oeiras, Portugal.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is composed by homeostatic signaling pathways
that are activated by excessive protein misfolding in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Ire1 signaling is an important mediator of the UPR, leading to the activation of 
the transcription factor Xbp1. Here, we show that Drosophila Ire1 mutant
photoreceptors have defects in the delivery of rhodopsin-1 to the rhabdomere
and in the secretion of Spacemaker/Eyes Shut into the interrhabdomeral space.
However, these defects are not observed in Xbp1 mutant photoreceptors. Ire1
mutant retinas have higher mRNA levels for targets of regulated Ire1-dependent
decay (RIDD), including for the fatty acid transport protein (fatp). Importantly,
the downregulation of fatp by RNAi rescues the rhodopsin-1 delivery defects
observed in Ire1 mutant photoreceptors. Our results show that the role of Ire1
during photoreceptor differentiation is independent of Xbp1 function and
demonstrate the physiological relevance of the RIDD mechanism in this specific
paradigm.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3858604
PMID: 24183663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Virus Res. 2013 Dec 26;178(2):471-7. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.10.012. Epub
2013 Oct 28.

Tick-borne encephalitis virus triggers inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) and
transcription factor 6 (ATF6) pathways of unfolded protein response.

Yu C(1), Achazi K, Niedrig M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens, ZBS 1: Highly Pathogenic 
Viruses, Robert Koch Institute, Nordufer 20, 13353 Berlin, Germany. Electronic
address: yuc@rki.de.

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a serious human neurological disease caused by
TBE virus (TBEV). However, the mechanisms of TBEV-caused pathogenesis remain
unclear. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, also defined as the
unfolded protein response (UPR), is an important conserved molecular signaling
pathway that modulates many biological functions including innate immunity and
viral pathogenesis. Here, we investigated the effects of the two UPR signaling
pathways upon TBEV infection in Vero E6 cells. We showed that the amount of heat 
shock protein 72 (Hsp72) increased in the course of TBEV infection. We then
confirmed that TBEV infection activates the IRE1 pathway, leading to RNA and
protein expression of the spliced X box binding protein 1 (sXBP1). Furthermore,
we observed the translocation of ATF6 during TBEV infection and expression of
cleaved transcription factor 6 (ATF6) which suggest activation of ATF6 pathway.
Finally, we examined whether inhibition of the IRE1 pathway has an effect on TBEV
infection. Cell treatment with 3,5-Dibromosalicylaldehyde (IRE1 inhibitor) and
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) showed that TBEV replication was significantly 
limited. These findings provide the first evidence that TBEV infection activates 
the two UPR signaling pathways. Moreover, inhibition of TBEV replication by UPR
inhibitors may provide a novel therapeutic strategy against TBE.

Copyright © 2013 The Author. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24177270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 15;441(2):344-50. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.056. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Unfolding protein response signaling is involved in development, maintenance, and
regression of the corpus luteum during the bovine estrous cycle.

Park HJ(1), Park SJ, Koo DB, Kong IK, Kim MK, Kim JM, Choi MS, Park YH, Kim SU,
Chang KT, Park CK, Chae JI, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology (BK 21 plus program), Kyungpook
National University, Daegu 702-701, Republic of Korea.

The corpus luteum (CL) is a transient endocrine organ. Development, maintenance, 
and regression of CL are effectively controlled by dynamic changes in gene
expression. However, it is unknown what types of gene are affected during the CL 
life span of the estrous cycle in bovine. Here, we determined whether unfolded
protein response (UPR) signaling via eIF2a/ATF4/GADD34, p90ATF6/p50ATF6, and
IRE1/XBP1, which is a cellular stress response associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), is involved in the bovine CL life span. Our results indicated
that expression of Grp78/Bip, the master UPR regulator, was increased during the 
maintenance stage and rapidly decreased at the regression stage. Additionally,
UPR signaling pathways genes were found to be involved in luteal phase
progression during the estrous cycle. Our findings suggested that Grp78/Bip,
ATF6, and XBP1 act as ER chaperones for initiating CL development and maintaining
the CL. In addition, we investigated whether ER stress-mediated apoptosis is
occurred through three UPR signaling pathways in CL regression stage.
Interestingly, pIRE1 and CHOP were found to be involved in both the adaptive
response and ER stress-mediated apoptosis. During the CL regression stage,
increased expression of pJNK and CHOP, two components of ER stress-mediated
apoptotic cascades, occurred before increased level of cleaved caspase 3 were
observed. The present investigation was performed to identify a functional link
between UPR signaling and CL life span during the bovine estrous cycle. Taken
together, results from this study demonstrated that UPR protein/gene expression
levels were different at various stages of the bovine CL life span. Variations in
the expression of these protein/genes may play important roles in luteal stage
progression during the estrous cycle.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24161737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Physiol Rep. 2013 Aug 1;1(3):e00052.

Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Activation during Total Knee Arthroplasty.

Hocker AD(1), Boileau RM, Lantz BA, Jewett BA, Gilbert JS, Dreyer HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Physiology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.

Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is the most common remediation for knee pain from
osteoarthritis (OA) and is performed 650,000 annually in the U.S. A tourniquet is
commonly used during TKA which causes ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) to the lower
limb but the effects of I/R on muscle are not fully understood. Previous reports 
suggest upregulation of cell-stress and catabolism and downregulation of markers 
of cap-dependent translation during and after TKA. I/R has also been shown to
cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and induce the unfolded protein response 
(UPR). We hypothesized that the UPR would be activated in response to ER stress
during TKA. We obtained muscle biopsies from the vastus lateralis at baseline,
before TKA; at maximal ischemia, prior to tourniquet deflation; and during
reperfusion in the operating room. Phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and AKT decreased
during ischemia (-28%, p < .05; -20%, p < .05 respectively) along with an
increase in eIF2a phosphorylation (64%, p < .05) suggesting decreased translation
initiation. Cleaved ATF6 protein increased in ischemia (39%, p = .056) but
returned to baseline during reperfusion. CASP3 activation increased during
reperfusion compared to baseline (23%, p < .05). XBP1 splicing assays revealed an
increase in spliced transcript during ischemia (31%, p < .05) which diminished
during reperfusion. These results suggest that in response to I/R during TKA all 
three branches of the ER stress response are activated.

PMCID: PMC3804266
PMID: 24159375  [PubMed]


378. Prog Neurobiol. 2014 Jan;112:50-69. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.10.003. Epub
2013 Oct 22.

Role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in brain ischemia: friend or foe?

Caldeira MV(1), Salazar IL(2), Curcio M(3), Canzoniero LM(4), Duarte CB(5).

Author information: 
(1)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Largo
Marquês de Pombal, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Life Sciences,
University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal. (2)CNC-Center for Neuroscience
and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Largo Marquês de Pombal, 3004-517
Coimbra, Portugal; Doctoral Programme in Experimental Biology and Biomedicine,
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal;
Institute for Interdisciplinary Research, University of Coimbra (IIIUC),
Portugal. (3)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra,
Largo Marquês de Pombal, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Science and
Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy. (4)Department of Science and 
Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy. (5)CNC-Center for
Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Largo Marquês de Pombal,
3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Department of Life Sciences, University of Coimbra,
3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address: cbduarte@ci.uc.pt.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a catalytic machinery that targets
numerous cellular proteins for degradation, thus being essential to control a
wide range of basic cellular processes and cell survival. Degradation of
intracellular proteins via the UPS is a tightly regulated process initiated by
tagging a target protein with a specific ubiquitin chain. Neurons are
particularly vulnerable to any change in protein composition, and therefore the
UPS is a key regulator of neuronal physiology. Alterations in UPS activity may
induce pathological responses, ultimately leading to neuronal cell death. Brain
ischemia triggers a complex series of biochemical and molecular mechanisms, such 
as an inflammatory response, an exacerbated production of misfolded and oxidized 
proteins, due to oxidative stress, and the breakdown of cellular integrity mainly
mediated by excitotoxic glutamatergic signaling. Brain ischemia also damages
protein degradation pathways which, together with the overproduction of damaged
proteins and consequent upregulation of ubiquitin-conjugated proteins, contribute
to the accumulation of ubiquitin-containing proteinaceous deposits. Despite
recent advances, the factors leading to deposition of such aggregates after
cerebral ischemic injury remain poorly understood. This review discusses the
current knowledge on the role of the UPS in brain function and the molecular
mechanisms contributing to UPS dysfunction in brain ischemia with consequent
accumulation of ubiquitin-containing proteins. Chemical inhibitors of the
proteasome and small molecule inhibitors of deubiquitinating enzymes, which
promote the degradation of proteins by the proteasome, were both shown to provide
neuroprotection in brain ischemia, and this apparent contradiction is also
discussed in this review.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Herpesviridae. 2013 Oct 21;4(1):2. doi: 10.1186/2042-4280-4-2.

Human cytomegalovirus induces apoptosis in neural stem/progenitor cells derived
from induced pluripotent stem cells by generating mitochondrial dysfunction and
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Nakamura H(1), Liao H, Minami K, Toyoda M, Akutsu H, Miyagawa Y, Okita H,
Kiyokawa N, Umezawa A, Imadome K, Inoue N, Fujiwara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
nakamura-hry@ncchd.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: Congenital human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, a leading cause of
birth defects, is most often manifested as neurological disorders. The
pathogenesis of HCMV-induced neurological disorders is, however, largely
unresolved, primarily because of limited availability of model systems to analyze
the effects of HCMV infection on neural cells.
METHODS: An induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line was established from the
human fibroblast line MRC5 by introducing the Yamanaka's four factors and then
induced to differentiate into neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) by dual
inhibition of the SMAD signaling pathway using Noggin and SB-431542.
RESULTS: iPSC-derived NSPCs (NSPC/iPSCs) were susceptible to HCMV infection and
allowed the expression of both early and late viral gene products. HCMV-infected 
NSPC/iPSCs underwent apoptosis with the activation of caspase-3 and -9 as well as
positive staining by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL). Cytochrome c release from mitochondria to cytosol was 
observed in these cells, indicating the involvement of mitochondrial dysfunction 
in their apoptosis. In addition, phosphorylation of proteins involved in the
unfolded protein response (UPR), such as PKR-like eukaryotic initiation factor 2a
kinase (PERK), c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), inositol-requiring enzyme 1
(IRE1), and the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2a) was
observed in HCMV-infected NSPC/iPSCs. These results, coupled with the finding of 
increased expression of mRNA encoding the C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) and the
detection of a spliced form of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, suggest that 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is also involved in HCMV-induced apoptosis of
these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: iPSC-derived NSPCs are thought to be a useful model to study HCMV
neuropathogenesis and to analyze the mechanisms of HCMV-induced apoptosis in
neural cells.

PMCID: PMC3875896
PMID: 24144363  [PubMed]


380. Haematologica. 2014 Mar;99(3):497-504. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.091702. Epub
2013 Oct 18.

Primary cold agglutinin-associated lymphoproliferative disease: a B-cell lymphoma
of the bone marrow distinct from lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.

Randen U(1), Trøen G, Tierens A, Steen C, Warsame A, Beiske K, Tjønnfjord GE,
Berentsen S, Delabie J.

Author information: 
(1)uranden@ous-hf.no.

Primary chronic cold agglutinin disease is a rare hemolytic disease mediated by
monoclonal IGHV4-34-encoded cold agglutinins with a predominant specificity for
the blood group antigen I. Bone marrow from 54 patients was studied to type the
underlying lymphoproliferative disorder better. Bone marrow biopsies showed
circumscribed intra-parenchymatous nodules with small monotonous monoclonal B
cells in 40/54 patients (median infiltration: 10% of marrow cells) with a
CD20(+), IgMs(+), IgDs(+), CD27(+), CD5(-/+), CD11c(-), CD23(-), CD38(-)
immunophenotype. Neither plasmacytoid cytological features nor expression of
plasma cell differentiation-associated transcription factors MUM1, XBP1 and
BLIMP1 were noted in these B cells. However, a limited number of mature
monoclonal IgM(+), IgD(-) plasma cells were present outside the lymphoid nodules 
and were diffusely scattered throughout the marrow. Of interest, the MYD88 L265P 
mutation, typical of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, was not detected (17/17 cases). 
Somatically mutated monoclonal IGHV4-34 gene rearrangement was demonstrated in
eight patients with frozen samples (mean sequence homology 95.4%). However,
mutations of BCL6 intron 1 were not demonstrated, except in one patient,
suggesting that the lymphoma cells had not matured in the germinal center. In
conclusion, cold agglutinin-associated lymphoproliferative disease displays
homogeneous histological and immunophenotypic features. The absence of
plasmacytoid cells, the presence of plasma cells predominantly outside the
nodular lymphoid infiltrates, IGHV4-34 restriction and absence of MYD88 L265P
mutation strongly suggest that cold agglutinin-associated lymphoproliferative
disease is a distinct entity that is different from lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3943313
PMID: 24143001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Yonsei Med J. 2013 Nov;54(6):1407-15. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1407.

Human leptin protein induces proliferation of A549 cells via inhibition of
PKR-like ER kinase and activating transcription factor-6 mediated apoptosis.

Lai Q(1), Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, General Hospital of Zaozhuang Mining Group, Qi
lian shan Road 12, Shandong, Zaozhuang 277000, China. laiqunzz@yeah.net.

PURPOSE: To investigate the anti-apoptotic mechanism of leptin in non-small cell 
lung cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The influences of leptin on apoptosis were investigated,
analyzing the mechanism that triggers growth of A549 cells. The effects of leptin
on cell proliferation were examined by XTT analysis. Leptin, C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP), phosphorylated-PKR-like ER kinase (p-Perk), inositol requiring
proteins-1, spliced X-box transcription factor-1 (XBP1), cleaved activating
transcription factor-6 (ATF6), eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2a,
caspase-12 and CHOP protein were detected in four groups by western blot, and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress related mRNA were detected by reverse
transcription PCR.
RESULTS: The expression of leptin in A549 and leptin transfected cells inhibited 
cisplatin activated ER stress-associated mRNA transcription and protein
activation. Two ER stress unfolded protein response pathways, PERK and ATF6, were
involved, and XBP1 and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2)
were increased significantly when treated with cisplatin in A549-siRNA against
leptin cells. Furthermore, CHOP expression was inhibited upon leptin expression
in A549, LPT-PeP and LPT-EX cells.
CONCLUSION: Leptin serves as an important factor that promotes the growth of A549
cells through blocking ER stress-mediated pathways. This blocking is triggered by
p-Perk and ATF6 via inhibition of CHOP expression.

PMCID: PMC3809871
PMID: 24142645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Dis Model Mech. 2014 Jan;7(1):93-106. doi: 10.1242/dmm.012864. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

Dysregulated phosphatidylinositol signaling promotes
endoplasmic-reticulum-stress-mediated intestinal mucosal injury and inflammation 
in zebrafish.

Thakur PC(1), Davison JM, Stuckenholz C, Lu L, Bahary N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA.

Dysregulated phosphatidylinositol (PI) signaling has been implicated in human
gastrointestinal (GI) malignancies and inflammatory states, underlining the need 
to study pathophysiological roles of PI in an in vivo genetic model. Here, we
study the significance of PI in GI pathophysiology using the zebrafish mutant
cdipt(hi559), which lacks PI synthesis, and unravel a crucial role of PI in
intestinal mucosal integrity and inflammation. The cdipt(hi559) mutants exhibit
abnormal villous architecture and disorganized proliferation of intestinal
epithelial cells (IECs), with pathologies reminiscent of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), including apoptosis of goblet cells, abnormal mucosecretion,
bacterial overgrowth and leukocyte infiltration. The mutant IECs exhibit
vacuolation, microvillus atrophy and impaired proliferation. The cdipt(hi559)
gene expression profile shows enrichment of acute phase response signaling, and
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress factors hspa5 and xbp1 are robustly
activated in the mutant GI tissue. Temporal electron micrographic analyses reveal
that PI-deficient IECs undergo sequential ER-Golgi disruption, mitochondrial
depletion, macroautophagy and cell death, consistent with chronic
ER-stress-mediated cytopathology. Furthermore, pharmacological induction of ER
stress by inhibiting protein glycosylation or PI synthase inhibition in
leukocyte-specific reporter lines replicates the cdipt(hi559) inflammatory
phenotype, suggesting a fundamental role of PI metabolism and ER stress in
mucosal inflammation. Antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs resolved the
inflammation, but not the autophagic necroapoptosis of IECs, suggesting that
bacterial overgrowth can exacerbate ER stress pathology, whereas persistent ER
stress is sufficient to trigger inflammation. Interestingly, the intestinal
phenotype was partially alleviated by chemical chaperones, suggesting their
therapeutic potential. Using zebrafish genetic and pharmacological models, this
study demonstrates a newly identified link between intracellular PI signaling and
ER-stress-mediated mucosal inflammation. The zebrafish cdipt mutants provide a
powerful tool for dissecting the fundamental mechanisms of ER-stress-mediated
human GI diseases and a platform to develop molecularly targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC3882052
PMID: 24135483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Lab Invest. 2013 Dec;93(12):1295-312. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.121. Epub 2013 
Oct 14.

Excess iron modulates endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated pathways in a mouse
model of alcohol and high-fat diet-induced liver injury.

Tan TC(1), Crawford DH, Jaskowski LA, Subramaniam VN, Clouston AD, Crane DI,
Bridle KR, Anderson GJ, Fletcher LM.

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia [2] 
Gallipoli Medical Research Centre, Greenslopes Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
[3] Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is an important pathogenic mechanism for
alcoholic (ALD) and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Iron overload is an
important cofactor for liver injury in ALD and NAFLD, but its role in ER stress
and associated stress signaling pathways is unclear. To investigate this, we
developed a murine model of combined liver injury by co-feeding the mildly iron
overloaded, the hemochromatosis gene-null (Hfe(-/)) mouse ad libitum with ethanol
and a high-fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. This co-feeding led to profound
steatohepatitis, significant fibrosis, and increased apoptosis in the Hfe(-/-)
mice as compared with wild-type (WT) controls. Iron overload also led to
induction of unfolded protein response (XBP1 splicing, activation of IRE-1a and
PERK, as well as sequestration of GRP78) and ER stress (increased CHOP protein
expression) following HFD and ethanol. This is associated with a muted autophagic
response including reduced LC3-I expression and impaired conjugation to LC3-II,
reduced beclin-1 protein, and failure of induction of autophagy-related proteins 
(Atg) 3, 5, 7, and 12. As a result of the impaired autophagy, levels of the
sequestosome protein p62 were most elevated in the Hfe(-/-) group co-fed ethanol 
and HFD. Iron overload reduces the activation of adenosine monophosphate protein 
kinase associated with ethanol and HFD feeding. We conclude that iron toxicity
may modulate hepatic stress signaling pathways by impairing adaptive cellular
compensatory mechanisms in alcohol- and obesity-induced liver injury.

PMID: 24126888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Dec;48(12):1455-68. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.10.001. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Characterization of global gene expression during assurance of lifespan extension
by caloric restriction in budding yeast.

Choi KM(1), Kwon YY, Lee CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Caloric restriction (CR) is the best-studied intervention known to delay aging
and extend lifespan in evolutionarily distant organisms ranging from yeast to
mammals in the laboratory. Although the effect of CR on lifespan extension has
been investigated for nearly 80years, the molecular mechanisms of CR are still
elusive. Consequently, it is important to understand the fundamental mechanisms
of when and how lifespan is affected by CR. In this study, we first identified
the time-windows during which CR assured cellular longevity by switching cells
from culture media containing 2% or 0.5% glucose to water, which allows us to
observe CR and non-calorically-restricted cells under the same conditions. We
also constructed time-dependent gene expression profiles and selected 646 genes
that showed significant changes and correlations with the lifespan-extending
effect of CR. The positively correlated genes participated in transcriptional
regulation, ribosomal RNA processing and nuclear genome stability, while the
negatively correlated genes were involved in the regulation of several metabolic 
pathways, endoplasmic reticulum function, stress response and cell cycle
progression. Furthermore, we discovered major upstream regulators of those
significantly changed genes, including AZF1 (YOR113W), HSF1 (YGL073W) and XBP1
(YIL101C). Deletions of two genes, AZF1 and XBP1 (HSF1 is essential and was thus 
not tested), were confirmed to lessen the lifespan extension mediated by CR. The 
absence of these genes in the tor1<U+0394> and ras2<U+0394> backgrounds did show
non-overlapping effects with regard to CLS, suggesting differences between the CR
mechanism for Tor and Ras signaling.

© 2013.

PMID: 24126084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 30;8(9):e75774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075774. eCollection
2013.

Drosophila XBP1 expression reporter marks cells under endoplasmic reticulum
stress and with high protein secretory load.

Ryoo HD(1), Li J, Kang MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York, United States of America.

Expression of genes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) beyond its protein folding 
capacity activates signaling pathways that are collectively referred to as the
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). A major branch of the UPR pathway is mediated by
IRE1, an ER-tethered endonuclease. Upon ER stress-induced activation, IRE1
splices the mRNA of XBP1, thereby generating an active isoform of this
transcription factor. During normal Drosophila development, tissues with high
protein secretory load show signs of IRE1/XBP1 activity indicative of inherent ER
stress associated with those cell types. Here, we report that the XBP1 promoter
activity itself is enhanced in secretory tissues of Drosophila, and it can be
induced by excessive ER stress. Specifically, we developed a Drosophila XBP1
transcription reporter by placing dsRed under the control of the XBP1 intergenic 
sequence. DsRed expression in these xbp1p>dsRed transgenic flies showed patterns 
similar to that of xbp1 transcript distribution. In healthy developing flies, the
reporter expression was highest in salivary glands and the intestine. In the
adult, the male reproductive organs showed high levels of dsRed. These tissues
are known to have high protein secretory load. Consistently, the xbp1p>dsRed
reporter was induced by excessive ER stress caused by mutant Rhodopsin-1
overexpression. These results suggest that secretory cells suffer from inherent
ER stress, and the xbp1p>dsRed flies provide a useful tool in studying the
function and homeostasis of those cells.

PMCID: PMC3787058
PMID: 24098723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nature. 2013 Nov 14;503(7475):272-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12599. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Paneth cells as a site of origin for intestinal inflammation.

Adolph TE(1), Tomczak MF, Niederreiter L, Ko HJ, Böck J, Martinez-Naves E,
Glickman JN, Tschurtschenthaler M, Hartwig J, Hosomi S, Flak MB, Cusick JL, Kohno
K, Iwawaki T, Billmann-Born S, Raine T, Bharti R, Lucius R, Kweon MN, Marciniak
SJ, Choi A, Hagen SJ, Schreiber S, Rosenstiel P, Kaser A, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK [2].

The recognition of autophagy related 16-like 1 (ATG16L1) as a genetic risk factor
has exposed the critical role of autophagy in Crohn's disease. Homozygosity for
the highly prevalent ATG16L1 risk allele, or murine hypomorphic (HM) activity,
causes Paneth cell dysfunction. As Atg16l1(HM) mice do not develop spontaneous
intestinal inflammation, the mechanism(s) by which ATG16L1 contributes to disease
remains obscure. Deletion of the unfolded protein response (UPR) transcription
factor X-box binding protein-1 (Xbp1) in intestinal epithelial cells, the human
orthologue of which harbours rare inflammatory bowel disease risk variants,
results in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, Paneth cell impairment and
spontaneous enteritis. Unresolved ER stress is a common feature of inflammatory
bowel disease epithelium, and several genetic risk factors of Crohn's disease
affect Paneth cells. Here we show that impairment in either UPR (Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC)) or
autophagy function (Atg16l1(<U+0394>IEC) or Atg7(<U+0394>IEC)) in intestinal epithelial cells
results in each other's compensatory engagement, and severe spontaneous
Crohn's-disease-like transmural ileitis if both mechanisms are compromised.
Xbp1(<U+0394>IEC) mice show autophagosome formation in hypomorphic Paneth cells, which
is linked to ER stress via protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), elongation initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) and activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF4). Ileitis is dependent on commensal microbiota and derives from
increased intestinal epithelial cell death, inositol requiring enzyme 1a
(IRE1a)-regulated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and tumour-necrosis factor signalling, which
are synergistically increased when autophagy is deficient. ATG16L1 restrains
IRE1a activity, and augmentation of autophagy in intestinal epithelial cells
ameliorates ER stress-induced intestinal inflammation and eases NF-<U+03BA>B
overactivation and intestinal epithelial cell death. ER stress, autophagy
induction and spontaneous ileitis emerge from Paneth-cell-specific deletion of
Xbp1. Genetically and environmentally controlled UPR function within Paneth cells
may therefore set the threshold for the development of intestinal inflammation
upon hypomorphic ATG16L1 function and implicate ileal Crohn's disease as a
specific disorder of Paneth cells.

PMCID: PMC3862182
PMID: 24089213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e75854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075854. eCollection
2013.

Induction of cytopathogenicity in human glioblastoma cells by chikungunya virus.

Abraham R(1), Mudaliar P, Padmanabhan A, Sreekumar E.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Disease Biology Program, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (RGCB),
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), an arthritogenic old-world alphavirus, has been
implicated in the central nervous system (CNS) infection in infants and elderly
patients. Astrocytes are the major immune cells of the brain parenchyma that
mediate inflammation. In the present study we found that a local isolate of CHIKV
infect and activate U-87 MG cells, a glioblastoma cell line of human astrocyte
origin. The infection kinetics were similar in infected U-87 MG cells and the
human embryo kidney (HEK293) cells as indicated by immunofluorescence and plaque 
assays, 24h post-infection (p.i.). In infected U-87 MG cells, apoptosis was
detectable from 48h p.i. evidenced by DNA fragmentation, PARP cleavage, loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential, nuclear condensation and visible cytopathic
effects in a dose and time-dependent manner. XBP1 mRNA splicing and eIF2a
phosphorylation studies indicated the occurrence of endoplasmic reticulum stress 
in infected cells. In U-87 MG cells stably expressing a green fluorescent
protein-tagged light chain-3 (GFP-LC3) protein, CHIKV infection showed increased 
autophagy response. The infection led to an enhanced expression of the mRNA
transcripts of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1ß, TNF-a, IL-6 and CXCL9 within
24h p.i. Significant up-regulation of the proteins of RIG-I like receptor (RLR)
pathway, such as RIG-I and TRAF-6, was observed indicating the activation of the 
cytoplasmic-cellular innate immune response. The overall results show that the
U-87 MG cell line is a potential in vitro model for in depth study of these
molecular pathways in response to CHIKV infection. The responses in these cells
of CNS origin, which are inherently defective in Type I interferon response,
could be analogous to that occurring in infants and very old patients who also
have a compromised interferon-response. The results also point to the intriguing 
possibility of using this virus for studies to develop oncolytic virus therapy
approaches against glioblastoma, a highly aggressive malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3783433
PMID: 24086645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2014 Feb;111(2):372-85. doi: 10.1002/bit.25116. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Model-directed engineering of "difficult-to-express" monoclonal antibody
production by Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Pybus LP(1), Dean G, West NR, Smith A, Daramola O, Field R, Wilkinson SJ, James
DC.

Author information: 
(1)ChELSI Institute, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
University of Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, UK.

Despite improvements in volumetric titer for monoclonal antibody (MAb) production
processes using Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, some "difficult-to-express"
(DTE) MAbs inexplicably reach much lower process titers. These DTE MAbs require
intensive cell line and process development activity, rendering them more costly 
or even unsuitable to manufacture. To rapidly and rationally identify an optimal 
strategy to improve production of DTE MAbs, we have developed an engineering
design platform combining high-yielding transient production, empirical modeling 
of MAb synthesis incorporating an unfolded protein response (UPR) regulatory loop
with directed expression and cell engineering approaches. Utilizing a panel of
eight IgG1 <U+03BB> MAbs varying >4-fold in volumetric titer, we showed that
MAb-specific limitations on folding and assembly rate functioned to induce a
proportionate UPR in host CHO cells with a corresponding reduction in cell growth
rate. Derived from comparative empirical modeling of cellular constraints on the 
production of each MAb we employed two strategies to increase production of DTE
MAbs designed to avoid UPR induction through an improvement in the rate/cellular 
capacity for MAb folding and assembly reactions. Firstly, we altered the
transfected LC:HC gene ratio and secondly, we co-expressed a variety of molecular
chaperones, foldases or UPR transactivators (BiP, CypB, PDI, and active forms of 
ATF6 and XBP1) with recombinant MAbs. DTE MAb production was significantly
improved by both strategies, although the mode of action was dependent upon the
approach employed. Increased LC:HC ratio or CypB co-expression improved cell
growth with no effect on qP. In contrast, BiP, ATF6c and XBP1s co-expression
increased qP and reduced cell growth. This study demonstrates that
expression-engineering strategies to improve production of DTE proteins in
mammalian cells should be product specific, and based on rapid predictive tools
to assess the relative impact of different engineering interventions.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24081924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Proteome Res. 2013 Dec 6;12(12):5570-86. doi: 10.1021/pr400535z. Epub 2013 Oct 
11.

Identification of GABA(C) receptor protein homeostasis network components from
three tandem mass spectrometry proteomics approaches.

Wang YJ(1), Han DY, Tabib T, Yates JR 3rd, Mu TW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics and Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine , 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,
United States.

<U+03B3>-Amino butyric acid type C (GABA(C)) receptors inhibit neuronal firing primarily
in retina. Maintenance of GABA(C) receptor protein homeostasis in cells is
essential for its function. However, a systematic study of GABA(C) receptor
protein homeostasis (proteostasis) network components is absent. Here
coimmunoprecipitation of human GABA(C)-<U+03C1>1-receptor complexes was performed in
HEK293 cells overexpressing <U+03C1>1 receptors. To enhance the coverage and reliability
of identified proteins, immunoisolated <U+03C1>1-receptor complexes were subjected to
three tandem mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analyses, namely, gel-based
tandem MS (GeLC-MS/MS), solution-based tandem MS (SoLC-MS/MS), and
multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT). From the 107
identified proteins, we assembled GABA(C)-<U+03C1>1-receptor proteostasis network
components, including proteins with protein folding, degradation, and trafficking
functions. We studied representative individual <U+03C1>1-receptor-interacting proteins,
including calnexin, a lectin chaperone that facilitates glycoprotein folding, and
LMAN1, a glycoprotein trafficking receptor, and global effectors that regulate
protein folding in cells based on bioinformatics analysis, including HSF1, a
master regulator of the heat shock response, and XBP1, a key transcription factor
of the unfolded protein response. Manipulating selected GABA(C) receptor
proteostasis network components is a promising strategy to regulate GABA(C)
receptor folding, trafficking, degradation and thus function to ameliorate
related retinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3864119
PMID: 24079818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003701. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003701. Epub 2013 Sep 
12.

Integration of the unfolded protein and oxidative stress responses through
SKN-1/Nrf.

Glover-Cutter KM(1), Lin S, Blackwell TK.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, and Harvard Medical
School Department of Genetics, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003827.

The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) maintains homeostasis in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and defends against ER stress, an underlying factor in various
human diseases. During the UPR, numerous genes are activated that sustain and
protect the ER. These responses are known to involve the canonical UPR
transcription factors XBP1, ATF4, and ATF6. Here, we show in C. elegans that the 
conserved stress defense factor SKN-1/Nrf plays a central and essential role in
the transcriptional UPR. While SKN-1/Nrf has a well-established function in
protection against oxidative and xenobiotic stress, we find that it also
mobilizes an overlapping but distinct response to ER stress. SKN-1/Nrf is
regulated by the UPR, directly controls UPR signaling and transcription factor
genes, binds to common downstream targets with XBP-1 and ATF-6, and is present at
the ER. SKN-1/Nrf is also essential for resistance to ER stress, including
reductive stress. Remarkably, SKN-1/Nrf-mediated responses to oxidative stress
depend upon signaling from the ER. We conclude that SKN-1/Nrf plays a critical
role in the UPR, but orchestrates a distinct oxidative stress response that is
licensed by ER signaling. Regulatory integration through SKN-1/Nrf may coordinate
ER and cytoplasmic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3772064
PMID: 24068940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 18;8(9):e75723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075723. eCollection
2013.

Regulation of sumo mRNA during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Moore KA(1), Plant JJ, Gaddam D, Craft J, Hollien J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and the Center for Cell and Genome Science, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a collection of pathways that maintains
the protein secretory pathway during the many physiological and pathological
conditions that cause stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The UPR is
mediated in part by Ire1, an ER transmembrane kinase and endoribonuclease that is
activated when misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER. Ire1's nuclease initiates
the cytosolic splicing of the mRNA encoding X-box binding protein (Xbp1), a
potent transcription factor that then upregulates genes responsible for restoring
ER function. This same nuclease is responsible for the degradation of many other 
mRNAs that are localized to the ER, through Regulated Ire1 Dependent Decay
(RIDD). Here we show that Smt3, a homolog of small ubiquitin-like modifier
(sumo), is a non-canonical RIDD target in Drosophila S2 cells. Unlike other RIDD 
targets, the sumo transcript does not stably associate with the ER membrane, but 
instead relies on an Xbp1-like stem loop and a second UPR mediator, Perk, for its
degradation during stress.

PMCID: PMC3776770
PMID: 24058701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Oct 15;142-143:221-9. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2013.08.017.
Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Exposure to tributyltin induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded
protein response in zebrafish.

Komoike Y(1), Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, 8-1 Kawadacho, Shinjuku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan. Electronic
address: komoike@research.twmu.ac.jp.

Tributyltin (TBT) is a major marine contaminant and causes endocrine disruption, 
hepatotoxicity, immunotoxicity, and neurotoxicity. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying the toxicity of TBT have not been fully elucidated. We
examined whether exposure to TBT induces the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response in zebrafish, a model organism. Zebrafish-derived BRF41 fibroblast cells
were exposed to 0.5 or 1 µM TBT for 0.5-16 h and subsequently lysed and
immunoblotted to detect ER stress-related proteins. Zebrafish embryos, grown
until 32 h post fertilization (hpf), were exposed to 1 µM TBT for 16 h and used
in whole mount in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry to visualize the
expression of ER chaperones and an ER stress-related apoptosis factor. Exposure
of the BRF41 cells to TBT caused phosphorylation of the zebrafish homolog of
protein kinase RNA-activated-like ER kinase (PERK), eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a), and inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1),
characteristic splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, and enhanced
expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) protein. In TBT-exposed
zebrafish embryos, ectopic expression of the gene encoding zebrafish homolog of
the 78 kDa glucose-regulating protein (GRP78) and gene encoding
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) was detected in the
precursors of the neuromast, which is a sensory organ for detecting water flow
and vibration. Our in vitro and in vivo studies revealed that exposure of
zebrafish to TBT induces the ER stress response via activation of both the
PERK-eIF2a and IRE1-XBP1 pathways of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in an
organ-specific manner.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 May 10;20(14):2091-106. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5240.
Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Role of unfolded protein response dysregulation in oxidative injury of retinal
pigment epithelial cells.

Chen C(1), Cano M, Wang JJ, Li J, Huang C, Yu Q, Herbert TP, Handa JT, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Ophthalmology/Ross Eye Institute, University at Buffalo, The
State University of New York , Buffalo, New York.

AIMS: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a major cause of legal blindness in
the elderly, is associated with genetic and environmental risk factors, such as
cigarette smoking. Recent evidence shows that cigarette smoke (CS) that contains 
high levels of potent oxidants preferably targets retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) leading to oxidative damage and apoptosis; however, the mechanisms are
poorly understood. The present study aimed to investigate the role of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR) in CS-related RPE
apoptosis.
RESULTS: ER stress and proapoptotic gene C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) were
induced in the RPE/choroid complex from mice exposed to CS for 2 weeks and in
human RPE cells treated with hydroquinone, a potent oxidant found at high
concentrations in CS. Suppressing ER stress or inhibiting CHOP activation by
pharmacological chaperones or genetic approaches attenuated hydroquinone-induced 
RPE cell apoptosis. In contrast to enhanced CHOP activation, protein level of
active X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a major regulator of the adaptive UPR, was
reduced in hydroquinone-treated cells. Conditional knockout of XBP1 gene in the
RPE resulted in caspase-12 activation, increased CHOP expression, and decreased
antiapoptotic gene Bcl-2. Furthermore, XBP1-deficient RPE cells are more
sensitive to oxidative damage induced by hydroquinone or NaIO3, a CS-unrelated
chemical oxidant. Conversely, overexpressing XBP1 protected RPE cells and
attenuated oxidative stress-induced RPE apoptosis.
INNOVATION AND CONCLUSION: These findings provide strong evidence suggesting an
important role of ER stress and the UPR in CS-related oxidative injury of RPE
cells. Thus, the modulation of the UPR signaling may provide a promising target
for the treatment of AMD.

PMCID: PMC3995121
PMID: 24053669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Exp Med. 2013 Sep 23;210(10):2041-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122341. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

ER stress transcription factor Xbp1 suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis and
directs intestinal stem cells.

Niederreiter L(1), Fritz TM, Adolph TE, Krismer AM, Offner FA, Tschurtschenthaler
M, Flak MB, Hosomi S, Tomczak MF, Kaneider NC, Sarcevic E, Kempster SL, Raine T, 
Esser D, Rosenstiel P, Kohno K, Iwawaki T, Tilg H, Blumberg RS, Kaser A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, England, UK.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Aug;147(2):531-3.

Unresolved endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the epithelium can provoke
intestinal inflammation. Hypomorphic variants of ER stress response mediators,
such as X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), confer genetic risk for inflammatory
bowel disease. We report here that hypomorphic Xbp1 function instructs a
multilayered regenerative response in the intestinal epithelium. This is
characterized by intestinal stem cell (ISC) expansion as shown by an
inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (Ire1a)-mediated increase in Lgr5(+) and Olfm4(+)
ISCs and a Stat3-dependent increase in the proliferative output of
transit-amplifying cells. These consequences of hypomorphic Xbp1 function are
associated with an increased propensity to develop colitis-associated and
spontaneous adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-related tumors of the intestinal
epithelium, which in the latter case is shown to be dependent on Ire1a. This
study reveals an unexpected role for Xbp1 in suppressing tumor formation through 
restraint of a pathway that involves an Ire1a- and Stat3-mediated regenerative
response of the epithelium as a consequence of ER stress. As such, Xbp1 in the
intestinal epithelium not only regulates local inflammation but at the same time 
also determines the propensity of the epithelium to develop tumors.

PMCID: PMC3782039
PMID: 24043762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Mar;229(3):374-83. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24459.

Calnexin silencing in mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes induces Ca2+ cycling defects,
ER stress, and apoptosis.

Bousette N(1), Abbasi C, Chis R, Gramolini AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Heart and Stroke/Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Calnexin (CNX) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control chaperone that
has been implicated in ER stress. ER stress is a prominent pathological feature
of various pathologic conditions, including cardiovascular diseases. However, the
role of CNX and ER stress has not been studied in the heart. In the present
study, we aimed to characterize the role of CNX in cardiomyocyte physiology with 
respect to ER stress, apoptosis, and cardiomyocyte Ca(2+) cycling. We
demonstrated significantly decreased CNX mRNA and protein levels by LentiVector
mediated transduction of targeting shRNAs. CNX silenced cardiomyocytes exhibited 
ER stress as evidenced by increased GRP78 and ATF6 protein levels, increased
levels of spliced XBP1 mRNA, ASK-1, ERO1a, and CHOP mRNA levels. CNX silencing
also led to significant activation of caspases-3 and -9. This activation of
caspases was associated with hallmark morphological features of apoptosis
including loss of sarcomeric organization and nuclear integrity. Ca(2+) imaging
in live cells showed that CNX silencing resulted in Ca(2+) transients with
significantly larger amplitudes but decreased frequency and Ca(2+) uptake rates
in the basal state. Interestingly, 5 mM caffeine stimulated Ca(2+) transients
were similar between control and CNX silenced cardiomyocytes. Finally, we
demonstrated that CNX silencing induced the expression of the L-type voltage
dependent calcium channel (CAV1.2) but reduced the expression of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum ATPase (SERCA2a). In conclusion, this is the first study to demonstrate
CNX has a specific role in cardiomyocyte viability and Ca(2+) cycling through its
effects on ER stress, apoptosis and Ca(2+) channel expression.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24037923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.005. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

Mmu-miR-702 functions as an anti-apoptotic mirtron by mediating ATF6 inhibition
in mice.

Zhang WG(1), Chen L, Dong Q, He J, Zhao HD, Li FL, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Basic Medical Science
College, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a group of endogenous, small, noncoding RNAs that function
as key post-transcriptional regulators. miRNAs are involved in many biological
processes including apoptosis. In this study, mouse miR-702 (mmu-miR-702), a
mirtron derived from the 13th intron of the Plod3 gene, was identified as a
regulator of anti-apoptosis. mmu-miR-702 was down-regulated after treatment with 
the apoptosis-inducer isoproterenol both in vivo and in vitro. According to
over-expression experiments, mmu-miR-702 inhibited apoptosis as well as the
expression levels of a subset of apoptosis-related genes including activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6). An interaction between mmu-miR-702 and the ATF6
3'-UTR binding site was confirmed using luciferase reporter and western blot
assays. This is the first report of ATF6 interaction with miRNA. Although the
possible existence of miR-702 in the human genome is low, our results indicate
that mirtrons also participate in the process of apoptosis and may provide a
novel study strategy for apoptosis.

© 2013.

PMID: 24035931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 May 7;93(17):1341-4.

[Inhibition of GRP78 expression reverses cisplatin resistance in human ovarian
cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Fan LM(1), Su J, Dong H, Wei M, Cui MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Second Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of GRP78 suppression on the sensitivity to
cisplatin and elucidate the role and mechanism of GRP78 in ovarian cancer
cisplatin resistance.
METHODS: The GRP78 siRNA expression plasmid was constructed to suppress GRP78
expression. Cell viability was detected by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT)
assay. Endoplasmic reticulum stress-related apoptosis related protein expressions
were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blot. And cell apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The expressions of GRP78, CHOP and cleaved-caspase 4 were induced
significantly by cisplatin (6 mg/L) in SKOV3 cells. And the expression of GRP78
was induced significantly by cisplatin in SKOV3/DDP cells. But the expressions of
CHOP and cleaved-caspase 4 showed no significant difference. Inhibition of GRP78 
expression and cisplatin combined treatment significantly increased the
expressions of cleaved-caspase 4 and cleaved-caspase 3 in SKOV3/DDP cells.
Inhibition of GRP78 expression reduced the cisplatin-induced up-regulations of
p-Akt and p-mTOR and induced XBP1 mRNA shear expression and CHOP mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of GRP78 expression reverses cisplatin resistance in
SKOV3/DDP cells. The mechanism may be through the activity of Akt/mTOR signaling 
pathway, CHOP expression levels and caspase activity.

PMID: 24029486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(22):12291-301. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02464-13. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Epstein-Barr virus induces global changes in cellular mRNA isoform usage that are
important for the maintenance of latency.

Homa NJ(1), Salinas R, Forte E, Robinson TJ, Garcia-Blanco MA, Luftig MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Center for Virology, Duke
University Medical Center.

Oncogenic viruses promote cell proliferation through the dramatic reorganization 
of host transcriptomes. In addition to regulating mRNA abundance, changes in mRNA
isoform usage can have a profound impact on the protein output of the
transcriptome. Using Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) transformation of primary B cells, 
we have studied the ability of an oncogenic virus to alter the mRNA isoform
profile of its host. Using the algorithm called SplicerEX with two complementary 
Affymetrix microarray platforms, we uncovered 433 mRNA isoform changes regulated 
by EBV during B-cell transformation. These changes were largely orthogonal with
the 2,163 mRNA abundance changes observed during transformation, such that less
than one-third of mRNAs changing at the level of isoform also changed in overall 
abundance. While we observed no preference for a mechanistic class of mRNA
isoform change, we detected a significant shortening of 3' untranslated regions
and exclusion of cassette exons in EBV-transformed cells relative to uninfected B
cells. Gene ontology analysis of the mRNA isoform changes revealed significant
enrichment in nucleic acid binding proteins. We validated several of these
isoform changes and were intrigued by those in two mRNAs encoding the proteins
XBP1 and TCF4, which have both been shown to bind and activate the promoter of
the major EBV lytic trans-activator BZLF1. Our studies indicate that EBV latent
infection promotes the usage of mRNA isoforms of XBP1 and TCF4 that restrict
BZLF1 activation. Therefore, characterization of global changes in mRNA isoform
usage during EBV infection identifies a new mechanism for the maintenance of
latent infection.

PMCID: PMC3807935
PMID: 24027308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2709-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.038. Epub
2013 Sep 7.

Regulated in DNA damage and development 1 (REDD1) promotes cell survival during
serum deprivation by sustaining repression of signaling through the mechanistic
target of rapamycin in complex 1 (mTORC1).

Dennis MD(1), McGhee NK, Jefferson LS, Kimball SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, The Pennsylvania State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Regulated in DNA damage and development 1 (REDD1) functions to repress signaling 
through the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) protein kinase in complex 1
(mTORC1) in response to diverse stress conditions. In the present study, we
investigated the role of REDD1 in the response of cells to growth cessation
induced by serum deprivation. REDD1 expression was induced within 2h of depriving
cells of serum, with the induction being mediated through ER stress, as evidenced
by activation of PERK, enhanced eIF2a phosphorylation, and ATF4 facilitated
transcription of the REDD1 gene. In wild-type cells, signaling through mTORC1 was
rapidly (within 30min) repressed in response to serum deprivation and the
repression was sustained for at least 10h. In contrast, in REDD1 knockout cells
mTORC1 signaling recovered toward the end of the 10h-deprivation period.
Interestingly, Akt phosphorylation initially declined in response to serum
deprivation and then recovered between 2 and 4h in wild-type but not REDD1
knockout cells. The recovery of mTORC1 signaling and the failure of Akt
phosphorylation to do so in the REDD1 knockout cells were accompanied by a
dramatic increase in caspase-3 cleavage and cell death, both of which were
blocked by rapamycin. Furthermore, overexpression of constitutively active Akt
rescued REDD1 knockout cells from serum deprivation induced cell death. Overall, 
the results implicate REDD1 as a key regulatory checkpoint that coordinates
growth signaling inputs to activate pro-survival mechanisms and reduce
susceptibility to cell death.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3867791
PMID: 24018049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Molecules. 2013 Aug 22;18(9):10242-53. doi: 10.3390/molecules180910242.

Brefeldin a effectively inhibits cancer stem cell-like properties and MMP-9
activity in human colorectal cancer Colo 205 cells.

Tseng CN(1), Huang CF, Cho CL, Chang HW, Huang CW, Chiu CC, Chang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Natural Products, Department of Biomedical Science and
Environmental Biology, Cancer Center, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are a small subset of cancer cells with indefinite
potential for self-renewal and the capacity to drive tumorigenesis. Brefeldin A
(BFA) is an antibiotic that is known to block protein transport and induce
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in eukaryotic cells, but its effects on
colorectal CSCs are unknown. We investigated the inhibitory effect of BFA on
human colorectal cancer Colo 205 cells. We found that BFA effectively reduced the
survival of suspension Colo 205 cells (IC50 = ~15 ng/mL) by inducing apoptosis,
and inhibited the clonogenic activity of Colo 205 CSCs in tumorsphere formation
assay and soft agar colony formation assay in the same nanogram per milliliter
range. We also discovered that at such low concentrations, BFA effectively
induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response as indicated by the increased 
mRNA expression of ER stress-related genes, such as glucose-regulated protein 78 
(GRP78), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP).
Finally, we found that BFA reduced the activity of matrix metallopeptidase 9
(MMP-9). These findings suggest that BFA can effectively suppress the progression
of colorectal cancer during the tumorigenesis and metastasis stages. These
results may lead to the development of novel therapies for the treatment of
colorectal cancer.

PMID: 23973996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Oct 18;8(10):2301-11. doi: 10.1021/cb4003893. Epub 2013 Sep
6.

Rutaecarpine analogues reduce lipid accumulation in adipocytes via inhibiting
adipogenesis/lipogenesis with AMPK activation and UPR suppression.

Chen YC(1), Zeng XY, He Y, Liu H, Wang B, Zhou H, Chen JW, Liu PQ, Gu LQ, Ye JM, 
Huang ZS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Institute of Medicinal Chemistry, Sun
Yat-sen University , Guangzhou, China.

Erratum in
    ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Jun 19;10(6):1570-1.

Obesity is characterized by expansion of adipose tissue, which results from an
increase in adipocyte number (adipogenesis) and adipocyte size (lipogenesis). A
reversal of these processes has been suggested to be a potential antiobetic
therapy. Rutaecarpine (Rut) and its novel analogues (R17 and R18) were identified
to exert potent effect in reducing lipid accumulation during adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes with little cytotoxicity. All three
compounds reduced lipid accumulation in a dose-dependent manner, while R17 and
R18 exhibited much more potent inhibitory effects compared to that of Rut.
Further studies showed that R17 suppressed both adipogenesis and lipogenesis
during all stages of adipocyte differentiation as indicated by the reduced
protein and mRNA levels of key regulators of adipogenesis/lipogenesis, including 
PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa, SREBP-1c, ACC, FAS, and SCD-1. We next examined the effect of R17 
on the UPR pathway and the results showed that the UPR markers (PERK, eIF2a,
IRE1a, and spliced XBP1 mRNA) were all significantly reduced by R17. Further
studies revealed that R17 persistently activated AMPK during differentiation,
suggesting that the AMPK may be an upstream mechanism for the effect of R17 on
adipogenesis and lipogenesis via the adipogenic/lipogenic markers and the UPR
pathway. Finally, studies in fast/refeeding mice demonstrated that R17
administration was able to reduce epididymal fat mass and the levels of plasma TG
and FFA in vivo. Our results suggest that rutaecarpine analogues may have
therapeutic potential for obesity and related metabolic disorders. The mechanism 
involves the suppression of adipogenic/lipogenic proteins and the suppression of 
the UPR pathway possibly via the AMPK.

PMID: 23962138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003544. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003544. Epub 2013 Aug
8.

Cytomegalovirus downregulates IRE1 to repress the unfolded protein response.

Stahl S(1), Burkhart JM, Hinte F, Tirosh B, Mohr H, Zahedi RP, Sickmann A,
Ruzsics Z, Budt M, Brune W.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.

During viral infection, a massive demand for viral glycoproteins can overwhelm
the capacity of the protein folding and quality control machinery, leading to an 
accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). To restore
ER homeostasis, cells initiate the unfolded protein response (UPR) by activating 
three ER-to-nucleus signaling pathways, of which the inositol-requiring enzyme 1 
(IRE1)-dependent pathway is the most conserved. To reduce ER stress, the UPR
decreases protein synthesis, increases degradation of unfolded proteins, and
upregulates chaperone expression to enhance protein folding. Cytomegaloviruses,
as other viral pathogens, modulate the UPR to their own advantage. However, the
molecular mechanisms and the viral proteins responsible for UPR modulation
remained to be identified. In this study, we investigated the modulation of IRE1 
signaling by murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) and found that IRE1-mediated mRNA
splicing and expression of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is repressed in
infected cells. By affinity purification, we identified the viral M50 protein as 
an IRE1-interacting protein. M50 expression in transfected or MCMV-infected cells
induced a substantial downregulation of IRE1 protein levels. The N-terminal
conserved region of M50 was found to be required for interaction with and
downregulation of IRE1. Moreover, UL50, the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) homolog 
of M50, affected IRE1 in the same way. Thus we concluded that IRE1 downregulation
represents a previously undescribed viral strategy to curb the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3738497
PMID: 23950715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Toxicol Lett. 2013 Oct 9;222(3):239-46. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.08.001. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling involvement in manganese-induced nerve
cell damage in organotypic brain slice cultures.

Xu B(1), Shan M, Wang F, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, China Medical
University, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
xubin@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Overexposure to manganese (Mn) has been known to induce neuronal damage. However,
the mechanisms underlying the neurotoxicity of Mn are still incompletely
understood but seem to involve endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The current
study investigated whether ER stress signaling was involved in Mn-induced
neurotoxicity in organotypic brain slices. After the brain slices were
respectively exposed to 400µM Mn for 0, 6, 12, 18, 24h, there was a
time-dependent increase in apoptotic cell death in slices and levels of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) in the culture medium. Moreover, Mn was found to upregulate
GRP78/94, CHOP and caspase-12 expression. Furthermore, PERK phosphorylation,
PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a and ATF4 mRNA expression increased. IRE1
activation and Xbp1 mRNA splicing also increased. However, ATF6 p90 levels did
not change. The findings clearly demonstrated that Mn induced the ER stress via
activation of PERK and IRE1 signaling pathway, which contributed to the
occurrence of apoptosis in cultured slices.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Sep 3;54(9):5995-6002. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12117.

Modulation of angiogenesis by genetic manipulation of ATF4 in mouse model of
oxygen-induced retinopathy [corrected].

Wang X(1), Wang G, Kunte M, Shinde V, Gorbatyuk M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, North Texas Eye Research Institute, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Mar;55(3):1310.

PURPOSE: The activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and an increase in
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) has been previously reported in the
diabetic retina. Despite this, a direct link between ATF4 and the degree of
proliferative retinopathy has not been demonstrated to date. Therefore, the
objective of this study was to determine whether ATF4 deficiency could reduce
neovascularization in mice with oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR).
METHODS: We induced OIR in C57BL/6, ATF4(+/-), and endoplasmic reticulum
stress-activated indicator (ERAI) mice and used quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blot analysis to evaluate relative gene and protein expression. Histology and
microscopy were used to calculate the extent of neovascularization in
flat-mounted retinas.
RESULTS: Experimental data revealed Xbp1 splicing in the retinal ganglia cells,
outer plexiform layer, inner nuclear layer, and outer nuclear layer and in
pericytes of postdevelopment day 17 ERAI OIR mice, confirming the activation of
IRE1 UPR signaling. In naive ATF4-deficient mice, we also observed an elevation
in UPR-associated and vascular-associated gene expression (Bip, Atf6, Hif1a,
Pik3/Akt, Flt1/Vegfa, and Tgfb1), which may have contributed to the alleviation
of hypoxia-driven neovascularization in experimental ATF4(+/-) retinas. The OIR
ATF4(+/-) retinas demonstrated reprogramming of the UPR seen at both the mRNA
(Atf6 and Bip) and protein (pATF6 and peIf2a) levels, as well as a reduction in
vascularization-associated gene expression (Flt1, Vegf1, Hif1, and Tgb1). These
changes corresponded to the decline in the rate of neovascularization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study validates ATF4 as a prospective therapeutic target to
inhibit neovascularization in proliferative retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3762331
PMID: 23942974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Feb;49(1):399-412. doi: 10.1007/s12035-013-8527-2. Epub 2013 
Aug 10.

a-Synuclein is involved in manganese-induced ER stress via PERK signal pathway in
organotypic brain slice cultures.

Xu B(1), Wang F, Wu SW, Deng Y, Liu W, Feng S, Yang TY, Xu ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 110001, People's Republic of China,
xubin@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

Overexposure to manganese (Mn) has been known to induce neuronal damage involving
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. However, the exact mechanism of Mn-induced ER 
stress is unclear. Increasing evidence suggested that the overexpression of
alpha-synuclein played a critical role in Mn-induced neurotoxicity. To explore
whether the occurrence of ER stress was associated with alpha-synuclein
overexpression, we made the rat brain slices model of silencing alpha-synuclein
using short-interference RNA. After non-silencing alpha-synuclein slices were
treated with Mn (0-400 µM) for 24 h, there was a dose-dependent increase in
apoptotic rates of cells and levels of lactate dehydrogenase in the culture
medium. Moreover, there was a dose-dependent increase in the protein expression
of 78, 94-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78/94), C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP), and caspase-12. Moreover, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) phosphorylation,
PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eIF2a, and ATF4 expression also increased.
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) activation and X-box-binding protein-1 (Xbp1) 
mRNA splicing increased. Activating transcription factor 6 p90 levels did not
change. However, after silencing alpha-synuclein slices were treated with 400 µM 
Mn for 24 h, there was a significant decrease in the expression of GRP78/94,
CHOP, and caspase-12 compared with 400 µM Mn-treated non-silencing
alpha-synuclein slices. Furthermore, PERK phosphorylation, PERK-mediated
phosphorylation of eIF2a, and ATF4 mRNA expression also decreased. However, IRE1 
phosphorylation and Xbp1 mRNA splicing did not change. The findings revealed that
Mn induced ER stress via activation of PERK and IRE1 signaling pathways and
subsequent apoptosis in cultured slices. Moreover, alpha-synuclein protein was
associated with Mn-induced activation of PERK signaling pathway.

PMID: 23934647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Neurochem. 2013 Oct;127(2):209-20. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12396. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

GalR3 activation promotes adult neural stem cell survival in response to a
diabetic milieu.

Mansouri S(1), Barde S, Ortsäter H, Eweida M, Darsalia V, Langel U, Sjöholm A,
Hökfelt T, Patrone C.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Science and Education,
Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden.

Type 2 diabetes impairs adult neurogenesis which could play a role in the CNS
complications of this serious disease. The goal of this study was to determine
the potential role of galanin in protecting adult neural stem cells (NSCs) from
glucolipotoxicity and to analyze whether apoptosis and the unfolded protein
response were involved in the galanin-mediated effect. We also studied the
regulation of galanin and its receptor subtypes under diabetes in NSCs in vitro
and in the subventricular zone (SVZ) in vivo. The viability of mouse SVZ-derived 
NSCs and the involvement of apoptosis (Bcl-2, cleaved caspase-3) and unfolded
protein response [C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) Glucose-regulated protein
78/immunoglobulin heavy-chain binding protein (GRP78/BiP), spliced X-box binding 
protein 1 (XBP1), c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) phosphorylation] were assessed
in the presence of glucolipotoxic conditions after 24 h. The effect of diabetes
on the regulation of galanin and its receptor subtypes was assessed on NSCs in
vitro and in SVZ tissues isolated from normal and type 2 diabetes ob/ob mice. We 
show increased NSC viability following galanin receptor (GalR)3 activation. This 
protective effect correlated with decreased apoptosis and CHOP levels. We also
report how galanin and its receptors are regulated by diabetes in vitro and in
vivo. This study shows GalR3-mediated neuroprotection, supporting a potential
future therapeutic development, based on GalR3 activation, for the treatment of
brain disorders.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 23927369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Feb;134(2):488-97. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.325. Epub 2013
Aug 6.

Oncogenic activation of MEK/ERK primes melanoma cells for adaptation to
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Croft A(1), Tay KH(2), Boyd SC(3), Guo ST(4), Jiang CC(2), Lai F(2), Tseng HY(2),
Jin L(2), Rizos H(3), Hersey P(5), Zhang XD(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan,
New South Wales, Australia [2] Oncology and Immunology Unit, Calvary Mater
Newcastle Mater Hospital, Waratah, New South Wales, Australia. (2)School of
Medicine and Public Health, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, 
Australia. (3)Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, Westmead Hospital,
University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead, New South Wales,
Australia. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Shanxi Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Taiyuan, People's Republic of China. (5)Kolling Institute for Medical 
Research, University of Sydney, St Leonards, New South Wales, Australia.

Cancer cells commonly undergo chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, to which
the cells have to adapt for survival and proliferation. We report here that in
melanoma cells intrinsic activation of the ER stress response/unfolded protein
response (UPR) is, at least in part, caused by increased outputs of protein
synthesis driven by oncogenic activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK/ERK) and promotes proliferation
and protects against apoptosis induced by acute ER stress. Inhibition of
oncogenic BRAF(V600E) or MEK-attenuated activation of inositol-requiring enzyme 1
(IRE1) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) signaling of the UPR in
melanoma cells. This was associated with decreased phosphorylation of eukaryotic 
initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) and nascent protein synthesis and was recapitulated 
by knockdown of eIF4E. In line with this, introduction of BRAF(V600E) into
melanocytes led to increases in eIF4E phosphorylation and protein production and 
triggered activation of the UPR. Similar to knockdown of glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78), inhibition of XBP1 decelerated melanoma cell proliferation
and enhanced apoptosis induced by the pharmacological ER stress inducers
tunicamycin and thapasigargin. Collectively, these results reveal that
potentiation of adaptation to chronic ER stress is another mechanism by which
oncogenic activation of the MEK/ERK pathway promotes the pathogenesis of
melanoma.

PMID: 23921951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2013 Aug;33(4):551-8. doi:
10.1007/s11596-013-1157-0. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in apoptosis of testicular cells
induced by low-dose radiation.

Wang ZC(1), Wang JF, Li YB, Guo CX, Liu Y, Fang F, Gong SL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Radiobiology of Ministry of Health, School of Public Health,
Jilin University, Changchun, 130021, China, zhicheng123a@126.com.

The study examined the role of endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and signaling
pathways of inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1), RNA-activated protein kinase-like
ER kinase (PERK) and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) in apoptosis of
mouse testicular cells treated with low-dose radiation (LDR). In the
dose-dependent experiment, the mice were treated with whole-body X-ray
irradiation at different doses (25, 50, 75, 100 or 200 mGy) and sacrificed 12 h
later. In the time-dependent experiment, the mice were exposed to 75 mGy X-ray
irradiation and killed at different time points (3, 6, 12, 18 or 24 h).
Testicular cells were harvested for experiments. H(2)O(2) and NO concentrations, 
and Ca(2+)-ATPase activity were detected by biochemical assays, the calcium ion
concentration ([Ca(2+)]i) by flow cytometry using fluo-3 probe, and GRP78 mRNA
and protein expressions by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western
blotting, respectively. The mRNA expressions of S-XBP1, JNK, caspase-12 and CHOP 
were measured by qRT-PCR, and the protein expressions of IRE1a, S-XBP1, p-PERK,
p-eIF2a, ATF6 p50, p-JNK, pro-caspase-12, cleaved caspase-12 and CHOP by Western 
blotting. The results showed that the concentrations of H2O2 and NO, the mRNA
expressions of GRP78, S-XBP1, JNK, caspase-12 and CHOP, and the protein
expressions of GRP78, S-XBP1, IRE1a, p-PERK, p-eIF2a, ATF6 p50, p-JNK,
pro-caspase-12, cleaved caspase-12 and CHOP were significantly increased in a
time- and dose-dependent manner after LDR. But the [Ca(2+)]i and Ca(2+)-ATPase
activities were significantly decreased in a time- and dose-dependent manner. It 
was concluded that the ERS, regulated by IRE1, PERK and ATF6 pathways, is
involved in the apoptosis of testicular cells in LDR mice, which is associated
with ERS-apoptotic signaling molecules of JNK, caspase-12 and CHOP.

PMID: 23904376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jul 28;19(28):4447-54. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i28.4447.

Interplay of autophagy and innate immunity in Crohn's disease: a key
immunobiologic feature.

Muzes G(1), Tulassay Z, Sipos F.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, 1088 Budapest,
Hungary. muzes.gyorgyi@med.semmelweis-univ.hu

Crohn's disease representing a clinical phenotype of inflammatory bowel disease
is a polygenic immune disorder with complex multifactor etiology. Recent
genome-wide association studies of susceptibility loci have highlighted on the
importance of the autophagy pathway, which previously had not been implicated in 
disease pathology. Autophagy represents an evolutionarily highly conserved
multi-step process of cellular self-digestion due to sequestration of excessive, 
damaged, or aged proteins and intracellular organelles in double-membranous
vesicles of autophagosomes, terminally self-digested in lysosomes. Autophagy is
deeply involved in regulation of cell development and differentiation, survival
and senescence, and it also fundamentally affects the inflammatory pathways, as
well as the innate and adaptive arms of immune responses. Autophagy is mainly
activated due to sensors of the innate immunity, i.e., by pattern recognition
receptor signaling. The interplay of genes regulating immune functions is
strongly influenced by the environment, especially gut resident microbiota. The
basic challenge for intestinal immune recognition is the requirement of a
simultaneous delicate balance between tolerance and responsiveness towards
microbes. On the basis of autophagy-related risk genetic polymorphisms (ATG16L1, 
IRGM, NOD2, XBP1) impaired sensing and handling of intracellular bacteria by
innate immunity, closely interrelated with the autophagic and unfolded protein
pathways seem to be the most relevant immunobiologic events. Autophagy is now
widely considered as a key regulator mechanism with the capacity to integrate
several aspects of Crohn's disease pathogenesis. In this review, recent advances 
in the exciting crosstalk of susceptibility coding variants-related autophagy and
innate immunity are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3725368
PMID: 23901219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2013 Sep;139(9):1551-62. doi: 10.1007/s00432-013-1473-6.
Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Perturbation of proteasome function by bortezomib leading to ER stress-induced
apoptotic cell death in cholangiocarcinoma.

Vaeteewoottacharn K(1), Kariya R, Matsuda K, Taura M, Wongkham C, Wongkham S,
Okada S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoiesis, Center for AIDS Research, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.

PURPOSE: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) or cancer of the biliary tract is
heterogeneous; however, chronic inflammatory-related features are unique in CCA. 
Moreover, the genes involved in proteasome functions are evidently increased in
CCA. Hence, CCA might be vulnerable to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stressors,
particularly a proteasome inhibitor. Therefore, bortezomib (BTZ), a specific 26S 
proteasome inhibitor, was selected, and its antitumor effects against CCA were
investigated.
METHODS: Liver fluke-associated CCA cell lines were used. Cell proliferation and 
apoptosis detection were determined by a tetrazolium-based assay, caspase
detection and annexin V binding assay. The accumulations of proteasome
substrates, the inductions of ER stress and unfolded protein response (UPR)
proteins were demonstrated by western blot and reporter systems. The in vivo
anti-proliferative effect was accessed in a subcutaneous transplantation mouse
model.
RESULTS: BTZ inhibited CCA proliferation and induced caspase-dependent apoptosis,
independently of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Inhibition of protein degradation by BTZ led 
to the induction of UPR; induction of XBP1 splicing, ATF6 proteolysis and nuclear
ATF4 as well as BiP and CHOP expressions were evident. Nevertheless, ER
stress-induced UPR was overwhelming, leading to the activation of apoptosis
demonstrated by proteolytic cleavages of ER-related caspase 4 and 12 as well as
classical caspase 8, 9 and 3. The growth inhibitory effect of BTZ was supported
by an in vivo model.
CONCLUSION: BTZ treatment could be a promising therapeutic approach for CCA
treatment.

PMID: 23877657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Oct;170(4):822-34. doi: 10.1111/bph.12306.

Selective, potent blockade of the IRE1 and ATF6 pathways by 4-phenylbutyric acid 
analogues.

Zhang H(1), Nakajima S, Kato H, Gu L, Yoshitomi T, Nagai K, Shinmori H, Kokubo S,
Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: 4-Phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA) is a chemical chaperone that
eliminates the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). However, its chaperoning ability is often weak and unable to attenuate the 
unfolded protein response (UPR) in vitro or in vivo. To develop more potent
chemical chaperones, we synthesized six analogues of 4-PBA and evaluated their
pharmacological actions on the UPR.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: NRK-52E cells were treated with ER stress inducers
(tunicamycin or thapsigargin) in the presence of each of the 4-PBA analogues; the
suppressive effects of these analogues on the UPR were assessed using selective
indicators for individual UPR pathways.
KEY RESULTS: 2-POAA-OMe, 2-POAA-NO2 and 2-NOAA, but not others, suppressed the
induction of ER stress markers GRP78 and CHOP. This suppressive effect was more
potent than that of 4-PBA. Of the three major UPR branches, the IRE1 and ATF6
pathways were markedly blocked by these compounds, as indicated by suppression of
XBP1 splicing, inhibition of UPRE and ERSE activation, and inhibition of JNK
phosphorylation. Unexpectedly, however, these agents did not inhibit
phosphorylation of PERK and eIF2a triggered by ER stress. These compounds
dose-dependently inhibited the early activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in ER stress-exposed
cells. 2-POAA-OMe and 2-POAA-NO2 also inhibited ER stress-induced phosphorylation
of Akt.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: The 4-PBA analogues 2-POAA-OMe, 2-POAA-NO2 and
2-NOAA strongly inhibited activation of the IRE1 and ATF6 pathways and downstream
pathogenic targets, including NF-<U+03BA>B and Akt, in ER stress-exposed cells. These
compounds may be useful for therapeutic intervention in ER stress-related
pathological conditions.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3799596
PMID: 23869584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Plant Physiol. 2013 Nov 1;170(16):1434-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.05.017.
Epub 2013 Jul 16.

The ER luminal binding protein (BiP) alleviates Cd(2+)-induced programmed cell
death through endoplasmic reticulum stress-cell death signaling pathway in
tobacco cells.

Xu H(1), Xu W, Xi H, Ma W, He Z, Ma M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100093, PR China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, PR China.

Cadmium (Cd) is very toxic to plant cells and Cd(2+) stress induces programmed
cell death (PCD) in Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. bright yellow-2 (BY-2) cells. In
plants, PCD can be regulated through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-cell
death signaling pathway. However, the mechanism of Cd(2+)-induced PCD remains
unclear. In this study, we found that Cd(2+) treatment induced ER stress in
tobacco BY-2 cells. The expression of two ER stress markers NtBLP4 and NtPDI and 
an unfolded protein response related transcription factor NtbZIP60 were
upregulated with Cd(2+) stress. Meanwhile, the PCD triggered by prolonged Cd(2+) 
stress could be relieved by two ER chemical chaperones, 4-phenylbutyric acid and 
tauroursodeoxycholic acid. These results demonstrate that the ER stress-cell
death signaling pathway participates in the mediation of Cd(2+)-induced PCD.
Furthermore, the ER chaperone AtBiP2 protein alleviated Cd(2+)-induced ER stress 
and PCD in BY-2 cells based on the fact that heterologous expression of AtBiP2 in
tobacco BY-2 cells reduced the expression of NtBLP4 and a PCD-related gene
NtHsr203J under Cd(2+) stress conditions. In summary, these results suggest that 
the ER stress-cell death signaling pathway regulates Cd(2+)-induced PCD in
tobacco BY-2 cells, and that the AtBiP2 protein act as a negative regulator in
this process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23867017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):541-7. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.005. Epub
2013 Jul 3.

New small molecule inhibitors of UPR activation demonstrate that PERK, but not
IRE1a signaling is essential for promoting adaptation and survival to hypoxia.

Cojocari D(1), Vellanki RN, Sit B, Uehling D, Koritzinsky M, Wouters BG.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute and Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research,
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada;
Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated in
response to hypoxia-induced stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and consists
of three distinct signaling arms. Here we explore the potential of targeting two 
of these arms with new potent small-molecule inhibitors designed against IRE1a
and PERK.
METHODS: We utilized shRNAs and small-molecule inhibitors of IRE1a (4µ8c) and
PERK (GSK-compound 39). XBP1 splicing and DNAJB9 mRNA was measured by qPCR and
was used to monitor IRE1a activity. PERK activity was monitored by immunoblotting
eIF2a phosphorylation and qPCR of DDIT3 mRNA. Hypoxia tolerance was measured
using proliferation and clonogenic cell survival assays of cells exposed to mild 
or severe hypoxia in the presence of the inhibitors.
RESULTS: Using knockdown experiments we show that PERK is essential for survival 
of KP4 cells while knockdown of IRE1a dramatically decreases the proliferation
and survival of HCT116 during hypoxia. Further, we show that in response to both 
hypoxia and other ER stress-inducing agents both 4µ8c and the PERK inhibitor are 
selective and potent inhibitors of IRE1a and PERK activation, respectively.
However, despite potent inhibition of IRE1a activation, 4µ8c had no effect on
cell proliferation or clonogenic survival of cells exposed to hypoxia. This was
in contrast to the inactivation of PERK signaling with the PERK inhibitor, which 
reduced tolerance to hypoxia and other ER stress inducing agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that IRE1a but not its splicing activity is 
important for hypoxic cell survival. The PERK signaling arm is uniquely important
for promoting adaptation and survival during hypoxia-induced ER stress and should
be the focus of future therapeutic efforts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jul 4;4:e701. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.236.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress sensitizes pancreatic beta cells to
interleukin-1ß-induced apoptosis via Bim/A1 imbalance.

Miani M(1), Barthson J, Colli ML, Brozzi F, Cnop M, Eizirik DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Brussels, Belgium.

We have recently shown that the crosstalk between mild endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and low concentrations of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin
(IL)-1ß exacerbates beta cell inflammatory responses via the IRE1a/XBP1 pathway. 
We presently investigated whether mild ER stress also sensitizes beta cells to
cytokine-induced apoptosis. Cyclopiazonic acid (CPA)-induced ER stress enhanced
the IL-1ß apoptosis in INS-1E and primary rat beta cells. This was not prevented 
by XBP1 knockdown (KD), indicating the dissociation between the pathways leading 
to inflammation and cell death. Analysis of the role of pro- and anti-apoptotic
proteins in cytokine-induced apoptosis indicated a central role for the
pro-apoptotic BH3 (Bcl-2 homology 3)-only protein Bim (Bcl-2-interacting mediator
of cell death), which was counteracted by four anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 (B-cell
lymphoma-2) proteins, namely Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1 and A1. CPA+IL-1ß-induced beta 
cell apoptosis was accompanied by increased expression of Bim, particularly the
most pro-apoptotic variant, small isoform of Bim (BimS), and decreased expression
of A1. Bim silencing protected against CPA+IL-1ß-induced apoptosis, whereas A1 KD
aggravated cell death. Bim inhibition protected against cell death caused by A1
silencing under all conditions studied. In conclusion, mild ER stress predisposes
beta cells to the pro-apoptotic effects of IL-1ß by disrupting the balance
between pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins. These findings link ER stress to 
exacerbated apoptosis during islet inflammation and provide potential mechanistic
targets for beta cell protection, namely downregulation of Bim and upregulation
of A1.

PMCID: PMC3730410
PMID: 23828564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2013;61(7):740-6.

Hydroxynaphthoic acids identified in a high throughput screening potently
ameliorate endoplasmic reticulum stress as novel chemical chaperones.

Jeong KW(1), Ku JM, Park MW, Park SM, Yang JE, Nam TG.

Author information: 
(1)Gyeonggi Bio-Center (GGBC), Gyeonggi Institute of Science and Technology
Promotion, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 443270, South Korea. assylum@gstep.re.kr

Folding of newly synthesized protein occurs in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is 
assisted by chaperone molecules. In ER stress conditions, misfolded proteins are 
enriched in a lumen of ER perturbing its normal function, which triggers cellular
self-defense mechanism, the unfolded protein response (UPR). It was reported that
tunicamycin-induced ER stress can be modulated with high concentration of
chemicals such as 4-phenylbutyric acid and salicylate. In search of assay systems
to identify such compounds, we have developed a cell-based reporter assay where
renilla luciferase activity is driven by glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78)
promoter. Using our reporter assay, we have screened chemical libraries and found
that hydroxynaphthoic acids, especially 1-, 3-, and 6-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acids, 
potently decrease the ER stress signal, showing an order of magnitude better
activity than salicylate. UPR markers such as GRP78, C/EBP homology protein
(CHOP) and phosphorylated protein kinase RNA-activated (PKR)-like ER kinase
(PERK) were significantly down-regulated with hydroxynaphthoic acids in western
blot. Among the analogues, 1-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid was the most potent in
down-regulating those UPR markers. Further, both phosphorylated
inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) and spliced form of X-box binding protein 1 
(XBP1) were decreased in the protein and the mRNA level, implying both PERK and
IRE1a branches in UPR mechanism are controlled with hydroxynaphthoic acids. Taken
together, it was suggested that hydroxynaphthoic acids exert their ER
stress-reducing activity prior to the UPR activation as chemical chaperones do.
In summary, we report a cell-based assay system for the screening of ER
stress-reducing compounds and hydroxynaphthoic acids as novel series of chemical 
chaperones.

PMID: 23812398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):780-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.06.005. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

ER stress in human hepatic cells treated with Efavirenz: mitochondria again.

Apostolova N(1), Gomez-Sucerquia LJ, Alegre F, Funes HA, Victor VM, Barrachina
MD, Blas-Garcia A, Esplugues JV.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Valencia,
Valencia, Spain; CIBERehd, Valencia, Spain. Electronic address:
nadezda.apostolova@uv.es.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: ER stress is associated with a growing number of liver
diseases, including drug-induced hepatotoxicity. The non-nucleoside analogue
reverse transcriptase inhibitor Efavirenz, a cornerstone of the multidrug
strategy employed to treat HIV1 infection, has been related to the development of
various adverse events, including metabolic disturbances and hepatic toxicity,
the mechanisms of which remain elusive. Recent evidence has pinpointed a specific
mitochondrial effect of Efavirenz in human hepatic cells. This study assesses the
induction of ER stress by Efavirenz in the same model and the implication of
mitochondria in this process.
METHODS: Primary human hepatocytes and Hep3B were treated with clinically
relevant concentrations of Efavirenz and parameters of ER stress were studied
using standard cell biology techniques.
RESULTS: ER stress markers, including CHOP and GRP78 expression (both protein and
mRNA), phosphorylation of eIF2a, and presence of the spliced form of XBP1 were
upregulated. Efavirenz also enhanced cytosolic Ca(2+) content and induced
morphological changes in the ER suggestive of ER stress. This response was
greatly attenuated in cells with altered mitochondrial function (Rho°). The
effects of Efavirenz on the ER, and particularly in regard to the mitochondrial
involvement, differed from those elicited by a standard pharmacological ER
stressor.
CONCLUSIONS: This newly discovered mechanism of cellular insult involving ER
stress and UPR response may help comprehend the hepatic toxicity that has been
associated with the widespread and life-long use of Efavirenz. In addition, the
specificity of the actions of Efavirenz observed expands our knowledge of the
mechanisms that trigger ER stress and shed some light on the mitochondria/ER
interplay in drug-induced hepatic challenge.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Dec;65:162-74. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.06.020. Epub 2013 Jun 19.

Bidirectional regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B by reactive oxygen species: a role of unfolded 
protein response.

Nakajima S(1), Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Shimokato 1110, Chuo,
Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is a transcription factor that plays a crucial role in 
coordinating innate and adaptive immunity, inflammation, and apoptotic cell
death. NF-<U+03BA>B is activated by various inflammatory stimuli including peptide
factors and infectious microbes. It is also known as a redox-sensitive
transcription factor activated by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Over the past
decades, various investigators focused on the role of ROS in the activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B by cytokines and lipopolysaccharides. However, recent studies also
suggested that ROS have the potential to repress NF-<U+03BA>B activity. Currently, it is
not well addressed how ROS regulate activity of NF-<U+03BA>B in a bidirectional fashion.
In this paper, we summarize evidence for positive and negative regulation of
NF-<U+03BA>B by ROS, possible redox-sensitive targets for NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, and
mechanisms underlying biphasic and bidirectional influences of ROS on NF-<U+03BA>B,
especially focusing on a role of ROS-mediated induction of endoplasmic reticulum 
stress.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Oct;209(4):345.e1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2013.06.037.
Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Superoxide dismutase 1 overexpression in mice abolishes maternal diabetes-induced
endoplasmic reticulum stress in diabetic embryopathy.

Wang F(1), Reece EA, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

OBJECTIVE: Both oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) are
causal events in diabetic embryopathy. We tested whether oxidative stress causes 
ER stress.
STUDY DESIGN: Wild-type (WT) and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)-overexpressing day
8.75 embryos from nondiabetic WT control with SOD1 transgenic male and diabetic
WT female with SOD1 transgenic male were analyzed for ER stress markers:
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), calnexin, eukaryotic initiation factor 2a
(eIF2a), protein kinase ribonucleic acid (RNA)-like ER kinase (PERK), binding
immunoglobulin protein, protein disulfide isomerase family A member 3, kinases
inositol-requiring protein-1a (IRE1a), and the X-box binding protein (XBP1)
messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing.
RESULTS: Maternal diabetes significantly increased the levels of CHOP, calnexin, 
phosphorylated (p)-eIF2a, p-PERK, and p-IRE1a; triggered XBP1 mRNA splicing; and 
enhanced ER chaperone gene expression in WT embryos. SOD1 overexpression blocked 
these diabetes-induced ER stress markers.
CONCLUSION: Mitigating oxidative stress via SOD1 overexpression blocks maternal
diabetes-induced ER stress in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3786037
PMID: 23791840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Metabolism. 2013 Oct;62(10):1367-74. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.05.002. Epub
2013 Jun 13.

Nutritional mismatch in postnatal life of low birth weight rat offspring leads to
increased phosphorylation of hepatic eukaryotic initiation factor 2 a in
adulthood.

Sohi G(1), Revesz A, Hardy DB.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Health Research Institute and the Lawson Health Research
Institute, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Physiology and
Pharmacology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1.

OBJECTIVE: Epidemiological studies have established that low birth weight
offspring, when faced with a nutritional mismatch in postnatal life, have an
increased risk of developing the metabolic syndrome. Our laboratory and others
have demonstrated that maternal protein restriction (MPR) leads to high
cholesterol and insulin resistance in the offspring due to impaired liver
function, though the underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. Recent in
vitro studies have associated decreased phosphorylation of Akt1 (Serine 473), a
marker of insulin sensitivity, with increased phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF)-2a (Serine 51), a key regulator of protein translation
attenuation. The main aim of the study was to determine whether nutritional
mismatch in MPR offspring leads to elevated phospho-eIF2a (Ser51) levels in the
liver.
MATERIALS/METHODS: To investigate if this occurs long-term in MPR offspring,
pregnant Wistar rats were fed a control (20%) protein diet (control) or a low
(8%) protein diet during pregnancy and postnatal life (LP1), or during pregnancy 
and lactation (LP2).
RESULTS: At postnatal day 130, LP2 offspring exhibited increases in hepatic
phosphorylation of eIF2a (Ser51) concomitant with decreases in the
phosphorylation of Akt1 (Ser473), while LP1 offspring exhibited the converse
relationship. Interestingly, in embryonic day 19 livers derived from control or
MPR pregnancy, no changes in eIF2a (Ser51) or Ak1 (Ser473) phosphorylation were
observed.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our data provide robust evidence that phosphorylation
of eIF2a (Ser51) is inversely correlated with phosphorylated Akt1 (Ser473) in
vivo. Moreover, this study demonstrates that this inverse relationship is
adversely influenced in these MPR offspring by a mismatch in the postnatal
nutritional environment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23768545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Lipids. 2013;2013:890343. doi: 10.1155/2013/890343. Epub 2013 May 14.

Trans-10, cis 12-Conjugated Linoleic Acid-Induced Milk Fat Depression Is
Associated with Inhibition of PPAR<U+03B3> Signaling and Inflammation in Murine Mammary 
Tissue.

Kadegowda AK(1), Khan MJ, Piperova LS, Teter BB, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Erdman RA,
Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742, USA.

Exogenous trans-10, cis-12-CLA (CLA) reduces lipid synthesis in murine adipose
and mammary (MG) tissues. However, genomewide alterations in MG and liver (LIV)
associated with dietary CLA during lactation remain unknown. We fed mice (n =
5/diet) control or control<U+2009>+<U+2009>trans-10, cis-12-CLA (37<U+2009>mg/day) between d 6 and d
10 postpartum. The 35,302 annotated murine exonic evidence-based oligo (MEEBO)
microarray and quantitative RT-PCR were used for transcript profiling. Milk fat
concentration was 44% lower on d 10 versus d 6 due to CLA. The CLA diet resulted 
in differential expression of 1,496 genes. Bioinformatics analyses underscored
that a major effect of CLA on MG encompassed alterations in cellular signaling
pathways and phospholipid species biosynthesis. Dietary CLA induced genes related
to ER stress (Xbp1), apoptosis (Bcl2), and inflammation (Orm1, Saa2, and Cp). It 
also induced marked inhibition of PPAR <U+03B3> signaling, including downregulation of
Pparg and Srebf1 and several lipogenic target genes (Scd, Fasn, and Gpam). In
LIV, CLA induced hepatic steatosis probably through perturbations in the
mitochondrial functions and induction of ER stress. Overall, results from this
study underscored the role of PPAR <U+03B3> signaling on mammary lipogenic target
regulation. The proinflammatory effect due to CLA could be related to inhibition 
of PPAR <U+03B3> signaling.

PMCID: PMC3666273
PMID: 23762566  [PubMed]


422. Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 1;73(15):4732-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3989. Epub
2013 Jun 10.

Posttranscriptional regulation of PER1 underlies the oncogenic function of IREa.

Pluquet O(1), Dejeans N, Bouchecareilh M, Lhomond S, Pineau R, Higa A, Delugin M,
Combe C, Loriot S, Cubel G, Dugot-Senant N, Vital A, Loiseau H, Gosline SJ,
Taouji S, Hallett M, Sarkaria JN, Anderson K, Wu W, Rodriguez FJ, Rosenbaum J,
Saltel F, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Chevet E.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1053, University of Bordeaux, 146 rue Leo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux
Cedex, France.

Growing evidence supports a role for the unfolded protein response (UPR) in
carcinogenesis; however, the precise molecular mechanisms underlying this
phenomenon remain elusive. Herein, we identified the circadian clock PER1 mRNA as
a novel substrate of the endoribonuclease activity of the UPR sensor IRE1a.
Analysis of the mechanism shows that IRE1a endoribonuclease activity decreased
PER1 mRNA in tumor cells without affecting PER1 gene transcription. Inhibition of
IRE1a signaling using either siRNA-mediated silencing or a dominant-negative
strategy prevented PER1 mRNA decay, reduced tumorigenesis, and increased
survival, features that were reversed upon PER1 silencing. Clinically, patients
showing reduced survival have lower levels of PER1 mRNA expression and increased 
splicing of XBP1, a known IRE-a substrate, thereby pointing toward an increased
IRE1a activity in these patients. Hence, we describe a novel mechanism connecting
the UPR and circadian clock components in tumor cells, thereby highlighting the
importance of this interplay in tumor development.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3915716
PMID: 23752693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Oct 1;272(1):137-46. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.05.026. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Tributyltin-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and its Ca(2+)-mediated
mechanism.

Isomura M(1), Kotake Y, Masuda K, Miyara M, Okuda K, Samizo S, Sanoh S, Hosoi T, 
Ozawa K, Ohta S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan.

Organotin compounds, especially tributyltin chloride (TBT), have been widely used
in antifouling paints for marine vessels, but exhibit various toxicities in
mammals. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multifunctional organelle that
controls post-translational modification and intracellular Ca(2+) signaling. When
the capacity of the quality control system of ER is exceeded under stress
including ER Ca(2+) homeostasis disruption, ER functions are impaired and
unfolded proteins are accumulated in ER lumen, which is called ER stress. Here,
we examined whether TBT causes ER stress in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. We
found that 700nM TBT induced ER stress markers such as CHOP, GRP78, spliced XBP1 
mRNA and phosphorylated eIF2a. TBT also decreased the cell viability both
concentration- and time-dependently. Dibutyltin and monobutyltin did not induce
ER stress markers. We hypothesized that TBT induces ER stress via Ca(2+)
depletion, and to test this idea, we examined the effect of TBT on intracellular 
Ca(2+) concentration using fura-2 AM, a Ca(2+) fluorescent probe. TBT increased
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration in a TBT-concentration-dependent manner, and
Ca(2+) increase in 700nM TBT was mainly blocked by 50µM dantrolene, a ryanodine
receptor antagonist (about 70% inhibition). Dantrolene also partially but
significantly inhibited TBT-induced GRP78 expression and cell death. These
results suggest that TBT increases intracellular Ca(2+) concentration by
releasing Ca(2+) from ER, thereby causing ER stress.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23743301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065061. Print 2013.

Toll-like receptor 4 knockout mice are protected against endoplasmic reticulum
stress induced by a high-fat diet.

Pierre N(1), Deldicque L, Barbé C, Naslain D, Cani PD, Francaux M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium.

The purpose of this study was to investigate whether toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) 
is implicated in the development of endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress)
observed after a high-fat diet (HFD) in liver, skeletal muscle and adipose
tissue. TLR4(-/-) and C57BL/6J wild-type mice (WT) were fed with chow or HFD (45%
calories from fat) during 18 weeks. An oral glucose tolerance-test was performed.
The animals were sacrificed in a fasted state and the tissues were removed. TLR4 
deletion protected from body weight gain and glucose intolerance induced by HFD
whereas energy intake was higher in transgenic mice suggesting larger energy
expenditure. HFD induced an ER stress in skeletal muscle, liver and adipose
tissue of WT mice as assessed by BiP, CHOP, spliced and unspliced XBP1 and
phospho-eIF2a. TLR4(-/-) mice were protected against HFD-induced ER stress. Then,
we investigated the main signaling downstream of TLR4 namely the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway,
expecting to identify the mechanism by which TLR4 is able to activate ER stress. 
The mRNA levels of cytokines regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B namely TNFa, IL-1ß and IL-6, were
not changed after HFD and phospho-I<U+03BA>B-a (ser 32) was not changed. Our results
indicate that TLR4 is essential for the development of ER stress related to HFD. 
Nevertheless, the NF<U+03BA>-B pathway does not seem to be directly implicated. The
reduced fat storage in TLR4(-/-) mice could explain the absence of an ER stress
after HFD.

PMCID: PMC3669084
PMID: 23741455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 12;288(28):20378-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457242. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Identification of a novel endoplasmic reticulum stress response element regulated
by XBP1.

Misiewicz M(1), Déry MA, Foveau B, Jodoin J, Ruths D, LeBlanc AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec
H3T 1E2, Canada.

Understanding the regulatory mechanisms mediating PRNP gene expression is highly 
relevant to elucidating normal cellular prion protein (PrP) function(s) and the
transmissibility of prion protein neurodegenerative diseases. Here, luciferase
reporter assays showed that an endoplasmic reticulum stress element (ERSE)-like
element, CCAAT-N26-CCACG in the human PRNP promoter, is regulated by ER stress
and X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) but not by activating transcription factor 6 a
(ATF6a). Bioinformatics identified the ERSE-26 motif in 37 other human genes in
the absence of canonical ERSE sites except for three genes. Several of these
genes are associated with a synaptic function or are involved in oxidative
stress. Brefeldin A, tunicamycin, and thapsigargin ER stressors induced gene
expression of PRNP and four randomly chosen ERSE-26-containing genes, ERLEC1,
GADD45B, SESN2, and SLC38A5, in primary human neuron cultures or in the breast
carcinoma MCF-7 cell line, although the level of the response depends on the gene
analyzed, the genetic background of the cells, the cell type, and the ER
stressor. Overexpression of XBP1 increased, whereas siRNA knockdown of XBP1
considerably reduced, PRNP and ERLEC1 mRNA levels in MCF-7 cells. Taken together,
these results identify a novel ER stress regulator, which implicates the ER
stress response in previously unrecognized cellular functions.

PMCID: PMC3711304
PMID: 23737521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Endocrinology. 2013 Sep;154(9):3228-39. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1249. Epub 2013 Jun 
4.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis contribute to the pathogenesis of
dominantly inherited isolated GH deficiency due to GH1 gene splice site
mutations.

Ariyasu D(1), Yoshida H, Yamada M, Hasegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Childrens
Medical Center, Tokyo 1838561, Japan.

Dominantly inherited isolated GH deficiency is mainly caused by a heterozygous
donor site mutation of intron 3 in the GH1 gene. An exon 3 deletion in GH
(del32-71 GH) is produced from a mutant allele, whereas wild-type GH is produced 
from the other allele. Several studies have demonstrated a dominant negative
effect of del32-71 GH on wild-type GH secretion, but the precise molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. We hypothesized that unfolded del32-71 GH accumulates 
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and causes ER stress and apoptosis in
somatotrophs, promoting GH deficiency. To evaluate del32-71 GH-mediated ER
stress, we established GH4C1 cell lines with doxycycline (dox)-controlled
del32-71 GH expression. In 20 of 23 dox-controlled cell lines, the concentration 
of wild-type GH in the culture medium significantly decreased with del32-71 GH
induction, demonstrating the dominant negative effect of this mutant. Cell
viability, mRNA abundance of ER stress-response genes, caspase activation, and
DNA fragmentation were evaluated in 5 dox-controlled cell lines selected as
cellular models. In 4 of the 5 cell lines, del32-71 GH induction decreased cell
viability, increased expression of 3 major ER stress response pathways (PRKR-like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase [PERK], activating transcription factor-6 [ATF6],
and inositol requirement 1 [IRE1]), and induced caspase-3 and caspase-7
activation. In 1 of the 4 cell lines, DNA fragmentation was demonstrated.
Finally, overexpression of XBP1(S), a nuclear transcription factor downstream of 
IRE1, completely reversed the observed caspase activation. These data suggested
that del32-71 GH-mediated ER stress and apoptosis contributed to the decrease in 
wild-type GH secretion observed in GH deficiency due to the GH1 gene slice-site
mutations.

PMID: 23736291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Jun;12(6):831-43. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0782. Epub 
2013 May 31.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response: targeting the
Achilles heel of multiple myeloma.

Vincenz L(1), Jäger R, O'Dwyer M, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway,
Ireland.

Multiple myeloma is characterized by the malignant proliferating
antibody-producing plasma cells in the bone marrow. Despite recent advances in
therapy that improve the survival of patients, multiple myeloma remains incurable
and therapy resistance is the major factor causing lethality. Clearly, more
effective treatments are necessary. In recent years it has become apparent that, 
as highly secretory antibody-producing cells, multiple myeloma cells require an
increased capacity to cope with unfolded proteins and are particularly sensitive 
to compounds targeting proteostasis such as proteasome inhibitors, which
represent one of the most prominent new therapeutic strategies. Because of the
increased requirement for dealing with secretory proteins within the endoplasmic 
reticulum, multiple myeloma cells are heavily reliant for survival on a set of
signaling pathways, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR). Thus, directly 
targeting the UPR emerges as a new promising therapeutic strategy. Here, we
provide an overview of the current understanding of the UPR signaling in cancer, 
and outline its important role in myeloma pathogenesis and treatment. We discuss 
new therapeutic approaches based on targeting the protein quality control
machinery and particularly the IRE1a/XBP1 axis of the UPR.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 23729400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 15;319(14):2166-78. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.05.023. Epub
2013 May 31.

Sorafenib enhances proteasome inhibitor-mediated cytotoxicity via inhibition of
unfolded protein response and keratin phosphorylation.

Honma Y(1), Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is highly resistant to conventional systemic
therapies and prognosis for advanced HCC patients remains poor. Recent studies of
the molecular mechanisms responsible for tumor initiation and progression have
identified several potential molecular targets in HCC. Sorafenib is a
multi-kinase inhibitor shown to have survival benefits in advanced HCC. It acts
by inhibiting the serine/threonine kinases and the receptor type tyrosine
kinases. In preclinical experiments sorafenib had anti-proliferative activity in 
hepatoma cells and it reduced tumor angiogenesis and increased apoptosis. Here,
we demonstrate for the first time that the cytotoxic mechanisms of sorafenib
include its inhibitory effects on protein ubiquitination, unfolded protein
response (UPR) and keratin phosphorylation in response to endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Moreover, we show that combined treatment with sorafenib and
proteasome inhibitors (PIs) synergistically induced a marked increase in cell
death in hepatoma- and hepatocyte-derived cells. These observations may open the 
way to potentially interesting treatment combinations that may augment the effect
of sorafenib, possibly including drugs that promote ER stress. Because sorafenib 
blocked the cellular defense mechanisms against hepatotoxic injury not only in
hepatoma cells but also in hepatocyte-derived cells, we must be careful to avoid 
severe liver injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2013 May 28;8(5):e64256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064256. Print 2013.

Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-2 (IRAK2) is a critical mediator of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling.

Benosman S(1), Ravanan P, Correa RG, Hou YC, Yu M, Gulen MF, Li X, Thomas J,
Cuddy M, Matsuzawa Y, Sano R, Diaz P, Matsuzawa S, Reed JC.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United
States of America.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress occurs when unfolded proteins accumulate in the
lumen of the organelle, triggering signal transduction events that contribute
either to cellular adaptation and recovery or alternatively to cellular
dysfunction and death. ER stress has been implicated in numerous diseases. To
identify novel modulators of ER stress, we undertook a siRNA library screen of
the kinome, revealing Interleukin-1 Receptor-Associated Kinase-2 (IRAK2) as a
contributor to unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling and ER stress-induced
cell death. Knocking down expression of IRAK2 (but not IRAK1) in cultured
mammalian cells suppresses ER stress-induced expression of the pro-apoptotic
transcription factor CHOP and activation of stress kinases. Similarly,
RNAi-mediated silencing of the IRAK family member Tube (but not Pelle) suppresses
activation of stress kinase signaling induced by ER stress in Drosophila cells.
The action of IRAK2 maps to the IRE1 pathway, rather than the PERK or ATF6
components of the UPR. Interestingly, ER stress also induces IRAK2 gene
expression in an IRE1/XBP1-dependent manner, suggesting a mutually supporting
amplification loop involving IRAK2 and IRE1. In vivo, ER stress induces Irak2
expression in mice. Moreover, Irak2 gene knockout mice display defects in ER
stress-induced CHOP expression and IRE1 pathway signaling. These findings
demonstrate an unexpected linkage of the innate immunity machinery to UPR
signaling, revealing IRAK2 as a novel amplifier of the IRE1 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3665826
PMID: 23724040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Aging Cell. 2013 Oct;12(5):794-801. doi: 10.1111/acel.12105. Epub 2013 Jul 7.

Inhibition of x-box binding protein 1 reduces tunicamycin-induced apoptosis in
aged murine macrophages.

Song Y(1), Shen H, Du W, Goldstein DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; Department of Immunobiology,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is induced by the accumulation of unfolded and 
misfolded proteins in the ER. Although apoptosis induced by ER stress has been
implicated in several aging-associated diseases, such as atherosclerosis, it is
unclear how aging modifies ER stress response in macrophages. To decipher this
relationship, we assessed apoptosis in macrophages isolated from young
(1.5-2 months) and aged (16-18 months) mice and exposed the cells to the ER
stress inducer tunicamycin. We found that aged macrophages exhibited more
apoptosis than young macrophages, which was accompanied by reduced activation of 
phosphorylated inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (p-IRE1a), one of the three key ER
stress signal transducers. Reduced gene expression of x-box binding protein 1
(XBP1), a downstream effector of IRE1a, enhanced p-IRE1a levels and reduced
apoptosis in aged, but not young macrophages treated with tunicamycin. These
findings delineate a novel, age-dependent interaction by which macrophages
undergo apoptosis upon ER stress, and suggest an important protective role of
IRE1a in aging-associated ER stress-induced apoptosis. This novel pathway may not
only be important in our understanding of longevity, but may also have important 
implications for pathogenesis and potential treatment of aging-associated
diseases in general.

© 2013 The Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3773058
PMID: 23711292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. PLoS One. 2013 May 16;8(5):e64344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064344. Print 2013.

Dual regulation of cadmium-induced apoptosis by mTORC1 through selective
induction of IRE1 branches in unfolded protein response.

Kato H(1), Katoh R, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

Cadmium (Cd) causes generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that trigger
renal tubular injury. We found that rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTORC1, attenuated
Cd-induced apoptosis in renal tubular cells. Knockdown of Raptor, a positive
regulator of mTORC1, also had the similar effect. However, rapamycin did not
alter generation of ROS, suggesting that mTORC1 is a target downstream of ROS.
Indeed, ROS caused activation of mTORC1, which contributed to induction of a
selective branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR); i.e., the IRE1 pathway. 
Although Cd triggered three major UPR pathways, activation of mTORC1 by Cd did
not contribute to induction of the PERK-eIF2a and ATF6 pathways. Consistently,
knockdown of Raptor caused suppression of JNK without affecting the PERK-eIF2a
pathway in Cd-exposed cells. Knockdown of TSC2, a negative regulator of mTORC1,
caused activation of mTORC1 and enhanced Cd induction of the IRE1-JNK pathway and
apoptosis without affecting other UPR branches. Inhibition of IRE1a kinase led to
suppression of JNK activity and apoptosis in Cd-treated cells. Dominant-negative 
inhibition of JNK also suppressed Cd-induced apoptosis. In contrast, inhibition
of IRE1a endoribonuclease activity or downstream XBP1 modestly enhanced
Cd-induced apoptosis. In vivo, administration with rapamycin suppressed
activation of mTORC1 and JNK, but not eIF2a, in the kidney of Cd-treated mice. It
was correlated with attenuation of tubular injury and apoptotic cell death in the
tubules. These results elucidate dual regulation of Cd-induced renal injury by
mTORC1 through selective induction of IRE1 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3655991
PMID: 23696882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 May 15;13(5):558-69. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.03.011.

The unfolded protein response element IRE1a senses bacterial proteins invading
the ER to activate RIG-I and innate immune signaling.

Cho JA(1), Lee AH, Platzer B, Cross BC, Gardner BM, De Luca H, Luong P, Harding
HP, Glimcher LH, Walter P, Fiebiger E, Ron D, Kagan JC, Lencer WI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of GI Cell Biology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2013 May 15;13(5):501-3.

The plasma membrane and all membrane-bound organelles except for the Golgi and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are equipped with pattern-recognition molecules to
sense microbes or their products and induce innate immunity for host defense.
Here, we report that inositol-requiring-1a (IRE1a), an ER protein that signals in
the unfolded protein response (UPR), is activated to induce inflammation by
binding a portion of cholera toxin as it co-opts the ER to cause disease. Other
known UPR transducers, including the IRE1a-dependent transcription factor XBP1,
are dispensable for this signaling. The inflammatory response depends instead on 
the RNase activity of IRE1a to degrade endogenous mRNA, a process termed
regulated IRE1a-dependent decay (RIDD) of mRNA. The mRNA fragments produced
engage retinoic-acid inducible gene 1 (RIG-I), a cytosolic sensor of RNA viruses,
to activate NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon pathways. We propose IRE1a provides for a
generalized mechanism of innate immune surveillance originating within the ER
lumen.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3766372
PMID: 23684307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Aug;23(8):1116-22.

Engineering the cellular protein secretory pathway for enhancement of recombinant
tissue plasminogen activator expression in Chinese hamster ovary cells: effects
of CERT and XBP1s genes.

Rahimpour A(1), Vaziri B, Moazzami R, Nematollahi L, Barkhordari F, Kokabee L,
Adeli A, Mahboudi F.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran 1316943551,
Iran.

Cell line development is the most critical and also the most time-consuming step 
in the production of recombinant therapeutic proteins. In this regard, a variety 
of vector and cell engineering strategies have been developed for generating
high-producing mammalian cells; however, the cell line engineering approach seems
to show various results on different recombinant protein producer cells. In order
to improve the secretory capacity of a recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
(t-PA)-producing Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line, we developed cell line
engineering approaches based on the ceramide transfer protein (CERT) and X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) genes. For this purpose, CERT S132A, a mutant form of
CERT that is resistant to phosphorylation, and XBP1s were overexpressed in a
recombinant t-PA-producing CHO cell line. Overexpression of CERT S132A increased 
the specific productivity of t-PA-producing CHO cells up to 35%. In contrast, the
heterologous expression of XBP1s did not affect the t-PA expression rate. Our
results suggest that CERTS132A- based secretion engineering could be an effective
strategy for enhancing recombinant t- PA production in CHO cells.

PMID: 23676904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Diabetes Res. 2013;2013:630537. doi: 10.1155/2013/630537. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Analog Liraglutide Protects against Diabetic
Cardiomyopathy by the Inhibition of the Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Pathway.

Liu J(1), Liu Y, Chen L, Wang Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Endocrinology, The Second Hospital of Jilin University,
Jilin University, Changchun 130041, China.

Aim. This study aimed to investigate whether the glucagon-like peptide-1 analog
liraglutide (LIRA) can protect against diabetic cardiomyopathy and explore the
related mechanism. Methods. Rats were divided into 6 groups: a nondiabetic group,
diabetic cardiomyopathy rats without LIRA treatment, diabetic cardiomyopathy rats
with LIRA treatment (with high-, medium-, and low-dose, resp.), and diabetic
cardiomyopathy rats treated with insulin. Cardiac function was examined by
echocardiography before and after treatment. The histopathology of the heart was 
examined with H&E staining. The mRNA levels of XBP1, ATF4, and TRAF2 were
analyzed by RT-PCR, and the expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (Grp78),
enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), caspase-3, and caspase-12 was
detected by western blot. Results. LIRA strongly improved cardiac function from
both echocardiographic and histopathologic analyses, but insulin only partly
increased cardiac function by improving FS and LVPW values. LIRA treatment can
significantly decrease the expression of XBP1, ATF4, and TRAF2 (P < 0.01). LIRA
also significantly downregulates the expression of Grp78, caspase-3 (P < 0.01),
CHOP, and caspase-12 (P < 0.05). Conclusions. LIRA can protect against diabetic
cardiomyopathy by inactivating the ER stress pathway. The improvement in cardiac 
function by LIRA is independent of glucose control.

PMCID: PMC3647568
PMID: 23671882  [PubMed]


435. Immunology. 2013 Sep;140(1):111-22. doi: 10.1111/imm.12122.

Acute infection of mice with Clostridium difficile leads to eIF2a phosphorylation
and pro-survival signalling as part of the mucosal inflammatory response.

Sadighi Akha AA(1), Theriot CM, Erb-Downward JR, McDermott AJ, Falkowski NR, Tyra
HM, Rutkowski DT, Young VB, Huffnagle GB.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5642, USA.

The current study sought to delineate the gene expression profile of the host
response in the caecum and colon during acute infection with Clostridium
difficile in a mouse model of infection, and to investigate the nature of the
unfolded protein response in this process. The infected mice displayed a
significant up-regulation in the expression of chemokines (Cxcl1, Cxcl2 and
Ccl2), numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines (Ifng, Il1b, Il6, and Il17f), as well 
as Il22 and a number of anti-microbial peptides (Defa1, Defa28, Defb1, Slpi and
Reg3g) at the site(s) of infection. This was accompanied by a significant influx 
of neutrophils, dendritic cells, cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage and all
major subsets of lymphocytes to these site(s). However, CD4 T cells of the
untreated and C. difficile-infected mice expressed similar levels of CD69 and
CD25. Neither tissue had up-regulated levels of Tbx21, Gata3 or Rorc. The caeca
and colons of the infected mice showed a significant increase in eukaryotic
initiation factor 2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, but neither the splicing of Xbp1
nor the up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones, casting doubt on the
full-fledged induction of the unfolded protein response by C. difficile. They
also displayed significantly higher phosphorylation of AKT and signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), an indication of pro-survival
signalling. These data underscore the local, innate, pro-inflammatory nature of
the response to C. difficile and highlight eIF2a phosphorylation and the
interleukin-22-pSTAT3-RegIII<U+03B3> axis as two of the pathways that could be used to
contain and counteract the damage inflicted on the intestinal epithelium.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3809711
PMID: 23668260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 28;110(22):9013-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1307125110. Epub 2013 May 10.

Using natural variation in Drosophila to discover previously unknown endoplasmic 
reticulum stress genes.

Chow CY(1), Wolfner MF, Clark AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853-2703, USA.

Natural genetic variation is a rich resource for identifying novel elements of
cellular pathways such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress occurs
when misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER and cells respond with the conserved
unfolded protein response (UPR), which includes large-scale gene expression
changes. Although ER stress can be a cause or a modifying factor of human
disease, little is known of the amount of variation in the response to ER stress 
and the genes contributing to such variation. To study natural variation in ER
stress response in a model system, we measured the survival time in response to
tunicamycin-induced ER stress in flies from 114 lines from the sequenced
Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel of wild-derived inbred strains. These lines
showed high heterogeneity in survival time under ER stress conditions. To
identify the genes that may be driving this phenotypic variation, we profiled ER 
stress-induced gene expression and performed an association study. Microarray
analysis identified variation in transcript levels of numerous known and
previously unknown ER stress-responsive genes. Survival time was significantly
associated with polymorphisms in candidate genes with known (i.e., Xbp1) and
unknown roles in ER stress. Functional testing found that 17 of 25 tested
candidate genes from the association study have putative roles in ER stress. In
both approaches, one-third of ER stress genes had human orthologs that contribute
to human disease. This study establishes Drosophila as a useful model for
studying variation in ER stress and identifying ER stress genes that may
contribute to human disease.

PMCID: PMC3670321
PMID: 23667151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Selective small molecule activator of the apoptotic arm of the UPR.

Flaherty DP, Golden JE, Liu C, Hedrick M, Gosalia P, Li Y, Milewski M, Sugarman
E, Suyama E, Nguyen K, Vasile S, Salaniwal S, Stonich D, Su Y, Mangravita-Novo A,
Vicchiarelli M, Smith LH, Diwan J, Chung TDY, Pinkerton AB, Aubé J, Miller JR,
Garshott DM, Callaghan MU, Fribley AM, Kaufman RJ.
In: Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular Libraries Program [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2010-.
2012 Apr 01.

Many diseases, such as diabetes, Alzheimers, Parkinsons, hemophilia, and
lysosomal storage diseases and cancer involve folding defects or impaired
transport of proteins from
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Cells activate the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR) to restore homeostatic protein processing by clearing out the stress of
accumulated misfolded proteins (adaptive arm). However, with prolonged stress an 
apoptotic arm of the UPR leads to selective cell death. We herein report the
successful development of a first-in-class, potent (762 nM EC50), not generally
cytotoxic, chemical probe, ML291, that selectively activates the apoptotic but
not the adaptive arm of the UPR, that demonstrates efficacy in inducing cell
death through activation of the apoptotic arm in relevant cells, and moreover
activate genes associated with the apoptotic arm of the UPR (by qRT-PCR). The
progenitor of this probe was identified through a high-throughput screen of the
NIH Molecular Libraries Small Molecule Repository (MLSMR) of >350,000 compounds
through complementary cell-based reporter assays using stably transfected CHO-K1 
cells that specifically identify activators of the PERK/eIF2a/CHOP (apoptotic),
but not the IRE1/XBP1 (adaptive) UPR subpathways. The identification, validation,
structure activity relationship (SAR) elucidation and development of this probe
are described. The probe may serve as the basis for eventual proof-of-concept
tool compound for activation of the apoptotic arm of UPR as a therapeutic
modality in certain diseases.

PMID: 23658962  [PubMed]


438. Neuroscience. 2013 Aug 29;246:160-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.057.
Epub 2013 May 2.

Psychological stress, cocaine and natural reward each induce endoplasmic
reticulum stress genes in rat brain.

Pavlovsky AA(1), Boehning D, Li D, Zhang Y, Fan X, Green TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

Our prior research has shown that the transcription of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress transcription factors activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and ATF4
are induced by amphetamine and restraint stress in rat striatum. However,
presently the full extent of ER stress responses to psychological stress or
cocaine, and which of the three ER stress pathways is activated is unknown. The
current study examines transcriptional responses of key ER stress target genes
subsequent to psychological stress or cocaine. Rats were subjected to acute or
repeated restraint stress or cocaine treatment and mRNA was isolated from dorsal 
striatum, medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens brain tissue. ER stress 
gene mRNA expression was measured using quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and RNA sequencing. Restraint stress and cocaine-induced transcription of
the classic ER stress-induced genes (BIP, CHOP, ATF3 and GADD34) and of two other
ER stress components x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and ATF6. In addition, rats
living in an enriched environment (large group cage with novel toys changed
daily) exhibited rapid induction of GADD34 and ATF3 after 30 min of exploring
novel toys, suggesting these genes are also involved in normal non-pathological
signaling. However, environmental enrichment, a paradigm that produces protective
addiction and depression phenotypes in rats, attenuated the rapid induction of
ATF3 and GADD34 after restraint stress. These experiments provide a sensitive
measure of ER stress and, more importantly, these results offer good evidence of 
the activation of ER stress mechanisms from psychological stress, cocaine and
natural reward. Thus, ER stress genes may be targets for novel therapeutic
targets for depression and addiction.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3691328
PMID: 23644055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e62603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062603. Print 2013.

Activating transcription factor 4 and X box binding protein 1 of Litopenaeus
vannamei transcriptional regulated white spot syndrome virus genes Wsv023 and
Wsv083.

Li XY(1), Pang LR, Chen YG, Weng SP, Yue HT, Zhang ZZ, Chen YH, He JG.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.

In response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, the signaling pathway termed
unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated. To investigate the role of UPR in
Litopenaeus vannamei immunity, the activating transcription factor 4 (designated 
as LvATF4) which belonged to a branch of the UPR, the [protein kinase RNA
(PKR)-like ER kinase, (PERK)]-[eukaryotic initiation factor 2 subunit alpha
(eIF2a)] pathway, was identified and characterized. The full-length cDNA of
LvATF4 was 1972 bp long, with an open reading frame of 1299 bp long that encoded 
a 432 amino acid protein. LvATF4 was highly expressed in gills, intestines and
stomach. For the white spot syndrome virus (WSSV) challenge, LvATF4 was
upregulated in the gills after 3 hpi and increased by 1.9-fold (96 hpi) compared 
to the mock-treated group. The LvATF4 knock-down by RNA interference resulted in 
a lower cumulative mortality of L. vannamei under WSSV infection. Reporter gene
assays show that LvATF4 could upregulate the expression of the WSSV gene wsv023
based on the activating transcription factor/cyclic adenosine 3',
5'-monophosphate response element (ATF/CRE). Another transcription factor of L.
vannamei, X box binding protein 1 (designated as LvXBP1), has a significant
function in [inositol-requiring enzyme-1(IRE1) - (XBP1)] pathway. This
transcription factor upregulated the expression of the WSSV gene wsv083 based on 
the UPR element (UPRE). These results suggest that in L. vannamei UPR signaling
pathway transcription factors are important for WSSV and might facilitate WSSV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3634759
PMID: 23638122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1430-9. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.042. Epub 2013
Apr 25.

The role of adipocyte XBP1 in metabolic regulation during lactation.

Gregor MF(1), Misch ES, Yang L, Hummasti S, Inouye KE, Lee AH, Bierie B,
Hotamisligil GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The adipocyte is central to organismal metabolism and exhibits significant
functional and morphological plasticity during its formation and lifespan.
Remarkable transformations of this cell occur during obesity and lactation, and
thus it is essential to gain a better understanding of adipocyte function in
these two metabolic processes. Considering the critical importance of the
cellular organelle endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in adapting to fluctuations in
synthetic processes, we explored the role of XBP1, a central regulator of ER
adaptive responses, in adipocyte formation and function. Unexpectedly, deletion
of adipocyte-XBP1 in vivo in mice (XBP1<U+0394>Ad) had no effect on adipocyte formation 
or on systemic homeostatic metabolism in mice fed a a regular or high-fat diet.
However, during lactation, XBP1<U+0394>Ad dams displayed increased adiposity, decreased 
milk production, and decreased litter growth as compared with control dams.
Moreover, we demonstrate that XBP1 is regulated during lactation and responds to 
prolactin to alter lipogenic gene expression. These results demonstrate a role
for adipocyte-XBP1 in the regulation of lactational metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3724425
PMID: 23623498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 17;434(4):861-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.032. Epub 2013 Apr 20.

Testicular hyperthermia induces Unfolded Protein Response signaling activation in
spermatocyte.

Kim JH(1), Park SJ, Kim TS, Park HJ, Park J, Kim BK, Kim GR, Kim JM, Huang SM,
Chae JI, Park CK, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nature Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701,
Republic of Korea.

The testes of most mammals are sensitive to temperature. To survive and adapt
under conditions that promote endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress such as heat
shock, cells have a self-protective mechanism against ER stress that has been
termed the "Unfolded Protein Response" (UPR). However, the cellular and molecular
events underlying spermatogenesis with testicular hyperthermia involved in the
UPR signaling pathway under ER stress remain poorly understood. In the present
study, we verified that UPR signaling via phospho-eIF2a/ATF4/GADD34, p90ATF6, and
phospho-IRE1a/XBP-1 is activated with testicular hyperthermia (43 °C, 15 min/day)
and induced ER stress-mediated apoptosis associated with CHOP, phospho-JNK, and
caspase-3 after repetitive periods of hyperthermia. Levels of phospho-eIF2a
protein of mouse spermatocytes in the testis were rapidly increased by one cycle 
of testicular hyperthermia. ATF4/GADD34 and p90ATF6 expression gradually
increased and decreased, respectively, with repetitive cycles of hyperthermia.
Spliced XBP1 mRNA as a marker of IRE1 activity was increased after one, three
cycles of hyperthermia and decreased by five cycles of hyperthermia. Although the
levels of anti-apoptotic phospho-JNK (p54) were gradually decreased after three
cycles of hyperthermia, CHOP expression was rapidly increased. After five cycles 
of testicular hyperthermia, the levels of cleaved caspase-3 and TUNEL-positive
apoptotic spermatocytes cells were significantly increased. Our data demonstrated
that testicular hyperthermia induces UPR signaling and repetitive cycles of
hyperthermia lead to apoptosis of spermatocytes in mouse testis. These results
suggest a link between the UPR signaling pathway and testicular hyperthermia.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23611781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;36(2):321-34. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130311.

Quantitative proteomic analysis of the hippocampus in the 5XFAD mouse model at
early stages of Alzheimer's disease pathology.

Hong I(1), Kang T, Yoo Y, Park R, Lee J, Lee S, Kim J, Song B, Kim SY, Moon M,
Yun KN, Kim JY, Mook-Jung I, Park YM, Choi S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by progressive memory loss accompanied 
by synaptic and neuronal degeneration. Although research has shown that
substantial neurodegeneration occurs even during the early stages of AD, the
detailed mechanisms of AD pathogenesis are largely unknown because of
difficulties in diagnosis and limitations of the analytical methods. The 5XFAD
mouse model harbors five early-onset familial AD (FAD) mutations and displays
substantial amyloid plaques and neurodegeneration. Here, we use quantitative mass
spectrometry to identify proteome-wide changes in the 5XFAD mouse hippocampus
during the early stages of AD pathology. A subset of the results was validated
with immunoblotting. We found that the 5XFAD mice display higher expression of
ApoE, ApoJ (clusterin), and nicastrin, three important proteins in AD that are
known to participate in amyloid-ß processing and clearance, as well as the
neurological damage/glial marker protein GFAP and other proteins. A large subset 
of the proteins that were up- or downregulated in 5XFAD brains have been
implicated in neurological disorders and cardiovascular disease, suggesting an
association between cardiovascular disease and AD. Common upstream regulator
analysis of upregulated proteins suggested that the XBP1, NRF2, and p53
transcriptional pathways were activated, as was IGF-1R signaling. Protein
interactome analysis revealed an interconnected network of regulated proteins,
with two major sub-networks centered on AßPP processing membrane complexes and
mitochondrial proteins. Together with a recent study on the transcriptome of
5XFAD mice, our study allows a comprehensive understanding of the molecular
events occurring in 5XFAD mice during the early stages of AD pathology.

PMID: 23603400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jun 5;587(11):1644-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.005. Epub
2013 Apr 19.

X-box binding protein 1 enhances adipogenic differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells
through the downregulation of Wnt10b expression.

Cho YM(1), Kim DH, Kwak SN, Jeong SW, Kwon OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701,
Republic of Korea.

Differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes is controlled by various
transcription factors. Recently, the pro-adipogenic function of XBP1, a
transcription factor upregulated by endoplasmic reticulum stress, has been
reported. In this study, we demonstrated that XBP1 suppresses the expression of
Wnt10b, an anti-adipogenic Wnt, during the differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes. The expression pattern of XBP1 was reciprocal to that of Wnt10b
during the early stage of adipogenesis. The intracellular protein levels of
ß-catenin were negatively regulated by XBP1. Direct binding of XBP1 to the Wnt10b
promoter and the subsequent decrease of the ß-catenin signalling pathway
represent a novel adipogenic differentiation mechanism.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23603388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mod Pathol. 2013 Oct;26(10):1329-37. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.73. Epub 2013
Apr 19.

ALK-positive large B-cell lymphomas express a terminal B-cell differentiation
program and activated STAT3 but lack MYC rearrangements.

Valera A(1), Colomo L, Martínez A, de Jong D, Balagué O, Matheu G, Martínez M,
Taddesse-Heath L, Jaffe ES, Bacchi CE, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, Hospital Clinic de
Barcelona, Insititut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

ALK-positive large B-cell lymphoma is an aggressive lymphoid neoplasm
characterized by a monomorphic proliferation of immunoblast-like cells expressing
a plasmablastic phenotype and carrying ALK rearrangements. MYC rearrangements are
frequent in plasmablastic lymphomas, advanced plasma cell myelomas and a subgroup
of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, but their presence in ALK-positive large
B-cell lymphomas is unknown. MYC expression is downregulated by BLIMP1, a master 
modulator of plasma cell differentiation. BLIMP1 and MYC are upregulated by
STAT3, a signal transducer activated by ALK. To determine the role of BLIMP1, MYC
and STAT3 in the pathogenesis of ALK-positive large B-cell lymphomas, we
investigated MYC rearrangement and the expression of MYC, phosphorylated STAT3,
BLIMP1, PAX5 and XBP1 in 12 ALK-positive large B-cell lymphomas. All cases
expressed ALK with a granular cytoplasmic pattern. Nine cases had a split signal 
consistent with an ALK rearrangement. Three additional cases showed a deletion of
the 5' or 3' end of the ALK probe consistent with cryptic translocation. PAX5 was
virtually negative in all cases tested, whereas BLIMP1 was expressed in all
tumors and XBP1 in 11 of 12. Phosphorylated STAT3 was observed in all cases with 
a strong and diffuse nuclear pattern. MYC rearrangements were not identified in
any tumor, but MYC gains and amplification were detected in six cases and one
case, respectively. MYC protein was expressed in all tumors independently of MYC 
gene alterations. These results indicate that ALK-positive large B-cell lymphomas
express a complete plasmablastic differentiation program but, contrary to
plasmablastic lymphomas, do not have MYC rearrangements. STAT3 is constantly
activated and may be an alternative mechanism to promote MYC expression in these 
tumors. The relevance of the ALK/STAT3 pathway in the pathogenesis of
ALK-positive large B-cell lymphomas may offer an attractive target for new
therapies.

PMID: 23599149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Semin Immunopathol. 2013 May;35(3):307-19. doi: 10.1007/s00281-013-0377-5. Epub
2013 Apr 16.

The unfolded protein response and gastrointestinal disease.

Kaser A(1), Adolph TE, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. ak729@cam.ac.uk

As the inner lining of the gastrointestinal tract, the intestinal epithelium
serves an essential role in innate immune function at the interface between the
host and microbiota. Given the unique environmental challenges and thus
physiologic secretory functions of this surface, it is exquisitely sensitive to
perturbations that affect its capacity to resolve endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. Genetic deletion of factors involved in the unfolded protein response
(UPR), which functions in the resolution of ER stress that arises from misfolded 
proteins, result in spontaneous intestinal inflammation closely mimicking human
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). This is demonstrated by observations wherein
deletion of genes such as Xbp1 and Agr2 profoundly affects the intestinal
epithelium and results in spontaneous intestinal inflammation. Moreover, both
genes, along with others (e.g., ORDML3) represent genetic risk factors for human 
IBD, both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Here, we review the current
mechanistic understanding for how unresolved ER stress can lead to intestinal
inflammation and highlight the findings that implicate ER stress as a genetically
affected biological pathway in IBD. We further discuss environmental and
microbial factors that might impact on the epithelium's capacity to resolve ER
stress and which may constitute exogenous factors that may precipitate disease in
genetically susceptible individuals.

PMCID: PMC3661271
PMID: 23588234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Exp Neurol. 2013 Sep;247:91-100. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.03.027. Epub 2013 
Apr 8.

Overexpression of human mutated G93A SOD1 changes dynamics of the ER mitochondria
calcium cycle specifically in mouse embryonic motor neurons.

Lautenschläger J(1), Prell T, Ruhmer J, Weidemann L, Witte OW, Grosskreutz J.

Author information: 
(1)Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Erlanger Allee 
101, 07747 Jena, Germany. janin.lautenschlaeger@med.uni-jena.de

Motor neurons vulnerable to the rapidly progressive deadly neurodegenerative
disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) inherently express low amounts of
calcium binding proteins (CaBP), likely to allow physiological motor neuron
firing frequency modulation. At the same time motor neurons are susceptible to
AMPA receptor mediated excitotoxicity and internal calcium deregulation which is 
not fully understood. We analysed ER mitochondria calcium cycle (ERMCC) dynamics 
with subsecond resolution in G93A hSOD1 overexpressing motor neurons as a model
of ALS using fluorescent calcium imaging. When comparing vulnerable motor neurons
and non-motor neurons from G93A hSOD1 mice and their non-transgenic littermates, 
we found a decelerated cytosolic calcium clearance in the presence of G93A hSOD1.
While both non-transgenic as well as G93A hSOD1 motor neurons displayed large
mitochondrial calcium uptake by the mitochondrial uniporter (mUP), the
mitochondrial calcium extrusion system was altered in the presence of G93A hSOD1.
In addition, ER calcium uptake by the sarco-/endoplasmic reticulum ATPase (SERCA)
was increased in G93A hSOD1 motor neurons. In survival assays, blocking the
mitochondrial sodium calcium exchanger (mNCE) by CGP37157 as well as inhibiting
SERCA by cyclopiazonic acid showed protective effects against kainate induced
excitotoxicity. Thus, our study shows for the first time that the functional
consequence of G93A hSOD1 overexpression in intact motor neurons is indeed a
disturbance of the ER mitochondria calcium cycle, and identified two promising
targets for therapeutic intervention in the pathology of ALS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23578819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Yi Chuan. 2013 Mar;35(3):343-51.

[The effect on BiP regulation of IRE1a promoter transcription activity and
protein expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou JH(1), Han XF, Liu YN, Zhang P, Guo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China. jhzhoubelinda@163.com

Usually, secreted or transmembrane proteins complete their three-dimension
folding within endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Under the conditions of nutrient
depletion, cell differentiation, or other stress statuses, misfolded or unfolded 
proteins aggregate within ER, and consequently cause ER stress and Unfolded
Protein Response (UPR). In response to ER stress, BiP (Binding immunoglobulin
protein) dissociates with IRE1a (Inositol-requiring kinase 1) and binds to
unfolded proteins as a molecular chaperone in helping maintain their correct
structure. Co-related to BiP's dissociation, IRE1a oglimerizes and activated its 
endoribonuclease domain by transautophosphorylation. Activated IRE1a then, by
cleaving mRNA of Xbp1 and activating its transcription activity, triggers UPR. In
this paper, in order to determine effect of BiP on transcription activity of
IRE1a, we cloned promoter region of IRE1a into reporter gene analysis vector and 
found that BiP could upregulate promoter activity of IRE1a. Then, we constructed 
another 6 truncated promoter reporter vectors of IRE1a and pinpoint the core
promoter activity region. Furthermore, both our RT-PCR and Western blot results
showed that BiP could upregulate mRNA transcription level and protein expression 
level of IRE1a. Base on these findings, we can propose that, in order to
alleviate ER stress caused by the misfolded or malfolded proteins, BiP could
upregulate expression of IRE1a by increase its promoter activity. This study may 
suggest a novel signal pathway on IRE1a regulation in ER stress.

PMID: 23575540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(12):2375-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01445-12. Epub 2013 Apr 
9.

The unfolded protein response selectively targets active smoothened mutants.

Marada S(1), Stewart DP, Bodeen WJ, Han YG, Ogden SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Childrens Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(12):2372-4.

The Hedgehog signaling pathway, an essential regulator of developmental
patterning, has been implicated in playing causative and survival roles in a
range of human cancers. The signal-transducing component of the pathway,
Smoothened, has revealed itself to be an efficacious therapeutic target in
combating oncogenic signaling. However, therapeutic challenges remain in cases
where tumors acquire resistance to Smoothened antagonists, and also in cases
where signaling is driven by active Smoothened mutants that exhibit reduced
sensitivity to these compounds. We previously demonstrated that active Smoothened
mutants are subjected to prolonged endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention, likely
due to their mutations triggering conformation shifts that are detected by ER
quality control. We attempted to exploit this biology and demonstrate that
deregulated Hedgehog signaling driven by active Smoothened mutants is
specifically attenuated by ER stressors that induce the unfolded protein response
(UPR). Upon UPR induction, active Smoothened mutants are targeted by
ER-associated degradation, resulting in attenuation of inappropriate pathway
activity. Accordingly, we found that the UPR agonist thapsigargin attenuated
mutant Smoothened-induced phenotypes in vivo in Drosophila melanogaster.
Wild-type Smoothened and physiological Hedgehog patterning were not affected,
suggesting that UPR modulation may provide a novel therapeutic window to be
evaluated for targeting active Smoothened mutants in disease.

PMCID: PMC3700102
PMID: 23572559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Br J Haematol. 2013 Jun;161(6):898-901. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12310. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Multiple myeloma Leu167Ile (c.499C>A) mutation prevents XBP1 mRNA splicing.

Hong SY, Hagen T.

PMID: 23560553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Cell Sci. 2013 Jun 1;126(Pt 11):2502-15. doi: 10.1242/jcs.122721. Epub 2013 Apr
2.

The genetic depletion or the triptolide inhibition of TFIIH in p53-deficient
cells induces a JNK-dependent cell death in Drosophila.

Villicaña C(1), Cruz G, Zurita M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo, Instituto de Biotecnología, Avenida
Universidad 2001, Cuernavaca Morelos 62250, México.

Transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) participates in transcription, nucleotide
excision repair and the control of the cell cycle. In the present study, we
demonstrate that the Dmp52 subunit of TFIIH in Drosophila physically interacts
with the fly p53 homologue, Dp53. The depletion of Dmp52 in the wing disc
generates chromosome fragility, increases apoptosis and produces wings with a
reduced number of cells; cellular proliferation, however, is not affected.
Interestingly, instead of suppressing the apoptotic phenotype, the depletion of
Dp53 in Dmp52-depleted wing disc cells increases apoptosis and the number of
cells that suffer from chromosome fragility. The apoptosis induced by the
depletion of Dmp52 alone is partially dependent on the JNK pathway. In contrast, 
the enhanced apoptosis caused by the simultaneous depletion of Dp53 and Dmp52 is 
absolutely JNK-dependent. In this study, we also show that the anti-proliferative
drug triptolide, which inhibits the ATPase activity of the XPB subunit of TFIIH, 
phenocopies the JNK-dependent massive apoptotic phenotype of Dp53-depleted wing
disc cells; this observation suggests that the mechanism by which triptolide
induces apoptosis in p53-deficient cancer cells involves the activation of the
JNK death pathway.

PMID: 23549790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 19;433(4):426-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.119. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Positive contribution of IRE1a-XBP1 pathway to the expression of placental
cathepsins.

Oikawa D(1), Iwawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Lab, Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit, Gunma
University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.
oikawa@showa.gunma-u.ac.jp

IRE1a is an ER-located transmembrane RNase whose activation leads to the
production of the transcriptional factor, XBP1. Recently, many studies report
that IRE1a-XBP1 pathway has novel and significant roles in placenta. However, its
molecular details have been still unknown. To address this point, we have focused
on the molecular linkage between IRE1a-XBP1 pathway and Cts7 and Cts8, which are 
essential cathepsins for placenta formation. In cellular model, this pathway
positively contributed to their expression at transcriptional level. In addition,
the disruption of IRE1a or XBP1 in animal model significantly attenuated their
transcripts in placenta. These results indicated that IRE1a-XBP1 pathway function
as a specific program supporting the placenta formation by ensuring the moderate 
expression of specific subset of placental cathepsins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1644-6. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002336. 
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Vascular endothelial growth factor and angiogenesis: the XBP1 games.

Silvestre JS.

Comment on
    Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1712-22.

PMID: 23529611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1712-22. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001337.
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Vascular endothelial cell growth-activated XBP1 splicing in endothelial cells is 
crucial for angiogenesis.

Zeng L(1), Xiao Q, Chen M, Margariti A, Martin D, Ivetic A, Xu H, Mason J, Wang
W, Cockerill G, Mori K, Li JY, Chien S, Hu Y, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London, 
UK. lingfang.zeng@kcl.ac.uk or

Comment in
    Circulation. 2013 Apr 23;127(16):1644-6.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial cell growth factor plays a pivotal role in
angiogenesis via regulating endothelial cell proliferation. The X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) is believed to be a signal transducer in the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. It is unknown whether there is crosstalk between
vascular endothelial cell growth factor signaling and XBP1 pathway.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that vascular endothelial cell growth factor
induced the kinase insert domain receptor internalization and interaction through
C-terminal domain with the unspliced XBP1 and the inositol requiring enzyme 1 a
in the endoplasmic reticulum, leading to inositol requiring enzyme 1 a
phosphorylation and XBP1 mRNA splicing, which was abolished by siRNA-mediated
knockdown of kinase insert domain receptor. Spliced XBP1 regulated endothelial
cell proliferation in a PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß/ß-catenin/E2F2-dependent manner and
modulated the cell size increase in a PI3K/Akt/GSK3ß/ß-catenin/E2F2-independent
manner. Knockdown of XBP1 or inositol requiring enzyme 1 a decreased endothelial 
cell proliferation via suppression of Akt/GSK3ß phosphorylation, ß-catenin
nuclear translocation, and E2F2 expression. Endothelial cell-specific knockout of
XBP1 (XBP1ecko) in mice retarded the retinal vasculogenesis in the first 2
postnatal weeks and impaired the angiogenesis triggered by ischemia.
Reconstitution of XBP1 by Ad-XBP1s gene transfer significantly improved
angiogenesis in ischemic tissue in XBP1ecko mice. Transplantation of bone marrow 
from wild-type o XBP1ecko mice could also slightly improve the foot blood
reperfusion in ischemic XBP1ecko mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that XBP1 can function via growth factor
signaling pathways to regulate endothelial proliferation and angiogenesis.

PMID: 23529610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Lung Cancer. 2013 Jun;80(3):333-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2013.02.012. Epub 2013 
Mar 16.

XBP1 promoter polymorphism modulates platinum-based chemotherapy gastrointestinal
toxicity for advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Peng J(1), Chen YY, Yang LX, Zhao XY, Gao ZQ, Yang J, Wu WT, Wang HJ, Wang JC,
Qian J, Chen HY, Jin L, Bai CX, Han BH, Lu DR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and MOE Key Laboratory of
Contemporary Anthropology, Institute of Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a critical transcription factor
in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response, which is essential for the
maintenance of cellular homeostasis. Here, we investigated whether the regulatory
variant rs2269577 of the XBP1 gene influences clinical outcome in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients undergoing platinum-based
chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We recruited 663 Chinese patients with advanced NSCLC
treated with platinum-based regimens and assessed the association between
rs2269577 and clinical outcome. Subsequent functional analyses, including
real-time quantitative PCR and dual-luciferase assays, were performed to explore 
possible molecular mechanisms.
RESULTS: The G/G genotype of rs2269577 was significantly associated with severe
gastrointestinal toxicity compared with the homozygous C/C genotype (P=0.012,
odds ratio=2.755), particularly in the female, performance status 0-1, and
adenocarcinoma subgroups. No significant relevance was found between rs2269577
and treatment efficacy. In gastric epithelial cells, in vitro molecular analyses 
demonstrated that XBP1 mRNA expression levels decreased after treatment with
cisplatin and the G allele of rs2269577 weakened the transcriptional activity of 
the XBP1 promoter.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to evaluate the effect of XBP1 polymorphism
on severe chemotherapy-related adverse outcomes in platinum-treated advanced
NSCLC patients using both pharmacogenomics and functional molecular analyses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23510626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 12;15(2):R22. doi: 10.1186/bcr3398.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces PRNP prion protein gene expression in breast
cancer.

Déry MA, Jodoin J, Ursini-Siegel J, Aleynikova O, Ferrario C, Hassan S, Basik M, 
LeBlanc AC.

INTRODUCTION: High prion protein (PrP) levels are associated with breast, colon
and gastric cancer resistance to treatment and with a poor prognosis for the
patients. However, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanism(s)
regulating human PrP gene (PRNP) expression in cancers. Because endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress is associated with solid tumors, we investigated a possible
regulation of PRNP gene expression by ER stress.
METHODS: Published microarray databases of breast cancer tissues and breast
carcinoma cell lines were analyzed for PrP mRNA and ER stress marker
immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP) levels. Breast cancer tissue
microarrays (TMA) were immunostained for BiP and PrP. Breast carcinoma MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, HS578T and HCC1500 cells were treated with three different ER
stressors - Brefeldin A, Tunicamycin, Thapsigargin - and levels of PrP mRNA or
protein assessed by RT-PCR and Western blot analyses. A human PRNP
promoter-luciferase reporter was used to assess transcriptional activation by ER 
stressors. Site-directed mutagenesis identified the ER stress response elements
(ERSE). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses were done to identify the
ER stress-mediated transcriptional regulators. The role of cleaved activating
transcription factor 6a (<U+0394>ATF6a) and spliced X-box protein-1 (sXBP1) in PRNP gene
expression was assessed with over-expression or silencing techniques. The role of
PrP protection against ER stress was assessed with PrP siRNA and by using Prnp
null cell lines.
RESULTS: We find that mRNA levels of BiP correlated with PrP transcript levels in
breast cancer tissues and breast carcinoma cell lines. PrP mRNA levels were
enriched in the basal subtype and were associated with poor prognosis in breast
cancer patients. Higher PrP and BiP levels correlated with increasing tumor grade
in TMA. ER stress was a positive regulator of PRNP gene transcription in MCF-7
cells and luciferase reporter assays identified one ER stress response element
(ERSE) conserved among primates and rodents and three primate-specific ERSEs that
regulated PRNP gene expression. Among the various transactivators of the ER
stress-regulated unfolded protein response (UPR), ATF6a and XBP1 transactivated
PRNP gene expression, but the ability of these varied in different cell types.
Functionally, PrP delayed ER stress-induced cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: These results establish PRNP as a novel ER stress-regulated gene
that could increase survival in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3672785
PMID: 23497519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Diabetes. 2013 Jul;62(7):2439-49. doi: 10.2337/db12-1747. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

X-box binding protein 1 is essential for insulin regulation of pancreatic a-cell 
function.

Akiyama M(1), Liew CW, Lu S, Hu J, Martinez R, Hambro B, Kennedy RT, Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Joslin Diabetes
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) often exhibit hyperglucagonemia despite
hyperglycemia, implicating defective a-cell function. Although endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress has been suggested to underlie ß-cell dysfunction in T2D,
its role in a-cell biology remains unclear. X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a
transcription factor that plays a crucial role in the unfolded protein response
(UPR), and its deficiency in ß-cells has been reported to impair insulin
secretion, leading to glucose intolerance. To evaluate the role of XBP1 in
a-cells, we created complementary in vivo (a-cell-specific XBP1 knockout [aXBPKO]
mice) and in vitro (stable XBP1 knockdown a-cell line [aXBPKD]) models. The
aXBPKO mice exhibited glucose intolerance, mild insulin resistance, and an
inability to suppress glucagon secretion after glucose stimulation. aXBPKD cells 
exhibited activation of inositol-requiring enzyme 1, an upstream activator of
XBP1, leading to phosphorylation of Jun NH2-terminal kinase. Interestingly,
insulin treatment of aXBPKD cells reduced tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin
receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) (pY(896)) and phosphorylation of Akt while enhancing 
serine phosphorylation (pS(307)) of IRS1. Consequently, the aXBPKD cells
exhibited blunted suppression of glucagon secretion after insulin treatment in
the presence of high glucose. Together, these data indicate that XBP1 deficiency 
in pancreatic a-cells induces altered insulin signaling and dysfunctional
glucagon secretion.

PMCID: PMC3712068
PMID: 23493568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Hepatol. 2013 Jul;59(1):98-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.02.016. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces fibrogenic activity in hepatic stellate
cells through autophagy.

Hernández-Gea V(1), Hilscher M, Rozenfeld R, Lim MP, Nieto N, Werner S, Devi LA, 
Friedman SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Metabolic stress during liver injury enhances autophagy and
provokes stellate cell activation, with secretion of scar matrix. Conditions that
augment protein synthesis increase demands on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
folding capacity and trigger the unfolded protein response (UPR) to cope with
resulting ER stress. Generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a common
feature of hepatic fibrogenesis, and crosstalk between oxidant stress and ER
stress has been proposed. The aim of our study was to determine the impact of
oxidant and ER stress on stellate cell activation.
METHODS: Oxidant stress was induced in hepatic stellate cells using H2O2 in
culture or by ethanol feeding in vivo, and the UPR was analyzed. Because the
branch of the UPR mainly affected was IREa, we blocked this pathway in stellate
cells and analyzed the fibrogenic response, together with autophagy and
downstream MAPK signaling. The Nrf2 antioxidant response was also evaluated in
stellate cells under oxidant stress conditions.
RESULTS: H2O2 treatment in culture or ethanol feeding in vivo increased the UPR
based on splicing of XBP1 mRNA, which triggered autophagy. The Nrf2-mediated
antioxidant response, as measured by qRT-PCR of its target genes was also induced
under ER stress conditions. Conversely, blockade of the IRE1a pathway in stellate
cells significantly decreased both their activation and autophagic activity in a 
p38 MAPK-dependent manner, leading to a reduced fibrogenic response.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate mechanisms underlying protein folding quality
control in regulating the fibrogenic response in hepatic stellate cells.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3686909
PMID: 23485523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jun;1833(6):1356-66. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.02.014. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Hsp90 inhibition by PU-H71 induces apoptosis through endoplasmic reticulum stress
and mitochondrial pathway in cancer cells and overcomes the resistance conferred 
by Bcl-2.

Gallerne C(1), Prola A, Lemaire C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR S-769, LabEx LERMIT, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) has recently emerged as an attractive therapeutic
target in cancer treatment because of its role in stabilizing the active form of 
a wide range of client oncoproteins. This study investigated the mechanism of
apoptosis induced by the purine-scaffold Hsp90 inhibitor PU-H71 in different
human cancer cell lines and examined the role of Bcl-2 and Bax in this process.
We demonstrated that Hsp90 inhibition by PU-H71 generated endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and activated the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) as evidenced by
XBP1 mRNA splicing and up-regulation of Grp94, Grp78, ATF4 and CHOP. In response 
to PU-H71-induced ER stress, apoptosis was triggered in melanoma, cervix, colon, 
liver and lung cancer cells, but not in normal human fibroblasts. Apoptosis was
executed through the mitochondrial pathway as shown by down-regulation of Bcl-2, 
up-regulation and activation of Bax, permeabilization of mitochondrial membranes,
release of cytochrome c and activation of caspases. We also found that, in
contrast to the ER stressor thapsigargin, PU-H71 induced apoptosis in cells
overexpressing Bcl-2 and thus overcame the resistance conferred by this
anti-apoptotic protein. In addition, although Bax deficiency rendered cells
resistant to PU-H71, combined treatment with the anticancer drugs cisplatin or
melphalan greatly sensitized these cells to PU-H71. Taken together, these data
suggest that inhibition of Hsp90 by PU-H71 is a promising strategy for cancer
treatment, particularly in the case of tumors resistant to conventional
chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Neuro Oncol. 2013 Jun;15(6):727-34. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/not012. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Prognostic significance of the aggregative perivascular growth pattern of tumor
cells in primary central nervous system diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

He M(1), Zuo C, Wang J, Liu J, Jiao B, Zheng J, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, 200433, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary central nervous system lymphomas, predominantly diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas (PCNS-DLBCL), are aggressive malignancies, and no
histopathological variables with independent prognostic value are currently
available. The aim of this study is to determine the prognostic value of
histopathological variables of PCNS-DLBCL.
METHODS: Aggregative perivascular tumor cells (APVTs) and reactive perivascular T
cell infiltrates (RPVIs) in tumor samples from 62 immunocompetent patients with
PCNS-DLBCL were histopathologically and immunohistochemically studied. A mouse
brain DLBCL model was established to confirm the special morphological features
of PCNS-DLBCL. The therapy, overall response rate (ORR), and overall survival
(OS) among patients were followed up.
RESULTS: APVT was present in 54 (87%) of the 62 cases, whereas RPVI was present
in 20 (32%). Patients with APVT-positive lesions exhibited significantly worse
OS, with intermediate to high International Extranodal Lymphoma Study Group
(IELSG) scores, compared with patients with RPVI-positive lesions. Among cases of
APVT-positive lymphoma, the semiquantitative score of immunostaining of
X-box-binding protein (XBP1) and CD44 demonstrated prognostic significance.
Multivariate analysis confirmed independent associations between APVT and XBP1
and between CD44 staining and survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of APVT and staining of XBP1 and CD44 are independently
associated with survival among patients with PCNS-DLBCL. These features could be 
routinely assessed in histopathological and immunohistochemical specimens.

PMCID: PMC3661096
PMID: 23482670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cell Struct Funct. 2013;38(1):67-79. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

UBC9 regulates the stability of XBP1, a key transcription factor controlling the 
ER stress response.

Uemura A(1), Taniguchi M, Matsuo Y, Oku M, Wakabayashi S, Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

XBP1 is a key transcription factor regulating the mammalian endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response, which is a cytoprotective mechanism for dealing with an
accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER (ER stress). The expression of XBP1
is regulated by two different mechanisms: mRNA splicing and protein stability.
When ER stress occurs, unspliced XBP1 mRNA is converted to mature mRNA, from
which an active transcription factor, pXBP1(S), is translated and activates the
transcription of ER-related genes to dispose of unfolded proteins. In the absence
of ER stress, pXBP1(U) is translated from unspliced XBP1 mRNA and enhances the
degradation of pXBP1(S). Here, we analyzed the regulatory mechanism of pXBP1(S)
stability, and found that a SUMO-conjugase, UBC9, specifically bound to the
leucine zipper motif of pXBP1(S) and increased the stability of pXBP1(S).
Suppression of UBC9 expression by RNA interference reduced both the expression of
pXBP1(S) and ER stress-induced transcription by pXBP1(S). Interestingly,
overexpression of a UBC9 mutant deficient in SUMO-conjugating activity was able
to increase pXBP1(S) expression as well as wild-type UBC9, indicating that UBC9
stabilizes pXBP1(S) without conjugating SUMO moieties. From these observations,
we concluded that UBC9 is a novel regulator of the mammalian ER stress response.

PMID: 23470653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056124. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Suppression of XBP1S mediates high glucose-induced oxidative stress and
extracellular matrix synthesis in renal mesangial cell and kidney of diabetic
rats.

Shao D(1), Liu J, Ni J, Wang Z, Shen Y, Zhou L, Huang Y, Wang J, Xue H, Zhang W, 
Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Recent evidences suggest that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was involved in
multi pathological conditions, including diabetic nephropathy (DN). X-box binding
protein 1(XBP1), as a key mediator of ER stress, has been proved having the
capability of preventing oxidative stress. In this study, we investigated the
effects of spliced XBP1 (XBP1S), the dominant active form of XBP1, on high
glucose (HG)-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and extracellular
matrix (ECM) synthesis in cultured renal mesangial cells (MCs) and renal cortex
of STZ-induced diabetic rats. Real time PCR and Western blot were used to
evaluate the mRNA and protein levels respectively. Transfection of recombinant
adenovirus vector carrying XBP1S gene (Ad-XBP1S) was used to upregulate XBP1S
expression. XBP1S siRNA was used to knockdown XBP1S expression. ROS level was
detected by dihydroethidium (DHE) fluorescent probe assay. The results showed
that HG treatment significantly reduced XBP1S protein and mRNA level in the
cultured MCs while no obvious change was observed in unspliced XBP1 (XBP1U). In
the mean time, the ROS production, collagen IV and fibronectin expressions were
increased. Diphenylene-chloride iodonium (DPI), a NADPH oxidase inhibtor,
prevented HG-induced increases in ROS as well as collagen IV and fibronectin
expressions. Transfection of Ad-XBP1S reversed HG-induced ROS production and ECM 
expressions. Knockdown intrinsic XBP1S expression induced increases in ROS
production and ECM expressions. Supplementation of supreoxide reversed the
inhibitory effect of Ad-XBP1S transfection on ECM synthesis. P47phox was
increased in HG-treated MCs. Ad-XBP1S transfection reversed HG-induced p47phox
increase while XBP1S knockdown upregulated p47phox expression. In the renal
cortex of diabetic rats, the expression of XBP1S was reduced while p47phox,
collagen IV and fibronectin expression were elevated. These results suggested
that XBP1S pathway of ER stress was involved in HG-induced oxidative stress and
ECM synthesis. A downstream target of XBP1S in regulating ROS formation might be 
NADPH oxidase.

PMCID: PMC3573021
PMID: 23457509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. BMC Cancer. 2013 Mar 1;13:96. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-96.

Bcl-2 associated athanogene 5 (Bag5) is overexpressed in prostate cancer and
inhibits ER-stress induced apoptosis.

Bruchmann A(1), Roller C, Walther TV, Schäfer G, Lehmusvaara S, Visakorpi T,
Klocker H, Cato AC, Maddalo D.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics,
Hermann-von-Helmholtz Platz 1, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen 76344, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The Bag (Bcl-2 associated athanogene) family of proteins consists of 
6 members sharing a common, single-copied Bag domain through which they interact 
with the molecular chaperone Hsp70. Bag5 represents an exception in the Bag
family since it consists of 5 Bag domains covering the whole protein. Bag
proteins like Bag1 and Bag3 have been implicated in tumor growth and survival but
it is not known whether Bag5 also exhibits this function.
METHODS: Bag5 mRNA and protein expression levels were investigated in prostate
cancer patient samples using real-time PCR and immunoblot analyses. In addition
immunohistological studies were carried out to determine the expression of Bag5
in tissue arrays. Analysis of Bag5 gene expression was carried out using one-way 
ANOVA and Bonferroni's Multiple Comparison test. The mean values of the Bag5
stained cells in the tissue array was analyzed by Mann-Whitney test. Functional
studies of the role of Bag5 in prostate cancer cell lines was performed using
overexpression and RNA interference analyses.
RESULTS: Our results show that Bag5 is overexpressed in malignant prostate tissue
compared to benign samples. In addition we could show that Bag5 levels are
increased following endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress induction, and Bag5
relocates from the cytoplasm to the ER during this process. We also demonstrate
that Bag5 interacts with the ER-resident chaperone GRP78/BiP and enhances its
ATPase activity. Bag5 overexpression in 22Rv.1 prostate cancer cells inhibited
ER-stress induced apoptosis in the unfolded protein response by suppressing
PERK-eIF2-ATF4 activity while enhancing the IRE1-Xbp1 axis of this pathway. Cells
expressing high levels of Bag5 showed reduced sensitivity to apoptosis induced by
different agents while Bag5 downregulation resulted in increased stress-induced
cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: We have therefore shown that Bag5 is overexpressed in prostate
cancer and plays a role in ER-stress induced apoptosis. Furthermore we have
identified GRP78/BiP as a novel interaction partner of Bag5.

PMCID: PMC3598994
PMID: 23448667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056123. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

HLA-B35 and dsRNA induce endothelin-1 via activation of ATF4 in human
microvascular endothelial cells.

Lenna S(1), Chrobak I, Farina GA, Rodriguez-Pascual F, Lamas S, Lafyatis R,
Scorza R, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.

Endothelin 1 (ET-1) is a key regulator of vascular homeostasis. We have recently 
reported that the presence of Human antigen class I, HLA-B35, contributes to
human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HDMEC) dysfunction by upregulating
ET-1 and proinflammatory genes. Likewise, a Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) ligand,
Poly(I:C), was shown to induce ET-1 expression in HDMECs. The goal of this study 
was to determine the molecular mechanism of ET-1 induction by these two agonists.
Because HLA-B35 expression correlated with induction of Binding Immunoglobulin
Protein (BiP/GRP78) and several heat shock proteins, we first focused on ER
stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) as possible mediators of this
response. ER stress inducer, Thapsigargin (TG), HLA-B35, and Poly(I:C) induced
ET-1 expression with similar potency in HDMECs. TG and HLA-B35 activated the
PERK/eIF2a/ATF4 branch of the UPR and modestly increased the spliced variant of
XBP1, but did not affect the ATF6 pathway. Poly(I:C) also activated eIF2a/ATF4 in
a protein kinase R (PKR)-dependent manner. Depletion of ATF4 decreased basal
expression levels of ET-1 mRNA and protein, and completely prevented upregulation
of ET-1 by all three agonists. Additional experiments have demonstrated that the 
JNK and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways are also required for ET-1 upregulation by these agonists.
Formation of the ATF4/c-JUN complex, but not the ATF4/NF-<U+03BA>B complex was increased
in the agonist treated cells. The functional role of c-JUN in responses to
HLA-B35 and Poly(I:C) was further confirmed in ET-1 promoter assays. This study
identified ATF4 as a novel activator of the ET-1 gene. The ER stress/UPR and TLR3
pathways converge on eIF2a/ATF4 during activation of endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3575387
PMID: 23441162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jun;65(6):1547-60. doi: 10.1002/art.37900.

Transcriptomics of wild-type mice and mice lacking ADAMTS-5 activity identifies
genes involved in osteoarthritis initiation and cartilage destruction.

Bateman JF(1), Rowley L, Belluoccio D, Chan B, Bell K, Fosang AJ, Little CB.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. john.bateman@mcri.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: To identify changes in gene expression in mice with osteoarthritis
(OA) in order to explore the mechanisms of the disease.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed in cartilage from mice with
surgically induced OA. We used wild-type (WT) mice and Adamts5<U+0394>cat mice, in which
ADAMTS-5 activity is lacking and aggrecan loss and cartilage erosion are
inhibited, to distinguish gene expression changes that are independent of
ADAMTS-5 activity and cartilage breakdown. Mechanical instability was introduced 
into the knee joints of 10-week-old male mice via surgical destabilization of the
medial meniscus (DMM). Cartilage from the developing lesion in the destabilized
medial meniscus and corresponding regions in sham-operated joints was harvested
by microdissection at 1, 2, and 6 weeks postsurgery, and RNA was extracted,
amplified, and hybridized to whole-genome microarrays.
RESULTS: Several previously identified OA-related genes, including Ptgs2, Crlf1, 
and Inhba, and novel genes, such as Phdla2 and Il11, were up-regulated in both WT
mice and Adamts5<U+0394>cat mice, indicating that they are independent of ADAMTS-5
activity. The altered expression of other genes, including Col10a1, the sentinel 
marker of cartilage hypertrophy, and Wnt/ß-catenin pathway genes, required
ADAMTS-5 activity. Cell death pathway genes were dysregulated, and Tp53, Foxo4,
and Xbp1 endoplasmic reticulum-stress transcriptional networks were activated.
Analysis of degradome genes identified up-regulation of many proteases, including
Mmp3, Capn2, and the novel cartilage proteases Prss46 and Klk8. Comparison with
other studies identified 16 genes also dysregulated in rat and human OA as
priorities for study.
CONCLUSION: We have identified, for the first time, several genes that have an
ADAMTS-5-independent role in OA, identifying them as possible OA initiation
candidates. This work provides new insights into the sequence of gene
dysregulation and the molecular basis of cartilage destruction in OA.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23436205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2013 Apr;19(4):229-34. doi: 10.1111/cns.12064. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Polymorphism -116C/G of human X-box-binding protein 1 promoter is associated with
risk of Alzheimer's disease.

Liu SY(1), Wang W, Cai ZY, Yao LF, Chen ZW, Wang CY, Zhao B, Li KS.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Age-Related Cardiac and Cerebral Diseases,
Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, China.

AIM: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactor disease that has been reported to 
have a close association with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. In the 
response, the regulator factor human X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) has been
shown to facilitate the refolding and degradation of misfolded proteins, prevent 
neurotoxicity of amyloid-beta (Aß) and tau, and play an important role in the
survival of neurons. The aim in the study was to analyze the potential
association between the -116C/G polymorphism of XBP1 and the risk of AD.
METHODS: The association between -116C/G polymorphism of XBP1 promoter and
possible risk of AD was assessed among 276 patients with AD and 254 matched
healthy individuals in a case-control study.
RESULTS: Overall, there was a significantly statistical difference in genotype (P
= 0.0354) and allele frequencies (P = 0.0150, OR = 1.3642, 95% CI =
1.0618-1.7528) between the AD subjects and control subjects, showing that the
-116C/G polymorphism of XBP1 might lead to increased susceptibility for AD in a
Chinese Han population. In addition, the -116CG and -116GG genotypes were
significantly associated with increased AD risk in female (P = 0.0217) and in
subjects with APOE <U+0454>4 (-) (P = 0.0070) in stratified analyses, and the -116CC
genotype was significantly associated with fast cognitive deterioration in the AD
patients (P = 0.0270).
CONCLUSION: The study supports a role for the -116C/G polymorphism of XBP1 gene
in the pathogenesis of AD, and further studies with a larger sample size and
detailed data should be performed in other populations.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23421912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Pathol. 2013 Apr;182(4):1412-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.12.020. Epub
2013 Feb 8.

Targeting the IRE1a/XBP1 and ATF6 arms of the unfolded protein response enhances 
VEGF blockade to prevent retinal and choroidal neovascularization.

Liu L(1), Qi X, Chen Z, Shaw L, Cai J, Smith LH, Grant MB, Boulton ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Although anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) treatments reduce
pathological neovascularization in the eye and in tumors, the regression is often
not sustainable or is incomplete. We investigated whether vascular endothelial
cells circumvent anti-VEGF therapies by activating the unfolded protein response 
(UPR) to override the classic extracellular VEGF pathway. Exposure of endothelial
cells to VEGF, high glucose, or H2O2 up-regulated the X-box binding
protein-1/inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1) a and activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6) arms of the UPR compared with untreated cells. This was
associated with increased expression in a-basic crystallin (CRYAB), which has
previously bound VEGF. siRNA knockdown or pharmacological blockade of IRE1a,
ATF6, or CRYAB increased intracellular VEGF degradation and decreased full-length
intracellular VEGF. Inhibition of IRE1a, ATF6, or CRYAB resulted in an
approximately 40% reduction of in vitro angiogenesis, which was further reduced
in combination with a neutralizing antibody against extracellular VEGF. Blockade 
of IRE1a or ATF6 in the oxygen-induced retinopathy or choroidal
neovascularization mouse models caused an approximately 35% reduction in
angiogenesis. However, combination therapy of VEGF neutralizing antibody with UPR
inhibitors or siRNAs reduced retinal/choroidal neovascularization by a further
25% to 40%, and this inhibition was significantly greater than either treatment
alone. In conclusion, activation of the UPR sustains angiogenesis by preventing
degradation of intracellular VEGF. The IRE1a/ATF6 arms of the UPR offer a
potential therapeutic target in the treatment of pathological angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3620403
PMID: 23395094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):2864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212484110. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Negative feedback by IRE1ß optimizes mucin production in goblet cells.

Tsuru A(1), Fujimoto N, Takahashi S, Saito M, Nakamura D, Iwano M, Iwawaki T,
Kadokura H, Ron D, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Nara 630-0192, Japan. atsuru@gtc.naist.jp

In mammals, the prototypical endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensor
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) has diverged into two paralogs. IRE1a is
broadly expressed and mediates the unconventional splicing of X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA during ER stress. By contrast, IRE1ß is expressed
selectively in the digestive tract, and its function remains unclear. Here, we
report that IRE1ß plays a distinctive role in mucin-secreting goblet cells. In
IRE1ß(-/-) mice, aberrant mucin 2 (MUC2) accumulated in the ER of goblet cells,
accompanied by ER distension and elevated ER stress signaling such as increased
XBP1 mRNA splicing. In contrast, conditional IRE1a(-/-) mice showed no such ER
distension but a marked decrease in spliced XBP1 mRNA. mRNA stability assay
revealed that MUC2 mRNA was greatly stabilized in IRE1ß(-/-) mice. These findings
suggest that in goblet cells, IRE1ß, but not IRE1a, promotes efficient protein
folding and secretion in the ER by optimizing the level of mRNA encoding their
major secretory product, MUC2.

PMCID: PMC3581977
PMID: 23386727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055155. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

Transcriptional regulation of VEGFA by the endoplasmic reticulum stress
transducer OASIS in ARPE-19 cells.

Miyagi H(1), Kanemoto S, Saito A, Asada R, Iwamoto H, Izumi S, Kido M, Gomi F,
Nishida K, Kiuchi Y, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGFA) is the main mediator of 
angiogenesis. Angiogenesis plays important roles not only in many physiological
processes, but also in the pathophysiology of many diseases. VEGFA is one of the 
therapeutic targets of treatment for ocular diseases with neovascularization.
Therefore, elucidation of the regulatory mechanisms for VEGFA expression is
important for the development of pharmaceutical drugs. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the unfolded protein response is involved in the
transcriptional regulation of VEGFA. However, the precise regulation of VEGFA in 
the human retina is not fully understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: When human retinal pigment epithelial cells, ARPE-19, were
exposed to endoplasmic reticulum stressors, VEGFA mRNA was significantly
upregulated. The unfolded protein response-related transcription factors XBP1,
ATF4, ATF6, and OASIS were expressed in ARPE-19 cells. To determine which
transcription factors preferentially contribute to the induction of VEGFA
expression after endoplasmic reticulum stress, we carried out reporter assays
using an approximately 6-kbp 5'-upstream region of the human VEGFA gene. Among
these transcription factors, OASIS acted most effectively on the VEGFA promoter
in ARPE-19 cells. Based on data obtained for certain deleted and mutated reporter
constructs, we determined that OASIS promoted VEGFA expression by acting on a
cyclic AMP-responsive element-like site located at around -500 bp relative to the
VEGFA transcription start site. Furthermore, we confirmed that OASIS directly
bound to the promoter region containing this site by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: We have demonstrated a novel regulatory mechanism
for VEGFA transcription by OASIS in human retinal pigment epithelial cells.
Chemical compounds that regulate the binding of OASIS to the promoter region of
the VEGFA gene may have potential as therapeutic agents for ocular diseases with 
neovascularization.

PMCID: PMC3559390
PMID: 23383089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2013 Jan;78(1):102-10. doi: 10.1134/S0006297913010136.

Human gastrin-releasing peptide triggers growth of HepG2 cells through blocking
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis.

Li X(1), Zhang L, Ke X, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid, Mammary Gland, and Blood Vessel Surgery, Renmin
Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, 442000, China.

Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) is a kind of neural peptide that plays an
important role in the growth of various human cancer cells. However, very little 
is known about the relationship between GRP and apoptosis in human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. This study investigated the influences of GRP on apoptosis, as
well as the mechanism that triggers HepG2 growth. The effects of GRP on cell
proliferation were examined by analysis of lactate dehydrogenase. The GRP,
caspase 12, and CHOP protein were detected in HepG2 and HL-7702 cells by Western 
blot, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related mRNA transcription was
detected by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. To explore the
specific pathway by which GRP induces the cell growth, we investigated the
apoptosis-related pathway. The expression of GRP in HL-7702 cells inhibited
tunicamycin triggered ER stress-associated XBP1, ATF4, and TRAF2 mRNA
transcription. Three main ER stress-unfolded protein response pathway proteins,
including spliced XBP1, cleaved ATF6, IRE1-a, PERK, and eIF2-a, were increased
significantly. Furthermore, the cleaved caspase 12 activation was blocked and
CHOP expression was inhibited when GRP was expressed either in HepG2 or HL-7702
cells. In conclusion, GRP triggers the growth of HepG2 cells through blocking the
ER stress-mediated pathway.

PMID: 23379566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. CNS Drugs. 2013 Mar;27(3):165-73. doi: 10.1007/s40263-013-0040-7.

Genetic influences on response to mood stabilizers in bipolar disorder: current
status of knowledge.

Rybakowski JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
ul.Szpitalna 27/33, 60-572, Poznan, Poland. janusz.rybakowski@gmail.com

Mood stabilizers form a cornerstone in the long-term treatment of bipolar
disorder. The first representative of their family was lithium, still considered 
a prototype drug for the prevention of manic and depressive recurrences in
bipolar disorder. Along with carbamazepine and valproates, lithium belongs to the
first generation of mood stabilizers, which appeared in psychiatric treatment in 
the 1960s. Atypical antipsychotics with mood-stabilizing properties and
lamotrigine, which were introduced in the mid-1990 s, form the second generation 
of such drugs. The response of patients with bipolar disorder to mood stabilizers
has different levels of magnitude. About one-third of lithium-treated patients
are excellent responders, showing total prevention of the episodes, and these
patients are clinically characterized by an episodic clinical course, complete
remission, a bipolar family history, low psychiatric co-morbidity and a
hyperthymic temperament. It has been suggested that responders to carbamazepine
or lamotrigine may differ clinically from responders to lithium. The main
phenotype of the response to mood stabilizers is a degree of prevention against
recurrences of manic and depressive episodes during long-term treatment. The most
specific scale in this respect is the so-called Alda scale, where retrospective
assessment of lithium response is scored on a 0-10 scale. The vast majority of
data on genetic influences on the response to mood stabilizers has been gathered 
in relation to lithium. The studies on the mechanisms of action of lithium and on
the neurobiology of bipolar disorder have led to the identification of a number
of candidate genes. The genes studied for their association with lithium response
have been those connected with neurotransmitters (serotonin, dopamine and
glutamate), second messengers (phosphatidyl inositol [PI], cyclic
adenosine-monophosphate [cAMP] and protein kinase C [PKC] pathways), substances
involved in neuroprotection (brain-derived neurotrophic factor [BDNF] and
glycogen synthase kinase 3-ß [GSK-3ß]) and a number of other miscellaneous genes.
There are no published pharmacogenomic studies of mood stabilizers other than
lithium, except for one study of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) gene in
relation to the efficacy of valproate. In recent years, a number of genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) in bipolar disorders have been performed and some of
those have also focused on lithium response. They suggest roles for the
glutamatergic receptor AMPA (GRIA2) gene and the amiloride-sensitive cation
channel 1 neuronal (ACCN1) gene in long-term lithium response. A promise for
better elucidating the genetics of lithium response has been created by the
formation of the Consortium on Lithium Genetics (ConLiGen) to establish the
largest sample, to date, for the GWAS of lithium response in bipolar disorder.
The sample currently comprises more than 1,200 patients, characterized by their
response to lithium treatment according to the Alda scale. Preliminary results
from this international study suggest a possible involvement of the sodium
bicarbonate transporter (SLC4A10) gene in lithium response. It is concluded that 
the pharmacogenetics of response to mood stabilizers has recently become a
growing field of research, especially so far as the pharmacogenetics of the
response to lithium is concerned. Clearly, the ConLiGen project is a highly
significant step in this research. Although the results of pharmacogenetic
studies are of significant scientific value, their possible practical
implications are yet to be seen.

PMCID: PMC3602611
PMID: 23378337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Sci Signal. 2013 Jan 29;6(260):ra7. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003057.

Vemurafenib potently induces endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis in
BRAFV600E melanoma cells.

Beck D(1), Niessner H, Smalley KS, Flaherty K, Paraiso KH, Busch C, Sinnberg T,
Vasseur S, Iovanna JL, Drießen S, Stork B, Wesselborg S, Schaller M, Biedermann
T, Bauer J, Lasithiotakis K, Weide B, Eberle J, Schittek B, Schadendorf D, Garbe 
C, Kulms D, Meier F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatologic Oncology, Department of Dermatology, University of
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The V600E mutation in the kinase BRAF is frequently detected in melanomas and
results in constitutive activation of BRAF, which then promotes cell
proliferation by the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. Although
the BRAFV600E kinase inhibitor vemurafenib has remarkable antitumor activity in
patients with BRAFV600E-mutated melanoma, its effects are limited by the onset of
drug resistance. We found that exposure of melanoma cell lines with the BRAFV600E
mutation to vemurafenib decreased the abundance of antiapoptotic proteins and
induced intrinsic mitochondrial apoptosis. Vemurafenib-treated melanoma cells
showed increased cytosolic concentration of calcium, a potential trigger for
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which can lead to apoptosis. Consistent with
an ER stress-induced response, vemurafenib decreased the abundance of the ER
chaperone protein glucose-regulated protein 78, increased the abundance of the
spliced isoform of the transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) (which
transcriptionally activates genes involved in ER stress responses), increased the
phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a (which would be
expected to inhibit protein synthesis), and induced the expression of ER
stress-related genes. Knockdown of the ER stress response protein activating
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) significantly reduced vemurafenib-induced
apoptosis. Moreover, the ER stress inducer thapsigargin prevented invasive growth
of tumors formed from vemurafenib-sensitive melanoma cells in vivo. In melanoma
cells with low sensitivity or resistance to vemurafenib, combination treatment
with thapsigargin augmented or induced apoptosis. Thus, thapsigargin or other
inducers of ER stress may be useful in combination therapies to overcome
vemurafenib resistance.

PMCID: PMC3698985
PMID: 23362240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054491. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Transgenic overexpression of 14-3-3 zeta protects hippocampus against endoplasmic
reticulum stress and status epilepticus in vivo.

Brennan GP(1), Jimenez-Mateos EM, McKiernan RC, Engel T, Tzivion G, Henshall DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

14-3-3 proteins are ubiquitous molecular chaperones that are abundantly expressed
in the brain where they regulate cell functions including metabolism, the cell
cycle and apoptosis. Brain levels of several 14-3-3 isoforms are altered in
diseases of the nervous system, including epilepsy. The 14-3-3 zeta (<U+03B6>) isoform
has been linked to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function in neurons, with reduced
levels provoking ER stress and increasing vulnerability to excitotoxic injury.
Here we report that transgenic overexpression of 14-3-3<U+03B6> in mice results in
selective changes to the unfolded protein response pathway in the hippocampus,
including down-regulation of glucose-regulated proteins 78 and 94, activating
transcription factors 4 and 6, and Xbp1 splicing. No differences were found
between wild-type mice and transgenic mice for levels of other 14-3-3 isoforms or
various other 14-3-3 binding proteins. 14-3-3<U+03B6> overexpressing mice were potently 
protected against cell death caused by intracerebroventricular injection of the
ER stressor tunicamycin. 14-3-3<U+03B6> overexpressing mice were also potently protected
against neuronal death caused by prolonged seizures. These studies demonstrate
that increased 14-3-3<U+03B6> levels protect against ER stress and seizure-damage
despite down-regulation of the unfolded protein response. Delivery of 14-3-3<U+03B6> may
protect against pathologic changes resulting from prolonged or repeated seizures 
or where injuries provoke ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3554740
PMID: 23359526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Diabetes. 2013 Jun;62(6):2095-105. doi: 10.2337/db12-1397. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Activation of PPARa ameliorates hepatic insulin resistance and steatosis in high 
fructose-fed mice despite increased endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Chan SM(1), Sun RQ, Zeng XY, Choong ZH, Wang H, Watt MJ, Ye JM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology for Diabetes Group, Health Innovations Research
Institute and School of Health Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is suggested to cause hepatic insulin
resistance by increasing de novo lipogenesis (DNL) and directly interfering with 
insulin signaling through the activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and
I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) pathway. The current study interrogated these two proposed
mechanisms in a mouse model of hepatic insulin resistance induced by a high
fructose (HFru) diet with the treatment of fenofibrate (FB) 100 mg/kg/day, a
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) agonist known to reduce
lipid accumulation while maintaining elevated DNL in the liver. FB administration
completely corrected HFru-induced glucose intolerance, hepatic steatosis, and the
impaired hepatic insulin signaling (pAkt and pGSK3ß). Of note, both the IRE1/XBP1
and PERK/eIF2a arms of unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling were activated. 
While retaining the elevated DNL (indicated by the upregulation of SREBP1c, ACC, 
FAS, and SCD1 and [3H]H2O incorporation into lipids), FB treatment markedly
increased fatty acid oxidation (indicated by induction of ACOX1, p-ACC, ß-HAD
activity, and [14C]palmitate oxidation) and eliminated the accumulation of
diacylglycerols (DAGs), which is known to have an impact on insulin signaling.
Despite the marked activation of UPR signaling, neither JNK nor IKK appeared to
be activated. These findings suggest that lipid accumulation (mainly DAGs),
rather than the activation of JNK or IKK, is pivotal for ER stress to cause
hepatic insulin resistance. Therefore, by reducing the accumulation of
deleterious lipids, activation of PPARa can ameliorate hepatic insulin resistance
against increased ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3661626
PMID: 23349482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jan 14;19(2):227-34. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i2.227.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1a is required for gut development in Xenopus lavies
embryos.

Guo J(1), Li XX, Feng JJ, Yin CY, Wang XJ, Wang N, Yuan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) in gut
development of Xenopus lavies embryos.
METHODS: Xenopus embryos were obtained with in vitro fertilization and cultured
in 0.1 × MBSH. One and half nanogram of IRE1a, 1 ng of IRE1a-GR mRNA, 1 ng of
IRE1a<U+0394>C-GR mRNA, and 50 ng of IRE1a morpholino oligonucleotide (MO) or XBP1(C)MO 
were injected into four blastomeres at 4-cell stage for scoring the phenotype and
marker gene analysis. To rescue the effect of IRE1a MO, 1 ng of IRE1a-GR mRNA was
co-injected with 50 ng of MO. For the activation of the GR-fusion proteins,
dexamethasone was prepared as 5 mmol/L stock solutions in 100% ethanol and
applied to the mRNA injected embryos at desired stages in a concentration of 10
µmol/L in 0.1 × MBSH. Embryos were kept in dexamethasone up to stage 41.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to determine specific gene expression,
such as IRE1a, IRE1ß, Xbra and Xsox17a. IRE1a protein expression during Xenopus
embryogenesis was detected by Western blotting.
RESULTS: In the whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis, xenopus IRE1a and
IRE1ß showed quite different expression pattern during tadpole stage. The
relatively higher expression of IRE1a was observed in the pancreas, and
significant transcription of IRE1ß was found in the liver. IRE1a protein could be
detected at all developmental stages analyzed, from stage 1 to stage 42.
Gain-of-function assay showed that IRE1a mRNA injected embryos at tailbud stage
were nearly normal and the expression of the pan-mesodermal marker gene Xbra and 
the endodermal gene Xsox17a at stage 10.5 was not significantly changed in
embryos injected with IRE1a mRNA as compared to uninjected control embryos. And
at tadpole stage, the embryos injected with IRE1a-GR mRNA did not display overt
phenotype, such as gut-coiling defect. Loss-of-function assay demonstrated that
the IRE1a MO injected embryos were morphologically normal before the tailbud
stages. We did not observe a significant change of mesodermal and endodermal
marker gene expression, while after stage 40, about 80% of the MO injected
embryos exhibited dramatic gut defects in which the guts did not coil, but other 
structures outside the gastrointestinal tract were relatively normal. To test if 
the phenotypes were specifically caused by the knockdown of IRE1a, a rescue
experiment was performed by co-injection of IRE1a-GR mRMA with IRE1a MO. The data
obtained demonstrated that the gut coiling defect was rescued. The deletion
mutant of IRE1a was constructed, consisting of the N-terminal part without the
C-terminal kinase and RNase domains named IRE1a<U+0394>C, to investigate the functional 
domain of IRE1a. Injection of IRE1a<U+0394>C-GR mRNA caused similar morphological
alterations with gut malformation by interfering with the function of endogenous 
xIRE1a. In order to investigate if IRE1a/XBP1 pathway was involved in gut
development, 50 ng of XBP1 MO was injected and the results showed that knockdown 
of XBP1 resulted in similar morphological alterations with gut-coiling defect at 
tadpole stage.
CONCLUSION: IRE1a is not required for germ layer formation but for gut
development in Xenopus lavies and it may function via XBP1-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC3548012
PMID: 23345945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cell Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):463-4. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.9. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Unspliced XBP1 controls autophagy through FoxO1.

Vidal RL(1), Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Neurounion Biomedical Foundation, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
rene.vidal@neurounion.com

Comment on
    Cell Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):491-507.

Protein homeostasis in higher eukaryotes is balanced by a dynamic network of
adaptive mechanisms, including the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy.
In a paper recently published in Cell Research, Zhu and co-workers uncover a
novel biological function of the unspliced form of the UPR transcription factor
XBP1 in the modulation of autophagy through the control of FoxO1 turnover.

PMCID: PMC3616432
PMID: 23337584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Vis. 2013;19:39-46. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Quinotrierixin inhibits proliferation of human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

Chen C(1), Wang JJ, Li J, Yu Q, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the effect of quinotrierixin, a previously reported
inhibitor of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), on cell proliferation and viability 
in human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells.
METHODS: Subconfluent human RPE cells (ARPE-19) were exposed to quinotrierixin
for 16-24 h. Cell proliferation was determined with 3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, hemocytometer
counts, and CyQUANT NF Cell Proliferation Assay. Apoptosis was detected with
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated uridine 5'-triphosphate-biotin
nick end labeling assay. XBP1 mRNA splicing and expression of endoplasmic
reticulum stress response genes were determined in cells exposed to thapsigargin 
in the presence or absence of quinotrierixin. Overexpression of spliced XBP1 was 
achieved with adenovirus.
RESULTS: Quinotrierixin reduced RPE cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner
without inducing apoptosis. In cells exposed to thapsigargin, quinotrierixin
inhibited XBP1 mRNA splicing and PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
activation, and reduced cellular and nuclear levels of spliced XBP1 and C/EBP
homologous protein. Paradoxically, quinotrierixin exacerbated endoplasmic
reticulum stress-induced phosphorylation of eIF2a, which in turn led to decreased
protein translation. Overexpressing spliced XBP1 partially reversed the
inhibition of cell proliferation by quinotrierixin. These results suggest that
inhibiting XBP1 splicing contributes to quinotrierixin's negative effect on RPE
cell proliferation, but other mechanisms such as reduction of protein translation
are also involved.
CONCLUSIONS: Quinotrierixin inhibits RPE cell proliferation and may be used as a 
novel antiproliferative drug for treating proliferative vitreoretinopathy. Future
studies are needed to investigate the in vivo effect of quinotrierixin on RPE
proliferation in animal models of proliferative vitreoretinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3541046
PMID: 23335849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Biotechnol Prog. 2013 May-Jun;29(3):697-706. doi: 10.1002/btpr.1693. Epub 2013
Mar 20.

A CHO cell line engineered to express XBP1 and ERO1-La has increased levels of
transient protein expression.

Cain K(1), Peters S, Hailu H, Sweeney B, Stephens P, Heads J, Sarkar K, Ventom A,
Page C, Dickson A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Expression and Purification Group, UCB, Slough, Berkshire, SL1 4EN,
England. Katharine.Cain@UCB.com

Transient gene expression (TGE) systems currently provide rapid and scalable (up 
to 100 L) methods for generating multigram quantities of recombinant heterologous
proteins. Product titers of up to 1 g/L have been demonstrated in HEK293 cells
but reported yields from Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are lower at ~300
mg/L. We report on the establishment of an engineered CHOS cell line, which has
been developed for TGE. This cell line has been engineered to express both X-box 
binding protein (XBP-1S) and endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductase (ERO1-La) and
has been named CHOS-XE. CHOS-XE cells produced increased antibody (MAb) yields
(5.3- 6.2 fold) in comparison to CHOS cells. Product quality was unchanged as
assessed by size, charge, propensity to aggregate, major glycosylation species,
and thermal stability. To further develop and test this TGE system, five
commercial media were assessed, and one was shown to offer the greatest increase 
in antibody yields. With the addition of a commercial feed, MAb titers reached
875 mg/L.

© 2013 American Institute of Chemical Engineers.

PMID: 23335490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Feb;52(2):85-93. doi: 10.1002/mc.21831. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Oligomycin A enhances apoptotic effect of TRAIL through CHOP-mediated death
receptor 5 expression.

He L(1), Jang JH, Choi HG, Lee SM, Nan MH, Jeong SJ, Dong Z, Kwon YT, Lee KS, Lee
KW, Chung JK, Ahn JS, Kim BY.

Author information: 
(1)Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Ochang, Cheongwon,
South Korea.

Development of resistance to TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) in
tumor cells is one of the important problems in cancer treatment. Despite the
previous report demonstrating that oligomycin suppressed TNF-induced apoptosis,
in our screening of small molecules enhancing cancer cell death to TRAIL,
oligomycin A (OMA) was found to enhance TRAIL-induced apoptosis in HeLa cells.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) was found to directly
bind to death receptor 5 (DR5) promoter through endoplasmic reticulum stress
(ER-stress) signaling and sensitize the cells to TRAIL. Among ER-stress
associated proteins, OMA triggered the inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1)
signaling pathway, leading to X-binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, CHOP
expression and DR5 upregulation. In contrast, small-interfering RNA (siRNA) of
CHOP reduced the number of apoptotic cells in response to the co-treatment of
TRAIL and OMA. Collectively, our data suggest that OMA enhances apoptotic death
of cervical cancer cells to TRAIL through upregulation of CHOP-mediated DR5
expression following ER-stress.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23335397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1831(4):759-68. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2013.01.005.
Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Trans-10, cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid induced cell death in human colon
cancer cells through reactive oxygen species-mediated ER stress.

Pierre AS(1), Minville-Walz M, Fèvre C, Hichami A, Gresti J, Pichon L, Bellenger 
S, Bellenger J, Ghiringhelli F, Narce M, Rialland M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bourgogne, Centre de Recherche INSERM, UMR866, 6 Boulevard
Gabriel, 21000 Dijon, France.

Dietary conjugated linoleic acids (CLA) are fatty acid isomers with anticancer
activities produced naturally in ruminants or from vegetable oil processing. The 
anticancer effects of CLA differ upon the cancer origin and the CLA isomers. In
this study, we carried out to precise the effects of CLA isomers, c9,t11 and
t10,c12 CLA, on mechanisms of cell death induction in colon cancer cells. We
first showed that only t10,c12 CLA treatment (25 and 50µM) for 72h triggered
apoptosis in colon cancer cells without affecting viability of normal-derived
colon epithelial cells. Exposure of colon cancer cells to t10,c12 CLA activated
ER stress characterized by induction of eIF2a phoshorylation, splicing of Xbp1
mRNA and CHOP expression. Furthermore, we evidenced that inhibition of CHOP
expression and JNK signaling decreased t10,c12 CLA-mediated cancer cell death.
Finally, we showed that CHOP induction by t10,c12 CLA was dependent on ROS
production and that the anti-oxidant N-acetyl-cysteine reduced CHOP
induction-dependent cell death. These results highlight that t10,c12 CLA exerts
its cytotoxic effect through ROS generation and a subsequent ER stress-dependent 
apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Plant J. 2013 Apr;74(2):248-57. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12117. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Identification of a cis-element that mediates multiple pathways of the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response in rice.

Hayashi S(1), Takahashi H, Wakasa Y, Kawakatsu T, Takaiwa F.

Author information: 
(1)Genetically Modified Organism Research Center, National Institute of
Agrobiological Sciences, Kannondai 2-1-2, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8602, Japan.

The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen
leads to ER stress. Intracellular signalling pathways are activated to alleviate 
the stress. The ER stress sensor IRE1 induces the active form of key
transcription factors, such as XBP1 in mammals and bZIP50 in Oryza sativa (rice),
by mediating the unconventional splicing of their mRNAs. Although the
characterization of cis-elements that are recognized by these transcription
factors is essential for understanding ER stress responses, such cis-elements
remain unidentified in plants. Here, a cis-element named pUPRE-II was identified 
from promoters of bZIP50-dependent genes using chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The sequence of pUPRE-II (e.g.,
5'-GATGACGCGTAC-3' in the OsSAR1 promoter) was found to be flexible and not
identical with that of mUPRE, a cis-element that preferentially interacts with
mammalian XBP1. Unexpectedly, the transcription factor bZIP60, another ER stress 
sensor in rice, and a counterpart of mammalian ATF6, also showed strong binding
affinity for pUPRE-II without assistance from co-factors. Reporter assays
indicated that pUPRE-II significantly contributes to gene expression mediated by 
bZIP50 or bZIP60 in rice. Although both bZIP50 and bZIP60 bound to pUPRE-II,
these transcription factors showed distinct requirements for transcriptional
activation. This study provides a missing link between ER stress sensors and
stress-responsive genes in rice. Furthermore, the characteristics of pUPRE-II
highlight the uniqueness of ER stress-responsive transcription in plants.

© 2013 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23331932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diabetologia. 2013 Apr;56(4):911-24. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2809-5. Epub 2013
Jan 12.

ER stress signalling through eIF2a and CHOP, but not IRE1a, attenuates
adipogenesis in mice.

Han J(1), Murthy R, Wood B, Song B, Wang S, Sun B, Malhi H, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Del E Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell Research Center, Sanford-Burnham 
Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037-1062, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Although obesity is associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in adipose tissue,
it is not known how UPR signalling affects adipogenesis. To test whether
signalling through protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase/eukaryotic initiation factor
2 alpha (PERK/eIF2a) or inositol-requiring enzyme 1 alpha/X-box binding protein 1
(IRE1a/XBP1) is required for adipogenesis, we studied the role of UPR signalling 
in adipocyte differentiation in vitro and in vivo in mice.
METHODS: The role of UPR signalling in adipogenesis was investigated using 3T3-L1
cells and primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) by activation or inhibition 
of PERK-mediated phosphorylation of the eIF2a- and IRE1a-mediated splicing of
Xbp1 mRNA. Body weight change, fat mass composition and adipocyte number and size
were measured in wild-type and genetically engineered mice fed a control or
high-fat diet (HFD).
RESULTS: ER stress repressed adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Impaired 
eIF2a phosphorylation enhanced adipocyte differentiation in MEFs, as well as in
mice. In contrast, increased eIF2a phosphorylation reduced adipocyte
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. Forced production of CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP), a downstream target of eIF2a
phosphorylation, inhibited adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells. Mice with deletion of
Chop (also known as Ddit3) (Chop (-/-)) gained more fat mass than wild-type mice 
on HFD. In addition, Chop deletion in genetically obese Lepr (db/db) mice
increased body fat mass without altering adipocyte size. In contrast to the
eIF2a-CHOP pathway, activation or deletion of Ire1a (also known as Ern1) did not 
alter adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results demonstrate that eIF2a-CHOP suppresses 
adipogenesis and limits expansion of fat mass in vivo in mice, rendering this
pathway a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3606029
PMID: 23314846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052873. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

PTGER4 expression-modulating polymorphisms in the 5p13.1 region predispose to
Crohn's disease and affect NF-<U+03BA>B and XBP1 binding sites.

Glas J(1), Seiderer J, Czamara D, Pasciuto G, Diegelmann J, Wetzke M, Olszak T,
Wolf C, Müller-Myhsok B, Balschun T, Achkar JP, Kamboh MI, Franke A, Duerr RH,
Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies identified a PTGER4
expression-modulating region on chromosome 5p13.1 as Crohn's disease (CD)
susceptibility region. The study aim was to test this association in a large
cohort of patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and to elucidate
genotypic and phenotypic interactions with other IBD genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 7073 patients and controls were
genotyped: 844 CD and 471 patients with ulcerative colitis and 1488 controls were
analyzed for the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs4495224 and rs7720838
on chromosome 5p13.1. The study included two replication cohorts of North
American (CD: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>684; controls: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1440) and of German origin (CD: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1098;
controls: n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1048). Genotype-phenotype, epistasis and transcription factor
binding analyses were performed. In the discovery cohort, an association of
rs4495224 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.10×10<U+207B>5; 0.76 [0.67-0.87]) and of rs7720838 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.91×10<U+207B>4; 0.81
[0.71-0.91]) with susceptibility to CD was demonstrated. These associations were 
confirmed in both replication cohorts. In silico analysis predicted rs4495224 and
rs7720838 as essential parts of binding sites for the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B
and XBP1 with higher binding scores for carriers of the CD risk alleles,
providing an explanation of how these SNPs might contribute to increased PTGER4
expression. There was no association of the PTGER4 SNPs with IBD phenotypes.
Epistasis detected between 5p13.1 and ATG16L1 for CD susceptibility in the
discovery cohort (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.99×10<U+207B>7 for rs7720838 and rs2241880) could not be
replicated in both replication cohorts arguing against a major role of this
gene-gene interaction in the susceptibility to CD.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We confirmed 5p13.1 as a major CD susceptibility locus 
and demonstrate by in silico analysis rs4495224 and rs7720838 as part of binding 
sites for NF-<U+03BA>B and XBP1. Further functional studies are necessary to confirm the
results of our in silico analysis and to analyze if changes in PTGER4 expression 
modulate CD susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3531335
PMID: 23300802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52187. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052187. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

ZFP36L1 negatively regulates plasmacytoid differentiation of BCL1 cells by
targeting BLIMP1 mRNA.

Nasir A(1), Norton JD, Baou M, Zekavati A, Bijlmakers MJ, Thompson S, Murphy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammatory Disease, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom.

The ZFP36/Tis11 family of zinc-finger proteins regulate cellular processes by
binding to adenine uridine rich elements in the 3' untranslated regions of
various mRNAs and promoting their degradation. We show here that ZFP36L1
expression is largely extinguished during the transition from B cells to plasma
cells, in a reciprocal pattern to that of ZFP36 and the plasma cell transcription
factor, BLIMP1. Enforced expression of ZFP36L1 in the mouse BCL1 cell line
blocked cytokine-induced differentiation while shRNA-mediated knock-down enhanced
differentiation. Reconstruction of regulatory networks from microarray gene
expression data using the ARACNe algorithm identified candidate mRNA targets for 
ZFP36L1 including BLIMP1. Genes that displayed down-regulation in plasma cells
were significantly over-represented (P<U+200A>=<U+200A><0.0001) in a set of previously
validated ZFP36 targets suggesting that ZFP36L1 and ZFP36 target distinct sets of
mRNAs during plasmacytoid differentiation. ShRNA-mediated knock-down of ZFP36L1
in BCL1 cells led to an increase in levels of BLIMP1 mRNA and protein, but not
for mRNAs of other transcription factors that regulate plasmacytoid
differentiation (xbp1, irf4, bcl6). Finally, ZFP36L1 significantly reduced the
activity of a BLIMP1 3' untranslated region-driven luciferase reporter. Taken
together, these findings suggest that ZFP36L1 negatively regulates plasmacytoid
differentiation, at least in part, by targeting the expression of BLIMP1.

PMCID: PMC3527407
PMID: 23284928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2013 Sep 3;6:e201303010. doi: 10.5936/csbj.201303010.
eCollection 2013.

The essential biology of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response for structural
and computational biologists.

Wakabayashi S(1), Yoshida H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Graduate School of Life Science,
University of Hyogo, Hyogo 678-1297, Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response is a cytoprotective mechanism that
maintains homeostasis of the ER by upregulating the capacity of the ER in
accordance with cellular demands. If the ER stress response cannot function
correctly, because of reasons such as aging, genetic mutation or environmental
stress, unfolded proteins accumulate in the ER and cause ER stress-induced
apoptosis, resulting in the onset of folding diseases, including Alzheimer's
disease and diabetes mellitus. Although the mechanism of the ER stress response
has been analyzed extensively by biochemists, cell biologists and molecular
biologists, many aspects remain to be elucidated. For example, it is unclear how 
sensor molecules detect ER stress, or how cells choose the two opposite cell
fates (survival or apoptosis) during the ER stress response. To resolve these
critical issues, structural and computational approaches will be indispensable,
although the mechanism of the ER stress response is complicated and difficult to 
understand holistically at a glance. Here, we provide a concise introduction to
the mammalian ER stress response for structural and computational biologists.

PMCID: PMC3962220
PMID: 24688718  [PubMed]


485. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 15;50(2):151-66. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0195. Print 2013 
Apr.

hCG-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress triggers apoptosis and reduces
steroidogenic enzyme expression through activating transcription factor 6 in
Leydig cells of the testis.

Park SJ(1), Kim TS, Park CK, Lee SH, Kim JM, Lee KS, Lee IK, Park JW, Lawson MA, 
Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food and Nutritional Genomics Research, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress generally occurs in secretory cell types. It
has been reported that Leydig cells, which produce testosterone in response to
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), express key steroidogenic enzymes for the
regulation of testosterone synthesis. In this study, we analyzed whether hCG
induces ER stress via three unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways in mouse
Leydig tumor (mLTC-1) cells and the testis. Treatment with hCG induced ER stress 
in mLTC-1 cells via the ATF6, IRE1a/XBP1, and eIF2a/GADD34/ATF4 UPR pathways, and
transient expression of 50<U+200A>kDa protein activating transcription factor 6
(p50ATF6) reduced the expression level of steroidogenic 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase <U+0394>5-<U+0394>4-isomerase (3ß-HSD) enzyme. In an in vivo model, high-level
hCG treatment induced expression of p50ATF6 while that of steroidogenic enzymes, 
especially 3ß-HSD, 17a-hydroxylase/C17-20 lyase (CYP17), and 17ß-hydrozysteroid
dehydrogenase (17ß-HSD), was reduced. Expression levels of steroidogenic enzymes 
were restored by the ER stress inhibitor tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA).
Furthermore, lentivirus-mediated transient expression of p50ATF6 reduced the
expression level of 3ß-HSD in the testis. Protein expression levels of
phospho-JNK, CHOP, and cleaved caspases-12 and -3 as markers of ER
stress-mediated apoptosis markedly increased in response to high-level hCG
treatment in mLTC-1 cells and the testis. Based on transmission electron
microscopy and H&E staining of the testis, it was shown that abnormal ER
morphology and destruction of testicular histology induced by high-level hCG
treatment were reversed by the addition of TUDCA. These findings suggest that
hCG-induced ER stress plays important roles in steroidogenic enzyme expression
via modulation of the ATF6 pathway as well as ER stress-mediated apoptosis in
Leydig cells.

PMCID: PMC4111658
PMID: 23256993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Brain. 2012 Dec;135(Pt 12):3551-66. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws299.

Curcumin derivatives promote Schwann cell differentiation and improve neuropathy 
in R98C CMT1B mice.

Patzkó A(1), Bai Y, Saporta MA, Katona I, Wu X, Vizzuso D, Feltri ML, Wang S,
Dillon LM, Kamholz J, Kirschner D, Sarkar FH, Wrabetz L, Shy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Drive, 1188
Medical Laboratories, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Brain. 2014 Dec;137(Pt 12):e316.

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Dec;135(Pt 12):3527-8.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1B is caused by mutations in myelin protein
zero. R98C mice, an authentic model of early onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
type 1B, develop neuropathy in part because the misfolded mutant myelin protein
zero is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum where it activates the unfolded
protein response. Because oral curcumin, a component of the spice turmeric, has
been shown to relieve endoplasmic reticulum stress and decrease the activation of
the unfolded protein response, we treated R98C mutant mice with daily gastric
lavage of curcumin or curcumin derivatives starting at 4 days of age and analysed
them for clinical disability, electrophysiological parameters and peripheral
nerve morphology. Heterozygous R98C mice treated with curcumin dissolved in
sesame oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin performed as well as wild-type
littermates on a rotarod test and had increased numbers of large-diameter axons
in their sciatic nerves. Treatment with the latter two compounds also increased
compound muscle action potential amplitudes and the innervation of neuromuscular 
junctions in both heterozygous and homozygous R98C animals, but it did not
improve nerve conduction velocity, myelin thickness, G-ratios or myelin period.
The expression of c-Jun and suppressed cAMP-inducible POU (SCIP)-transcription
factors that inhibit myelination when overexpressed-was also decreased by
treatment. Consistent with its role in reducing endoplasmic reticulum stress,
treatment with curcumin dissolved in sesame oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin
was associated with decreased X-box binding protein (XBP1) splicing. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that treatment with curcumin dissolved in sesame
oil or phosphatidylcholine curcumin improves the peripheral neuropathy of R98C
mice by alleviating endoplasmic reticulum stress, by reducing the activation of
unfolded protein response and by promoting Schwann cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3577101
PMID: 23250879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Org Lett. 2013 Jan 4;15(1):120-3. doi: 10.1021/ol303146a. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Fluevirosines A-C: a biogenesis inspired example in the discovery of new
bioactive scaffolds from Flueggea virosa.

Zhang H(1), Zhang CR, Zhu KK, Gao AH, Luo C, Li J, Yue JM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi Road, Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park,
Shanghai 201203, People's Republic of China.

Biogenesis inspired chemical investigation of a Chinese folk medicine, Flueggea
virosa, returned three unprecedented C,C-linked trimeric Securinega alkaloids,
fluevirosines A-C (1-3). Their absolute structures were characterized on the
basis of spectroscopic data and computational analysis. Compounds 2 and 3 showed 
inhibition against the splicing of XBP1 mRNA.

PMID: 23244193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Feb;7(2):618-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1232. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Cloning and functions of the HBxAg-binding protein XBP1.

Fan W(1), Cheng J, Zhang S, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, P.R. China.

In the present study the hepatitis B virus X antigen binding protein 1 (XBP1) was
cloned by inducing its expression, and its subcellular localization and function 
were examined. Total RNA was extracted from HepG2 cells and XBP1 was amplified
using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), followed by
restriction enzyme digestion of the pGBKT7 yeast plasmid and identification by
enzyme digestion. The plasmid was transformed into AH109 yeast via the lithium
acetate method and protein extracts were prepared. XBP1 protein expression in the
eukaryotic cells was determined using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
western blot analysis. The gene encoding the XBP1-binding protein was screened in
liver cells using yeast two-hybrid technology. We transfected a human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line and observed the intracellular localization of
the gene expression protein using a fluorescence microscope, followed by
prokaryotic expression and XBP1 gene identification. A 921-bp XBP1 gene fragment 
was obtained via RT-PCR amplification and 20 proteins with known functions that
interact with XBP1 were screened, including metallothionein, smooth muscle
cell-related protein, asialoglycoprotein receptor, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 
1 and a sequence with unknown functions. A green fluorescent protein expression
plasmid pEGFP-C1-XBP1 of XBP1 was constructed successfully and its expression
protein was localized in the cytoplasm. A 56-kDa recombinant protein was
successfully obtained via prokaryotic expression and was demonstrated to have
good specificity using western blot analysis. The XBP1 gene, which expresses the 
XBP1 protein, is located in the cytoplasm and plays a role in the intracellular
structure, cell growth, intracellular metabolism and signal transduction pathway,
as well as DNA duplication, transcription, recombination and repair.

PMID: 23241634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Neuromolecular Med. 2013 Mar;15(1):180-91. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8209-7. Epub
2012 Dec 13.

Variable phenotypes of knockin mice carrying the M712T Gne mutation.

Sela I(1), Yakovlev L, Becker Cohen M, Elbaz M, Yanay N, Ben Shlomo U, Yotvat H, 
Fellig Y, Argov Z, Mitrani-Rosenbaum S.

Author information: 
(1)Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah Hospital, Hadassah Hebrew
University Medical Center, Mount Scopus, 91240, Jerusalem, Israel.

GNE myopathy is a recessive adult onset, slowly progressive distal and proximal
myopathy, caused by mutations in the GNE gene. The most frequent mutation in GNE 
myopathy patients is the Middle Eastern founder mutation M712T. We have generated
Gne (M712T/M712T) knockin mice. A high mortality rate in the first generation due
to renal failure was recorded (as previously described). However, the following
Gne (M712T/M712T) offspring generations could be classified into 3 phenotypic
categories: severe, mild and without apparent phenotype. By further crossing
between mice with no apparent phenotype, we were able to establish a colony of
Gne (M712T/M712T) knockin mice with a high- and long-term survival rate, lacking 
any renal phenotype. These mice did not present any muscle phenotype (clinical or
pathological) for up to 18 months. No correlation was found between the
expression of any of the two mRNA Gne isoforms in muscle and the mouse genotype
or phenotype. However, the expression of isoform 2 mRNA was significantly higher 
in the kidney of Gne (M712T/M712T) kidney affected mice compared with control. In
contrast, the expression of UPR markers Bip, Chop and of the spliced form of
XBP1, was upregulated in muscle of Gne (M712T/M712T) mice compared with controls,
but was unchanged in the affected kidney. Thus, Gne defects can affect both
muscle and kidney in mouse, but probably through different mechanisms.

PMID: 23238814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1691-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C112.424606. Epub 2012
Dec 12.

The IRE1a-XBP1 pathway positively regulates parathyroid hormone (PTH)/PTH-related
peptide receptor expression and is involved in pth-induced osteoclastogenesis.

Tohmonda T(1), Yoda M, Mizuochi H, Morioka H, Matsumoto M, Urano F, Toyama Y,
Horiuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-aging Orthopedic Research, Keio University, School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

To address the "endoplasmic reticulum stress" triggered by the burden of protein 
synthesis, the unfolded protein response is induced during osteoblast
differentiation. In this study, we show that the transcription of parathyroid
hormone (PTH)/PTH-related peptide receptor (PTH1R) is regulated by one of the
endoplasmic reticulum-stress mediators, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, in osteoblasts.
We found that the increase in Pth1r transcription upon BMP2 treatment is
significantly suppressed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking IRE1a. As
expected, gene silencing of Ire1a and Xbp1 resulted in a decrease in Pth1r
transcripts in BMP2-treated embryonic fibroblasts. We identified two potential
binding sites for XBP1 in the promoter region of Pth1r and found that XBP1
promotes the transcription of Pth1r by directly binding to those sites. Moreover,
we confirmed that the gene silencing of Xbp1 suppresses PTH-induced Rankl
expression in primary osteoblasts and thereby abolishes osteoclast formation in
an in vitro model of osteoclastogenesis. Thus, the present study reveals
potential involvement of the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway in PTH-induced osteoclastogenesis
through the regulation of PTH1R expression.

PMCID: PMC3548479
PMID: 23235147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2012 Dec;12(1):377-90. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2012-0025.

Co-expression of genes with estrogen receptor-a and progesterone receptor in
human breast carcinoma tissue.

Andres SA, Wittliff JL.

Abstract Background: To detect genes associated with the expression of ESR1 and
PGR - as well as of their protein products, estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) - 221 de-identified invasive ductal carcinomas of the 
breast were investigated. Our long-term goal is to decipher relationships between
the expression of ER- and PR-associated genes and breast cancer behavior to
improve diagnostics and identify new molecular targets for drug design.MATERIALS 
AND METHODS: Frozen tissue sections were evaluated for structural integrity and
pathology after hematoxylin and eosin staining. ER and PR protein levels were
quantified by either enzyme immunoassay or radio-ligand binding assay. Total RNA 
preparations were reverse transcribed for qPCR measurements of ESR1, PGR and 31
gene candidates.
RESULTS: Both ESR1 and PGR expression levels were correlated with their cognate
receptor protein expression (Pearson correlations of 0.82 and 0.68, p<0.001,
respectively), to assess molecular relationships between clinically relevant
biomarkers in tissue specimens. Coordinate expression of EVL, NAT1, TBC1D9,
SCUBE2, RABEP1, SLC39A6, TCEAL1, FUT8, XBP1, PTP4A2 or GATA3 with either ESR1 or 
PGR was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Examination of relationships between ESR1 and PGR gene expression
and that of other genes of interest indicated: a high degree of correlation
between ESR1 levels and expression of NAT1, SCUBE2, XBP1 and GATA3; and a high
degree of correlation between PGR expression and that of NAT1, ESR1, SCUBE2 and
RABEP1. These results suggest that direct relationships of these genes exist with
estrogen and progestin receptor mediated pathways. Pathway analysis software
provided additional evidence of gene interactions.

PMID: 25436697  [PubMed]


492. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 11;288(2):859-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.412783. Epub 2012
Nov 26.

XBP1 mRNA splicing triggers an autophagic response in endothelial cells through
BECLIN-1 transcriptional activation.

Margariti A(1), Li H, Chen T, Martin D, Vizcay-Barrena G, Alam S, Karamariti E,
Xiao Q, Zampetaki A, Zhang Z, Wang W, Jiang Z, Gao C, Ma B, Chen YG, Cockerill G,
Hu Y, Xu Q, Zeng L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London BHF Centre, 125 Coldharbour
Lane, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom. andriani.margariti@kcl.ac.uk

Sustained activation of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) results in endothelial
cell (EC) apoptosis and atherosclerosis development. The present study provides
evidence that XBP1 mRNA splicing triggered an autophagic response in ECs by
inducing autophagic vesicle formation and markers of autophagy BECLIN-1 and
microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3ß (LC3-ßII). Endostatin activated
autophagic gene expression through XBP1 mRNA splicing in an inositol-requiring
enzyme 1a (IRE1a)-dependent manner. Knockdown of XBP1 or IRE1a by shRNA in ECs
ablated endostatin-induced autophagosome formation. Importantly, data from
arterial vessels from XBP1 EC conditional knock-out (XBP1eko) mice demonstrated
that XBP1 deficiency in ECs reduced the basal level of LC3ß expression and
ablated response to endostatin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays further
revealed that the spliced XBP1 isoform bound directly to the BECLIN-1 promoter at
the region from nt -537 to -755. BECLIN-1 deficiency in ECs abolished the
XBP1-induced autophagy response, whereas spliced XBP1 did not induce
transcriptional activation of a truncated BECLIN-1 promoter. These results
suggest that XBP1 mRNA splicing triggers an autophagic signal pathway through
transcriptional regulation of BECLIN-1.

PMCID: PMC3543035
PMID: 23184933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 15;189(12):5773-85. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103720. Epub 2012 
Nov 16.

In vitro generation of long-lived human plasma cells.

Cocco M(1), Stephenson S, Care MA, Newton D, Barnes NA, Davison A, Rawstron A,
Westhead DR, Doody GM, Tooze RM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, United Kingdom.

Plasma cells (PCs), the terminal effectors of humoral immunity, are short-lived
unless supported by niche environments in which they may persist for years. No
model system has linked B cell activation with niche function to allow the in
vitro generation of long-lived PCs. Thus, the full trajectory of B cell terminal 
differentiation has yet to be investigated in vitro. In this article, we describe
a robust model for the generation of polyclonal long-lived human PCs from
peripheral blood B cells. After a proliferative plasmablast phase, PCs persist in
the absence of cell division, with viability limited only by elective culture
termination. Conservative predictions for PC life expectancy are 300 d, but with 
the potential for significantly longer life spans for some cells. These
long-lived PCs are preferentially derived from memory B cells, and acquire a
CD138(high) phenotype analogous to that of human bone marrow PCs. Analysis of
gene expression across the system defines clusters of genes with related dynamics
and linked functional characteristics. Importantly, genes in these
differentiation clusters demonstrate a similar overall pattern of expression for 
in vitro and ex vivo PCs. In vitro PCs are fully reprogrammed to a secretory
state and are adapted to their secretory load, maintaining IgG secretion of 120
pg/cell/day in the absence of XBP1 mRNA splicing. By establishing a set of
conditions sufficient to allow the development and persistence of mature human
PCs in vitro, to our knowledge, we provide the first platform with which to
sequentially explore and manipulate each stage of human PC differentiation.

PMID: 23162129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2013 Feb;29(1):13-37. doi: 10.1007/s10565-012-9235-9. Epub
2012 Nov 19.

Detrimental effects of proteasome inhibition activity in Drosophila melanogaster:
implication of ER stress, autophagy, and apoptosis.

Velentzas PD(1), Velentzas AD, Mpakou VE, Antonelou MH, Margaritis LH,
Papassideri IS, Stravopodis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, University of Athens,
Panepistimiopolis, Zografou, Athens, Greece. panosvel@biol.uoa.gr

In eukaryotes, the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery regulates a number of
fundamental cellular processes through accurate and tightly controlled protein
degradation pathways. We have, herein, examined the effects of proteasome
functional disruption in Dmp53 (+/+) (wild-type) and Dmp53 (-/-) Drosophila
melanogaster fly strains through utilization of Bortezomib, a proteasome-specific
inhibitor. We report that proteasome inhibition drastically shortens fly
life-span and impairs climbing performance, while it also causes larval lethality
and activates developmentally irregular cell death programs during oogenesis.
Interestingly, Dmp53 gene seems to play a role in fly longevity and climbing
ability. Moreover, Bortezomib proved to induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
that was able to result in the engagement of unfolded protein response (UPR)
signaling pathway, as respectively indicated by fly Xbp1 activation and
Ref(2)P-containing protein aggregate formation. Larva salivary gland and adult
brain both underwent strong ER stress in response to Bortezomib, thus
underscoring the detrimental role of proteasome inhibition in larval development 
and brain function. We also propose that the observed upregulation of autophagy
operates as a protective mechanism to "counterbalance" Bortezomib-induced
systemic toxicity, which is tightly associated, besides ER stress, with
activation of apoptosis, mainly mediated by functional Drice caspase and
deregulated dAkt kinase. The reduced life-span of exposed to Bortezomib flies
overexpressing Atg1_RNAi or Atg18_RNAi supports the protective nature of
autophagy against proteasome inhibition-induced stress. Our data reveal the in
vivo significance of proteasome functional integrity as a major defensive system 
against cellular toxicity likely occurring during critical biological processes
and morphogenetic courses.

PMID: 23161111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 May;18(3):307-19. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0383-x.
Epub 2012 Nov 17.

A modified UPR stress sensing system reveals a novel tissue distribution of
IRE1/XBP1 activity during normal Drosophila development.

Sone M(1), Zeng X, Larese J, Ryoo HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 560 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Eukaryotic cells respond to stress caused by the accumulation of
unfolded/misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum by activating the
intracellular signaling pathways referred to as the unfolded protein response
(UPR). In metazoans, UPR consists of three parallel branches, each characterized 
by its stress sensor protein, IRE1, ATF6, and PERK, respectively. In Drosophila, 
IRE1/XBP1 pathway is considered to function as a major branch of UPR; however,
its physiological roles during the normal development and homeostasis remain
poorly understood. To visualize IRE1/XBP1 activity in fly tissues under normal
physiological conditions, we modified previously reported XBP1 stress sensing
systems (Souid et al., Dev Genes Evol 217: 159-167, 2007; Ryoo et al., EMBO J 26:
242-252, 2007), based on the recent reports regarding the unconventional splicing
of XBP1/HAC1 mRNA (Aragon et al., Nature 457: 736-740, 2009; Yanagitani et al.,
Mol Cell 34: 191-200, 2009; Science 331: 586-589, 2011). The improved XBP1 stress
sensing system allowed us to detect new IRE1/XBP1 activities in the brain, gut,
Malpighian tubules, and trachea of third instar larvae and in the adult male
reproductive organ. Specifically, in the larval brain, IRE1/XBP1 activity was
detected exclusively in glia, although previous reports have largely focused on
IRE1/XBP1 activity in neurons. Unexpected glial IRE1/XBP1 activity may provide us
with novel insights into the brain homeostasis regulated by the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3631089
PMID: 23160805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biomol Screen. 2013 Mar;18(3):298-308. doi: 10.1177/1087057112465647. Epub 2012
Nov 8.

Identification of autophosphorylation inhibitors of the inositol-requiring enzyme
1 alpha (IRE1a) by high-throughput screening using a DELFIA assay.

Newbatt Y(1), Hardcastle A, McAndrew PC, Strover JA, Mirza A, Morgan GJ, Burke R,
Davies FE, Collins I, van Montfort RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, UK.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 alpha (IRE1a) is a transmembrane sensor protein with 
both kinase and ribonuclease activity, which plays a crucial role in the unfolded
protein response (UPR). Protein misfolding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
lumen triggers dimerization and subsequent trans-autophosphorylation of IRE1a.
This leads to the activation of its endoribonuclease (RNase) domain and splicing 
of the mRNA of the transcriptional activator XBP1, ultimately generating an
active XBP1 (XBP1s) implicated in multiple myeloma survival. Previously, we have 
identified human IRE1a as a target for the development of kinase inhibitors that 
could modulate the UPR in human cells, which has particular relevance for
multiple myeloma and other secretory malignancies. Here we describe the
development and validation of a 384-well high-throughput screening assay using
DELFIA technology that is specific for IRE1a autophosphorylation. Using this
format, a focused library of 2312 potential kinase inhibitors was screened, and
several novel IRE1a kinase inhibitor scaffolds were identified that could
potentially be developed toward new therapies to treat multiple myeloma.

PMID: 23139381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Jan;24(1):14-20. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-06-0491. Epub 2012 Nov 
7.

Comparison of mRNA localization and regulation during endoplasmic reticulum
stress in Drosophila cells.

Gaddam D(1), Stevens N, Hollien J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and the Center for Cell and Genome Science, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84109, USA.

Ire1 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) transmembrane protein that senses
disturbances in protein folding homeostasis and contributes to a multifaceted
response to stress. The nuclease activity of Ire1, in addition to splicing the
mRNA encoding the transcription factor Xbp1, mediates mRNA degradation in
response to ER stress through a pathway termed regulated Ire1-dependent decay
(RIDD). We previously showed that ER targeting of substrates is necessary for
RIDD; in this paper, we show that ER localization is also sufficient to induce
decay in a normally unaffected mRNA. Using microarrays, we also measured relative
mRNA degradation in the presence and absence of ER stress in Drosophila S2 cells,
and determined mRNA membrane association using detergent fractionation. The vast 
majority of mRNAs that were strongly associated with the ER were degraded faster 
during ER stress in an Ire1-dependent manner, suggesting that RIDD is the default
pathway for ER-localized mRNAs during stress. We also show that the mRNA encoding
plexin A remains highly polysome associated during stress and escapes degradation
by RIDD, and that its 5' untranslated region can protect a strong RIDD target
from degradation. These results suggest that while translation is generally
attenuated during ER stress, continued translation of certain messages can
protect them from degradation by RIDD.

PMCID: PMC3530775
PMID: 23135994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048235. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

2-Hydroxyoleic acid induces ER stress and autophagy in various human glioma cell 
lines.

Marcilla-Etxenike A(1), Martín ML, Noguera-Salvà MA, García-Verdugo JM,
Soriano-Navarro M, Dey I, Escribá PV, Busquets X.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología, Instituto Universitario de Investigación en Ciencias 
de la Salud, Universidad de las Islas Baleares, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

BACKGROUND: 2-Hydroxyoleic acid is a synthetic fatty acid with potent anti-cancer
activity which does not induce undesired side effects. However, the molecular and
cellular mechanisms by which this compound selectively kills human glioma cancer 
cells without killing normal cells is not fully understood. The present study was
designed to determine the molecular bases underlying the potency against 1321N1, 
SF-767 and U118 human glioma cell lines growth without affecting non cancer MRC-5
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The cellular levels of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress, unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy markers were determined by 
quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblotting on 1321N1, SF-767 and U118 human glioma
cells and non-tumor MRC-5 cells incubated in the presence or absence of 2OHOA or 
the ER stress/autophagy inducer, palmitate. The cellular response to these agents
was evaluated by fluorescence microscopy, electron microscopy and flow cytometry.
We have observed that 2OHOA treatments induced augments in the expression of
important ER stress/UPR markers, such as phosphorylated eIF2a, IRE1a, CHOP, ATF4 
and the spliced form of XBP1 in human glioma cells. Concomitantly, 2OHOA led to
the arrest of 1321N1 cells in the G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle, with
down-regulation of cyclin B1 and Cdk1/Cdc2 proteins in the three glioma cell
lines studied. Finally, 2OHOA induced autophagy in 1321N1, SF-767 and U118 cells,
with the appearance of autophagic vesicles and the up-regulation of LC3BI, LC3BII
and ATG7 in 1321N1 cells, increases of LC3BI, LC3BII and ATG5 in SF-767 cells and
up-regulation of LC3BI and LC3BII in U118 cells. Importantly, 2OHOA failed to
induce such changes in non-tumor MRC-5 cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The present results demonstrate that 2OHOA induces ER
stress/UPR and autophagy in human glioma (1321N1, SF-767 and U118 cell lines) but
not normal (MRC-5) cells, unraveling the molecular bases underlying the efficacy 
and lack of toxicity of this compound.

PMCID: PMC3484997
PMID: 23133576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Lab Invest. 2013 Jan;93(1):112-22. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.131. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

The unfolded protein response is activated in Helicobacter-induced gastric
carcinogenesis in a non-cell autonomous manner.

Baird M(1), Woon Ang P, Clark I, Bishop D, Oshima M, Cook MC, Hemmings C,
Takeishi S, Worthley D, Boussioutas A, Wang TC, Taupin D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research, The Canberra Hospital, Garran, ACT, Australia.

Mucous metaplasia (MM) is an aberrant secretory phenotype that arises during
Helicobacter-induced gastric carcinogenesis. HSPA5, a key modulator of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) activated by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is
overexpressed in gastric cancer (GC). We studied activation of the UPR in MM and 
GC in humans and mice. We assessed RNA and protein levels of ER stress markers
(HSPA5, XBP1, and CHOP) in human GC, and correlated with Helicobacter pylori (H. 
pylori) status, then surveyed HSPA5 in normal gastric mucosa and gastric
pre-neoplasia including gastritis and intestinal metaplasia (IM). The role of H. 
pylori infection in the UPR was assessed by co-culture with AGS GC cells. ER
stress markers in metaplasia and dysplasia from transgenic K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice and
C57Bl/6 mice with chronic Helicobacter felis (H. felis) infection were compared. 
HSPA5 was overexpressed in 24/73 (33%) of human GC. Induction of HSPA5 and XBP1
splicing was associated with H. pylori-associated GC (P=0.007 for XBP1 splicing).
HSPA5 was overexpressed in MM but not gastritis in patients with H. pylori
infection. Stimulation of AGS cells with CagA-positive H. pylori suppressed HSPA5
expression and XBP1 splicing. In the normal gastric mucosa of human and mouse,
HSPA5 was constitutively expressed in MIST1-positive chief cells. Increased Hspa5
and Chop expression were found in dysplasia of C57Bl/6 mice with chronic H. felis
infection but was absent in spontaneous gastric dysplasia in K19-Wnt1/C2mE mice
with concomitant loss of Mist1 expression, similar to that observed in H.
pylori-associated human GC. Induction of the UPR in the milieu of
Helicobacter-induced chronic inflammation and MM may promote neoplastic
transformation of Helicobacter-infected gastric mucosa.

PMID: 23108377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nat Chem Biol. 2012 Dec;8(12):982-9. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1094. Epub 2012 Oct
21.

Divergent allosteric control of the IRE1a endoribonuclease using kinase
inhibitors.

Wang L(1), Perera BG, Hari SB, Bhhatarai B, Backes BJ, Seeliger MA, Schürer SC,
Oakes SA, Papa FR, Maly DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA.

Under endoplasmic reticulum stress, unfolded protein accumulation leads to
activation of the endoplasmic reticulum transmembrane kinase/endoRNase (RNase)
IRE1a. IRE1a oligomerizes, autophosphorylates and initiates splicing of XBP1
mRNA, thus triggering the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here we show that
IRE1a's kinase-controlled RNase can be regulated in two distinct modes with
kinase inhibitors: one class of ligands occupies IRE1a's kinase ATP-binding site 
to activate RNase-mediated XBP1 mRNA splicing even without upstream endoplasmic
reticulum stress, whereas a second class can inhibit the RNase through the same
ATP-binding site, even under endoplasmic reticulum stress. Thus, alternative
kinase conformations stabilized by distinct classes of ATP-competitive inhibitors
can cause allosteric switching of IRE1a's RNase--either on or off. As
dysregulation of the UPR has been implicated in a variety of cell degenerative
and neoplastic disorders, small-molecule control over IRE1a should advance
efforts to understand the UPR's role in pathophysiology and to develop drugs for 
endoplasmic reticulum stress-related diseases.

PMCID: PMC3508346
PMID: 23086298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Elife. 2012 Oct 15;1:e00048. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00048.

The unfolded protein response in fission yeast modulates stability of select
mRNAs to maintain protein homeostasis.

Kimmig P(1), Diaz M, Zheng J, Williams CC, Lang A, Aragón T, Li H, Walter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California, San
Francisco , San Francisco , United States.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) monitors the protein folding capacity of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In all organisms analyzed to date, the UPR drives
transcriptional programs that allow cells to cope with ER stress. The
non-conventional splicing of Hac1 (yeasts) and XBP1 (metazoans) mRNA, encoding
orthologous UPR transcription activators, is conserved and dependent on Ire1, an 
ER membrane-resident kinase/endoribonuclease. We found that the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe lacks both a Hac1/XBP1 ortholog and a
UPR-dependent-transcriptional-program. Instead, Ire1 initiates the selective
decay of a subset of ER-localized-mRNAs that is required to survive ER stress. We
identified Bip1 mRNA, encoding a major ER-chaperone, as the sole mRNA cleaved
upon Ire1 activation that escapes decay. Instead, truncation of its 3' UTR,
including loss of its polyA tail, stabilized Bip1 mRNA, resulting in increased
Bip1 translation. Thus, S. pombe uses a universally conserved stress-sensing
machinery in novel ways to maintain homeostasis in the
ER.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00048.001.

PMCID: PMC3470409
PMID: 23066505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Science. 2012 Nov 9;338(6108):818-22. doi: 10.1126/science.1226191. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

IRE1a cleaves select microRNAs during ER stress to derepress translation of
proapoptotic Caspase-2.

Upton JP(1), Wang L, Han D, Wang ES, Huskey NE, Lim L, Truitt M, McManus MT,
Ruggero D, Goga A, Papa FR, Oakes SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Nov 13;23(5):921-3.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the primary organelle for folding and
maturation of secretory and transmembrane proteins. Inability to meet
protein-folding demand leads to "ER stress," and activates IRE1a, an ER
transmembrane kinase-endoribonuclease (RNase). IRE1a promotes adaptation through 
splicing Xbp1 mRNA or apoptosis through incompletely understood mechanisms. Here,
we found that sustained IRE1a RNase activation caused rapid decay of select
microRNAs (miRs -17, -34a, -96, and -125b) that normally repress translation of
Caspase-2 mRNA, and thus sharply elevates protein levels of this initiator
protease of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. In cell-free systems,
recombinant IRE1a endonucleolytically cleaved microRNA precursors at sites
distinct from DICER. Thus, IRE1a regulates translation of a proapoptotic protein 
through terminating microRNA biogenesis, and noncoding RNAs are part of the ER
stress response.

PMCID: PMC3742121
PMID: 23042294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Metab. 2012 Oct 3;16(4):487-99. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.09.004.

Silencing of lipid metabolism genes through IRE1a-mediated mRNA decay lowers
plasma lipids in mice.

So JS(1), Hur KY, Tarrio M, Ruda V, Frank-Kamenetsky M, Fitzgerald K, Koteliansky
V, Lichtman AH, Iwawaki T, Glimcher LH, Lee AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2012 Oct 3;16(4):407-8.

XBP1 is a key regulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), which is involved
in a wide range of physiological and pathological processes. XBP1 ablation in
liver causes profound hypolipidemia in mice, highlighting its critical role in
lipid metabolism. XBP1 deficiency triggers feedback activation of its upstream
enzyme IRE1a, instigating regulated IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD) of cytosolic
mRNAs. Here, we identify RIDD as a crucial control mechanism of lipid
homeostasis. Suppression of RIDD by RNA interference or genetic ablation of IRE1a
reversed hypolipidemia in XBP1-deficient mice. Comprehensive microarray analysis 
of XBP1 and/or IRE1a-deficient liver identified genes involved in lipogenesis and
lipoprotein metabolism as RIDD substrates, which might contribute to the
suppression of plasma lipid levels by activated IRE1a. Ablation of XBP1
ameliorated hepatosteatosis, liver damage, and hypercholesterolemia in
dyslipidemic animal models, suggesting that direct targeting of either IRE1a or
XBP1 might be a feasible strategy to treat dyslipidemias.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3475419
PMID: 23040070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Metab. 2012 Oct 3;16(4):473-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.09.003.

IRE1a-XBP1s induces PDI expression to increase MTP activity for hepatic VLDL
assembly and lipid homeostasis.

Wang S(1), Chen Z, Lam V, Han J, Hassler J, Finck BN, Davidson NO, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, Aging, and Stem Cell Research, Sanford-Burnham
Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2012 Oct 3;16(4):407-8.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signaling pathway required to maintain
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis and hepatic lipid metabolism. Here, we
identify an essential role for the inositol-requiring transmembrane
kinase/endoribonuclease 1a (IRE1a)-X box binding protein 1 (XBP1) arm of the UPR 
in regulation of hepatic very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) assembly and
secretion. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of Ire1a reduces lipid partitioning into 
the ER lumen and impairs the assembly of triglyceride (TG)-rich VLDL but does not
affect TG synthesis, de novo lipogenesis, or the synthesis or secretion of
apolipoprotein B (apoB). The defect in VLDL assembly is, at least in part, due to
decreased microsomal triglyceride-transfer protein (MTP) activity resulting from 
reduced protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) expression. Collectively, our findings 
reveal a key role for the IRE1a-XBP1s-PDI axis in linking ER homeostasis with
regulation of VLDL production and hepatic lipid homeostasis that may provide a
therapeutic target for disorders of lipid metabolism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3569089
PMID: 23040069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2012 Oct;237(10):1173-80. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2012.012140.
Epub 2012 Oct 4.

p53 antagonizes the unfolded protein response and inhibits ground glass
hepatocyte development during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Dioufa N(1), Chatzistamou I, Farmaki E, Papavassiliou AG, Kiaris H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Athens Medical School, M.
Asias 75, Athens, Greece.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is triggered during stress of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and facilitates tissue homeostasis. Considering the role of p53
tumor suppressor gene in the interpretation of stress-inducing stimuli, in this
study, we explored whether p53 modulates UPR. We found that p53 ablation resulted
in a profound sensitivity to tunicamycin that was associated with liver
dysfunction, ground glass hepatocyte (GGH) development and nuclear
atypia/dysplasia. Binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP)/glucose-regulated protein 
78 (GRP78) chaperone was readily detected in the cytoplasm of GGHs, confirming ER
expansion. Tunicamycin administration induced BiP/GRP78 and GRP94 expression more
potently in the p53-deficient mice than in controls and elevated
phosphatidylcholine, the major lipid of ER, by a p53-dependent mechanism.
Furthermore, alternative splicing of XBP1, the transcription factor that executes
the UPR, was more efficient in cells which do not express p53. The cytoprotective
effects of p53 were confirmed by cell viability studies, indicating that p53
deficiency conferred sensitivity against tunicamycin. Our findings show that p53 
protects from the hepatotoxic effects of chronic ER stress. Stimulation of p53
activity when intense UPR is undesirable may possess therapeutic implications.

PMID: 23038705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;45(2):438-47. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.09.017. Epub 2012 Sep 29.

The hyperglycemia stimulated myocardial endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
contributes to diabetic cardiomyopathy in the transgenic non-obese type 2
diabetic rats: a differential role of unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling
proteins.

Lakshmanan AP(1), Harima M, Suzuki K, Soetikno V, Nagata M, Nakamura T, Takahashi
T, Sone H, Kawachi H, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Niigata University of Pharmacy and Applied Life Sciences, Niigata City 956-8603, 
Japan.

It has been well demonstrated that excessive blood glucose level could be
detrimental to the myocardial function through the variety of mechanisms, of
which endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) could play an unprecedented role through
the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR). Recently, reports are coming
out with the evidences that UPR signaling proteins are regulated differentially
depend on the experimental conditions and cell types. In addition, ERS has been
proposed to be closely associated with the regulation of lipogenesis. Therefore, 
in this study we tried to find out the expressions of myocardial UPR signaling
proteins as well as proteins involved in lipid and glucose metabolism in
non-obese type 2 diabetic mellitus (DM) condition using Spontaneous Diabetic
Torii (SDT) rat. We have found the significant up-regulation of oxidative,
nitrosative and ERS marker proteins in the myocardium of the SDT rats, in
comparison to its normal (Sprague-Dawley - SD) rats. In addition, the sub-arm of 
UPR signaling proteins, such as p-PERK, p-eIF2a, ATF6, CHOP/GADD153, TRAF2,
apoptotic signaling proteins, such as BAD, cytochrome C, cleaved caspase-7 and
-12, were significantly up-regulated in the SDT rats, in comparison to the SD
rats. Interestingly, there were no significant changes in the phosphorylation of 
IRE-1a, and XBP-1 protein expression. In addition, the proteins involved in lipid
and glucose metabolisms, such as PPARa, PPAR<U+03B3>, CPT1, PGC-1a except GLUT4, and the
proteins involved in insulin signaling, such as p-Akt and p-PI3K were shown
significant attenuation in its expressions in the SDT rats, when compared with
the SD rats. Taken together, it is suggested that the activation of PERK and ATF6
pathway are the major determinant rather than the IRE-1a-XBP1 pathway for the
ERS-mediated metabolic dysfunction, which might eventually leads to diabetic
cardiomyopathy in non-obese type 2 DM.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23032698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Oct;19(10):1018-22. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2376. Epub 2012
Sep 23.

A biphasic pulling force acts on transmembrane helices during translocon-mediated
membrane integration.

Ismail N(1), Hedman R, Schiller N, von Heijne G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomembrane Research, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Oct;19(10):975-7.

Membrane proteins destined for insertion into the inner membrane of bacteria or
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane in eukaryotic cells are synthesized by
ribosomes bound to the bacterial SecYEG or the homologous eukaryotic Sec61
translocon. During co-translational membrane integration, transmembrane a-helical
segments in the nascent chain exit the translocon through a lateral gate that
opens toward the surrounding membrane, but the mechanism of lateral exit is not
well understood. In particular, little is known about how a transmembrane helix
behaves when entering and exiting the translocon. Using translation-arrest
peptides from bacterial SecM proteins and from the mammalian Xbp1 protein as
force sensors, we show that substantial force is exerted on a transmembrane helix
at two distinct points during its transit through the translocon channel,
providing direct insight into the dynamics of membrane integration.

PMCID: PMC3553220
PMID: 23001004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Neurochem. 2012 Nov;123(3):406-16. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12014.

XBP1 depletion precedes ubiquitin aggregation and Golgi fragmentation in TDP-43
transgenic rats.

Tong J(1), Huang C, Bi F, Wu Q, Huang B, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy & Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Protein inclusion is a prominent feature of neurodegenerative diseases including 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) that is characterized by the presence of
ubiquitinated TDP-43 inclusion. Presence of protein inclusions indicates an
interruption to protein degradation machinery or the overload of misfolded
proteins. In response to the increase in misfolded proteins, cells usually
initiate a mechanism called unfolded protein response (UPR) to reduce misfolded
proteins in the lumen of endoplasmic reticules. Here, we examined the effects of 
mutant TDP-43 on the UPR in transgenic rats that express mutant human TDP-43
restrictedly in the neurons of the forebrain. Over-expression of mutant TDP-43 in
rats caused prominent aggregation of ubiquitin and remarkable fragmentation of
Golgi complexes prior to neuronal loss. While ubiquitin aggregates and Golgi
fragments were accumulating, neurons expressing mutant TDP-43 failed to
up-regulate chaperones residing in the endoplasmic reticules and failed to
initiate the UPR. Prior to ubiquitin aggregation and Golgi fragmentation, neurons
were depleted of X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), a key player of UPR machinery.
Although it remains to determine how mutation of TDP-43 leads to the failure of
the UPR, our data demonstrate that failure of the UPR is implicated in TDP-43
pathogenesis.

© 2012 The Authors Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3534861
PMID: 22970712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Endocrinology. 2012 Nov;153(11):5275-84. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1418. Epub 2012 Sep
11.

Palmitate causes endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in human mesenchymal 
stem cells: prevention by AMPK activator.

Lu J(1), Wang Q, Huang L, Dong H, Lin L, Lin N, Zheng F, Tan J.

Author information: 
(1)FuJian Provincial Key Laboratory of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General
Hospital, Xiamen University, China. junlu.heather@yahoo.com

Elevated circulating saturated fatty acids concentration is commonly associated
with poorly controlled diabetes. The highly prevalent free fatty acid palmitate
could induce apoptosis in various cell types, but little is known about its
effects on human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). Here, we report that prolonged
exposure to palmitate induces human bone marrow-derived MSC (hBM-MSC) and human
umbilical cord-derived MSC apoptosis. We investigated the role of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, which is known to promote cell apoptosis. Palmitate
activated XBP1 splicing, elF2a (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2a)
phosphorylation, and CHOP, ATF4, BiP, and GRP94 transcription in hBM-MSCs. ERK1/2
and p38 MAPK phosphorylation were also induced by palmitate in hBM-MSCs. A
selective p38 inhibitor inhibited palmitate activation of the ER stress, whereas 
the ERK1/2 inhibitors had no effect. The AMP-activated protein kinase activator
aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide blocked palmitate-induced ER stress and
apoptosis. These findings suggest that palmitate induces ER stress and ERK1/2 and
p38 activation in hBM-MSCs, and AMP-activated protein kinase activator prevents
the deleterious effects of palmitate by inhibiting ER stress and apoptosis.

PMID: 22968644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Chem Biol Interact. 2012 Oct 25;200(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2012.08.017. Epub
2012 Sep 1.

Age-related cataracts: homocysteine coupled endoplasmic reticulum stress and
suppression of Nrf2-dependent antioxidant protection.

Elanchezhian R(1), Palsamy P, Madson CJ, Lynch DW, Shinohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

To determine whether high levels of homocysteine (Hcy) induce endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress with suppression of the nuclear factor-erythroid-2-related 
factor 2 (Nrf2)-dependent antioxidant protection in lens epithelial cells (LECs).
ER stress was acutely induced by exposure of LECs to 100 µM Hcy without FCS and
also by exposure to 5 mM Hcy with 10% FCS. After exposure to Hcy, significant
changes were found in P-PERK, P-eIF2a, XBP1, Nrf2, and Keap1 within 24 h. The
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was increased after Hcy exposure. The
downstream enzymes of Nrf2 like, catalase, and glutathione reductase, were
significantly decreased. These results suggested that the Hcy-induced ER stress
suppressed the Nrf2-dependent antioxidant protection and simultaneously generated
ROS which resulted in further oxidation and death of LECs. The loss of Nrf2 is
mainly due to proteosomal degradation and m-calpain activation by the increased
levels of cytoplasmic Ca(++). The caspases also play a role in the degradation of
Nrf2. Our findings demonstrated that high levels of Hcy induce ER stress, chronic
UPR, alter the levels of UPR specific proteins, increase the production of ROS,
degrade Nrf2 and block the Nrf2-dependent antioxidant defense protection in LECs.
Thus, the upregulation of ROS might exceed the Nrf2 dependent antioxidant defense
protection in the LECs and result in the highly oxidized lenses and resulted in
ARCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586200
PMID: 22964297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Recent Pat Anticancer Drug Discov. 2013 May;8(2):191-9.

Involvement of endoplasmic reticulum stress in isoliquiritigenin-induced SKOV-3
cell apoptosis.

Yuan X(1), Yu B, Wang Y, Jiang J, Liu L, Zhao H, Qi W, Zheng Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shihezi University, 832002, Shihezi, P.R. China.

Isoliquiritigenin (ISL), a licorice chalconoid, is a bioactive agent with
chemopreventive potential that has been patented for tumor treatment in China.
This study investigated the mechanisms of ISL-induced apoptosis in ovarian
carcinoma SKOV-3 cells. Cell viability was evaluated using a
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide assay. The
apoptotic rate was determined via flow cytometry using an annexin V-FITC
apoptosis detection kit. The intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels
were assessed using a 2,7-dichlorofluorescein probe assay. Malondialdehyde (MDA) 
formation was determined via thiobarbituric acid reactive substance test. The
expressions of growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene (GADD153/CHOP), 78 kDa
glucose-regulated protein (GRP 78), a-subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2
(eIF2a) phosphorylation, activating transcription factor 6a (ATF6a), and
unspliced form of X-box binding protein1 (XBP1U) were analyzed via Western blot. 
Caspase-3 and caspase-12 activities were assessed using a fluorometric kit.
Findings indicate that ISL significantly inhibits SKOV-3 cell proliferation,
increases intracellular ROS levels, and causes SKOV-3 cell apoptosis. Moreover,
ISL-exposed SKOV-3 cells trigger endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, as indicated 
by the enhancement of ER stress-related molecules p-eIF2a, GADD153/CHOP, GRP78,
XBP1 expression, and cleavage of ATF6a. However, caspase-12 inhibitor (Z-ATAD)
effectively and partially prevents ROS and MDA formation and inhibits ISL-induced
SKOV-3 cell apoptosis. ISL induces apoptosis via ER stress-triggered signaling
pathways in SKOV-3 cells. ER stress-induced cancer cell apoptosis has been
discussed in some patents.

PMID: 22963151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):972-80. doi: 10.1038/ni.2420. Epub 2012 Sep 9.

A multiply redundant genetic switch 'locks in' the transcriptional signature of
regulatory T cells.

Fu W(1), Ergun A, Lu T, Hill JA, Haxhinasto S, Fassett MS, Gazit R, Adoro S,
Glimcher L, Chan S, Kastner P, Rossi D, Collins JJ, Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Oct;13(10):943-5.

The transcription factor Foxp3 participates dominantly in the specification and
function of Foxp3(+)CD4(+) regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells) but is neither
strictly necessary nor sufficient to determine the characteristic T(reg) cell
signature. Here we used computational network inference and experimental testing 
to assess the contribution of other transcription factors to this. Enforced
expression of Helios or Xbp1 elicited distinct signatures, but Eos, IRF4, Satb1, 
Lef1 and GATA-1 elicited exactly the same outcome, acting in synergy with Foxp3
to activate expression of most of the T(reg) cell signature, including key
transcription factors, and enhancing occupancy by Foxp3 at its genomic targets.
Conversely, the T(reg) cell signature was robust after inactivation of any single
cofactor. A redundant genetic switch thus 'locked in' the T(reg) cell phenotype, 
a model that would account for several aspects of T(reg) cell physiology,
differentiation and stability.

PMCID: PMC3698954
PMID: 22961053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;44(12):2135-43. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.08.025. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Dihydroceramide delays cell cycle G1/S transition via activation of ER stress and
induction of autophagy.

Gagliostro V(1), Casas J, Caretti A, Abad JL, Tagliavacca L, Ghidoni R, Fabrias
G, Signorelli P.

Author information: 
(1)Lab. Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, San Paolo Hospital, Medical School,
University of Milan, Via A. di Rudinì 8, 20142 Milan, Italy.

Dihydroceramides, the precursors of ceramides in the de novo sphingolipid
synthesis, have been recently implicated in active signalling. We previously
demonstrated that dihydroceramide accumulation, in response to treatment with the
dihydroceramide desaturase inhibitor XM462, induced autophagy with no sign of
cell death in the gastric carcinoma HCG27 cell line. Here we show that XM462
treatment induces a transient early increase in dihydroceramides that are
successively metabolized into other sphingolipids. Dihydroceramides accumulation 
is associated with cyclin D1 expression modulation, delayed G1/S transition of
cell cycle and increased autophagy. Moreover, XM462 treatment induces ER stress
via the activation of the translation inhibitor eIF2a and the pro-survival
transcriptional factor Xbp1. Exogenous addition of a short chain dihydroceramide 
analog reproduces the effects of endogenous accumulation of dihydroceramides,
causing cell cycle delay of the G1/S transition, autophagy enhancement, eIF2a
activation and Xbp1 splicing. Blocking autophagy with 3-methyladenine abrogates
the effect of XM462 on cell cycle and reduces cell survival to XM462 treatment.
Furthermore, the XM462-induced survival response is able to reduce etoposide
toxicity in HCG27 and HCT116 cancer cells. Our data suggest a role of
dihydroceramide in regulating cell proliferation and survival.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncol Rep. 2012 Nov;28(5):1851-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1977. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Sulforaphane synergistically enhances the cytotoxicity of arsenic trioxide in
multiple myeloma cells via stress-mediated pathways.

Doudican NA(1), Wen SY, Mazumder A, Orlow SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, NY 10016 , USA.

Persistent paraprotein production in plasma cells necessitates a highly developed
rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that is unusually susceptible to perturbations
in protein synthesis. This biology is believed to account for the exquisite
sensitivity of multiple myeloma (MM) to the proteasomal inhibitor bortezomib
(BTZ). Despite remarkable response rates to BTZ in MM, BTZ carries the potential 
for serious side-effects and development of resistance. We, therefore, sought to 
identify therapeutic combinations that effectively disrupt proteostasis in order 
to provide new potential treatments for MM. We found that sulforaphane, a dietary
isothiocyanate found in cruciferous vegetables, inhibits TNFa-induced I<U+03BA>ß
proteasomal degradation in a manner similar to BTZ. Like BTZ, sulforaphane
synergistically enhances the cytotoxicity of arsenic trioxide (ATO), an agent
with clinical activity in MM. ATO and sulforaphane co-treatment augmented
apoptotic induction as demonstrated by cleavage of caspase-3, -4 and PARP. The
enhanced apoptotic response was dependent upon production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) as demonstrated by glutathione depletion and partial inhibition of 
the apoptotic cascade after pretreatment with the radical scavenger
N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC). Combination treatment resulted in enhanced ER stress
signaling and activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), indicative of
perturbation of proteostasis. Specifically, combination treatment caused elevated
expression of the molecular chaperone HSP90 (heat shock protein 90) along with
increased PERK (protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase) and eIF2a
phosphorylation and XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1) splicing, key indicators of
UPR activation. Moreover, increased splicing of XBP1 was apparent upon
combination treatment compared to treatment with either agent alone. Sulforaphane
in combination with ATO effectively disrupts protein homeostasis through ROS
generation and induction of ER stress to culminate in inhibition of protein
secretion and apoptotic induction in MM. Our results suggest that sulforaphane
deserves further investigation in combination with ATO in the treatment of MM.

PMCID: PMC3981004
PMID: 22922937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):34946-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.391532. Epub
2012 Aug 22.

Biochemical and structural insights into xylan utilization by the thermophilic
bacterium Caldanaerobius polysaccharolyticus.

Han Y(1), Agarwal V, Dodd D, Kim J, Bae B, Mackie RI, Nair SK, Cann IK.

Author information: 
(1)Energy Biosciences Institute, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, 
USA.

Hemicellulose is the next most abundant plant cell wall component after
cellulose. The abundance of hemicellulose such as xylan suggests that their
hydrolysis and conversion to biofuels can improve the economics of bioenergy
production. In an effort to understand xylan hydrolysis at high temperatures, we 
sequenced the genome of the thermophilic bacterium Caldanaerobius
polysaccharolyticus. Analysis of the partial genome sequence revealed a gene
cluster that contained both hydrolytic enzymes and also enzymes key to the
pentose-phosphate pathway. The hydrolytic enzymes in the gene cluster were
demonstrated to convert products from a large endoxylanase (Xyn10A) predicted to 
anchor to the surface of the bacterium. We further use structural and
calorimetric studies to demonstrate that the end products of Xyn10A hydrolysis of
xylan are recognized and bound by XBP1, a putative solute-binding protein, likely
for transport into the cell. The XBP1 protein showed preference for
xylo-oligosaccharides as follows: xylotriose > xylobiose > xylotetraose. To
elucidate the structural basis for the oligosaccharide preference, we solved the 
co-crystal structure of XBP1 complexed with xylotriose to a 1.8-Å resolution.
Analysis of the biochemical data in the context of the co-crystal structure
reveals the molecular underpinnings of oligosaccharide length specificity.

PMCID: PMC3471757
PMID: 22918832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Jan;6(1):146-59. doi: 10.1242/dmm.009852. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Glafenine-induced intestinal injury in zebrafish is ameliorated by µ-opioid
signaling via enhancement of Atf6-dependent cellular stress responses.

Goldsmith JR(1), Cocchiaro JL, Rawls JF, Jobin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA.

Beside their analgesic properties, opiates exert beneficial effects on the
intestinal wound healing response. In this study, we investigated the role of
µ-opioid receptor (MOR) signaling on the unfolded protein response (UPR) using a 
novel zebrafish model of NSAID-induced intestinal injury. The NSAID glafenine was
administered to zebrafish larvae at 5 days post-fertilization (dpf) for up to 24 
hours in the presence or absence of the MOR-specific agonist DALDA. By analysis
with histology, transmission electron microscopy and vital dye staining,
glafenine-treated zebrafish showed evidence of endoplasmic reticulum and
mitochondrial stress, with disrupted intestinal architecture and halted cell
stress responses, alongside accumulation of apoptotic intestinal epithelial cells
in the lumen. Although the early UPR marker BiP was induced with
glafenine-induced injury, downstream atf6 and s-xbp1 expression were
paradoxically not increased, explaining the halted cell stress responses. The
µ-opioid agonist DALDA protected against glafenine-induced injury through
induction of atf6-dependent UPR. Our findings show that DALDA prevents
glafenine-induced epithelial damage through induction of effective UPR.

PMCID: PMC3529347
PMID: 22917923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Diabetologia. 2012 Nov;55(11):2999-3009. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2657-3. Epub
2012 Jul 28.

Cross-talk between the unfolded protein response and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signalling
pathways regulates cytokine-mediated beta cell death in MIN6 cells and isolated
mouse islets.

Chan JY(1), Biden TJ, Laybutt DR.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria St, Darlinghurst, NSW 2010, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pancreatic beta cell destruction in type 1 diabetes may be
mediated by cytokines such as IL-1ß, IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B) signalling are activated by cytokines, but
their significance in beta cells remains unclear. Here, we investigated the role 
of cytokine-induced ER stress and NF<U+03BA>B signalling in beta cell destruction.
METHODS: Isolated mouse islets and MIN6 beta cells were incubated with IL-1ß,
IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a. The chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA) was used to
inhibit ER stress. Protein production and gene expression were assessed by
western blot and real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We found in beta cells that inhibition of cytokine-induced ER stress
with PBA unexpectedly potentiated cell death and NF<U+03BA>B-regulated gene expression. 
These responses were dependent on NF<U+03BA>B activation and were associated with a
prolonged decrease in the inhibitor of <U+03BA>B-a (I<U+03BA>Ba) protein, resulting from
increased I<U+03BA>Ba protein degradation. Cytokine-mediated NF<U+03BA>B-regulated gene
expression was also potentiated after pre-induction of ER stress with
thapsigargin, but not tunicamycin. Both PBA and thapsigargin treatments led to
preferential upregulation of ER degradation genes over ER-resident chaperones as 
part of the adaptive unfolded protein response (UPR). In contrast, tunicamycin
activated a balanced adaptive UPR in association with the maintenance of Xbp1
splicing.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data suggest a novel mechanism by which
cytokine-mediated ER stress interacts with NF<U+03BA>B signalling in beta cells, by
regulating I<U+03BA>Ba degradation. The cross-talk between the UPR and NF<U+03BA>B signalling
pathways may be important in the regulation of cytokine-mediated beta cell death.

PMID: 22893028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042694. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

ADAM10 regulates transcription factor expression required for plasma cell
function.

Chaimowitz NS(1), Kang DJ, Dean LM, Conrad DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia, United States of America.

A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) is a key regulator of cellular
processes by shedding extracellular domains of transmembrane proteins. We have
previously demonstrated that deletion of B cell expressed ADAM10 results in
changes in lymphoid tissue architecture and impaired germinal center (GC)
formation. In this study, mice were generated in which ADAM10 is deleted in B
cells following class switch recombination (ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice).
Despite normal GC formation, antibody responses were impaired in
ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice, implicating ADAM10 in post-GC and extrafollicular 
B cell terminal differentiation. Surprisingly, plasma cell (PC) numbers were
normal in ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice when compared to controls. However, PCs
isolated from ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice exhibited decreased expression of
transcription factors important for PC function: Prdm1, Xbp1 and Irf4. Bcl6 is a 
GC transcriptional repressor that inhibits the PC transcriptional program and
thus must be downregulated for PC differentiation to occur. Bcl6 expression was
increased in PCs isolated from ADAM10(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)IgG1-cre(+/-) mice at both the mRNA and
protein level. These results demonstrate that ADAM10 is required for proper
transcription factor expression in PCs and thus, for normal PC function.

PMCID: PMC3411801
PMID: 22880085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Autophagy. 2012 Nov;8(11):1557-76. doi: 10.4161/auto.21315. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Depletion of L-arginine induces autophagy as a cytoprotective response to
endoplasmic reticulum stress in human T lymphocytes.

García-Navas R(1), Munder M, Mollinedo F.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Centro de Investigación 
del Cáncer, CSIC-Universidad de Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, Salamanca,
Spain.

L-arginine (L-Arg) deficiency results in decreased T-cell proliferation and
impaired T-cell function. Here we have found that L-Arg depletion inhibited
expression of different membrane antigens, including CD247 (CD3<U+03B6>), and led to an 
ER stress response, as well as cell cycle arrest at G(0)/G(1) in both human
Jurkat and peripheral blood mitogen-activated T cells, without undergoing
apoptosis. By genetic and biochemical approaches, we found that L-Arg depletion
also induced autophagy. Deprivation of L-Arg induced EIF2S1 (eIF2a), MAPK8 (JNK),
BCL2 (Bcl-2) phosphorylation, and displacement of BECN1 (Beclin 1) binding to
BCL2, leading to autophagosome formation. Silencing of ERN1 (IRE1a) prevented the
induction of autophagy as well as MAPK8 activation, BCL2 phosphorylation and XBP1
splicing, whereas led T lymphocytes to apoptosis under L-Arg starvation,
suggesting that the ERN1-MAPK8 pathway plays a major role in the activation of
autophagy following L-Arg depletion. Autophagy was required for survival of T
lymphocytes in the absence of L-Arg, and resulted in a reversible process.
Replenishment of L-Arg made T lymphocytes to regain the normal cell cycle profile
and proliferate, whereas autophagy was inhibited. Inhibition of autophagy by
ERN1, BECN1 and ATG7 silencing, or by pharmacological inhibitors, promoted cell
death of T lymphocytes incubated in the absence of L-Arg. Our data indicate for
the first time that depletion of L-Arg in T lymphocytes leads to a reversible
response that preserves T lymphocytes through ER stress and autophagy, while
remaining arrested at G(0)/G(1). Our data also show that the L-Arg
depletion-induced ER stress response could lead to apoptosis when autophagy is
blocked.

PMCID: PMC3494587
PMID: 22874569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34500-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385922. Epub 2012
Aug 3.

XBP1S associates with RUNX2 and regulates chondrocyte hypertrophy.

Liu Y(1), Zhou J, Zhao W, Li X, Jiang R, Liu C, Guo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Core Facility of Development Biology,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 24;290(17):10643.

BMP2 (bone morphogenetic protein 2) is known to activate unfolded protein
response signaling molecules, including XBP1S and ATF6. However, the influence on
XBP1S and ATF6 in BMP2-induced chondrocyte differentiation has not yet been
elucidated. In this study, we demonstrate that BMP2 mediates mild endoplasmic
reticulum stress-activated ATF6 and directly regulates XBP1S splicing in the
course of chondrogenesis. XBP1S is differentially expressed during
BMP2-stimulated chondrocyte differentiation and exhibits prominent expression in 
growth plate chondrocytes. This expression is probably due to the activation of
the XBP1 gene by ATF6 and splicing by IRE1a. ATF6 directly binds to the
5'-flanking regulatory region of the XBP1 gene at its consensus binding elements.
Overexpression of XBP1S accelerates chondrocyte hypertrophy, as revealed by
enhanced expression of type II collagen, type X collagen, and RUNX2; however,
knockdown of XBP1S via the RNAi approach abolishes hypertrophic chondrocyte
differentiation. In addition, XBP1S associates with RUNX2 and enhances
RUNX2-induced chondrocyte hypertrophy. Altered expression of XBP1S in chondrocyte
hypertrophy was accompanied by altered levels of IHH (Indian hedgehog) and PTHrP 
(parathyroid hormone-related peptide). Collectively, XBP1S may be a novel
regulator of hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation by 1) acting as a cofactor 
of RUNX2 and 2) affecting IHH/PTHrP signaling.

PMCID: PMC3464558
PMID: 22865880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Blood Cancer J. 2012 Jul;2(7):e79. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2012.26. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Identification of Toyocamycin, an agent cytotoxic for multiple myeloma cells, as 
a potent inhibitor of ER stress-induced XBP1 mRNA splicing.

Ri M, Tashiro E, Oikawa D, Shinjo S, Tokuda M, Yokouchi Y, Narita T, Masaki A,
Ito A, Ding J, Kusumoto S, Ishida T, Komatsu H, Shiotsu Y, Ueda R, Iwawaki T,
Imoto M, Iida S.

The IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, a key component of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress 
response, is considered to be a critical regulator for survival of multiple
myeloma (MM) cells. Therefore, the availability of small-molecule inhibitors
targeting this pathway would offer a new chemotherapeutic strategy for MM. Here, 
we screened small-molecule inhibitors of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation, and
identified toyocamycin from a culture broth of an Actinomycete strain.
Toyocamycin was shown to suppress thapsigargin-, tunicamycin- and
2-deoxyglucose-induced XBP1 mRNA splicing in HeLa cells without affecting
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)
activation. Furthermore, although toyocamycin was unable to inhibit IRE1a
phosphorylation, it prevented IRE1a-induced XBP1 mRNA cleavage in vitro. Thus,
toyocamycin is an inhibitor of IRE1a-induced XBP1 mRNA cleavage. Toyocamycin
inhibited not only ER stress-induced but also constitutive activation of XBP1
expression in MM lines as well as primary samples from patients. It showed
synergistic effects with bortezomib, and induced apoptosis of MM cells including 
bortezomib-resistant cells at nanomolar levels in a dose-dependent manner. It
also inhibited growth of xenografts in an in vivo model of human MM. Taken
together, our results suggest toyocamycin as a lead compound for developing
anti-MM therapy and XBP1 as an appropriate molecular target for anti-MM therapy.

PMCID: PMC3408640
PMID: 22852048  [PubMed]


22. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jul 30;13:350. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-350.

Genome-wide expression analysis upon constitutive activation of the HacA bZIP
transcription factor in Aspergillus niger reveals a coordinated cellular response
to counteract ER stress.

Carvalho ND(1), Jørgensen TR, Arentshorst M, Nitsche BM, van den Hondel CA,
Archer DB, Ram AF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University, Molecular Microbiology and
Biotechnology, BE Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: HacA/Xbp1 is a conserved bZIP transcription factor in eukaryotic
cells which regulates gene expression in response to various forms of secretion
stress and as part of secretory cell differentiation. In the present study, we
replaced the endogenous hacA gene of an Aspergillus niger strain with a gene
encoding a constitutively active form of the HacA transcription factor (HacACA). 
The impact of constitutive HacA activity during exponential growth was explored
in bioreactor controlled cultures using transcriptomic analysis to identify
affected genes and processes.
RESULTS: Transcription profiles for the wild-type strain (HacAWT) and the HacACA 
strain were obtained using Affymetrix GeneChip analysis of three replicate batch 
cultures of each strain. In addition to the well known HacA targets such as the
ER resident foldases and chaperones, GO enrichment analysis revealed
up-regulation of genes involved in protein glycosylation, phospholipid
biosynthesis, intracellular protein transport, exocytosis and protein complex
assembly in the HacACA mutant. Biological processes over-represented in the
down-regulated genes include those belonging to central metabolic pathways,
translation and transcription. A remarkable transcriptional response in the
HacACA strain was the down-regulation of the AmyR transcription factor and its
target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the constitutive activation of the HacA
leads to a coordinated regulation of the folding and secretion capacity of the
cell, but with consequences on growth and fungal physiology to reduce secretion
stress.

PMCID: PMC3472299
PMID: 22846479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Jan;18(1):11-23. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0351-5.
Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Gene regulatory network of unfolded protein response genes in endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Takayanagi S(1), Fukuda R, Takeuchi Y, Tsukada S, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashimita, Tama-ku,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, 214-8571, Japan.

In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), secretory and membrane proteins are properly
folded and modified, and the failure of these processes leads to ER stress. At
the same time, unfolded protein response (UPR) genes are activated to maintain
homeostasis. Despite the thorough characterization of the individual gene
regulation of UPR genes to date, further investigation of the mutual regulation
among UPR genes is required to understand the complex mechanism underlying the ER
stress response. In this study, we aimed to reveal a gene regulatory network
formed by UPR genes, including immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein (BiP), 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), C/EBP [CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein]-homologous
protein (CHOP), PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring 
1 (IRE1), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and ATF4. For this purpose,
we focused on promoter-luciferase reporters for BiP, XBP1, and CHOP genes, which 
bear an ER stress response element (ERSE), and p5<U+2009>×<U+2009>ATF6-GL3, which bears an
unfolded protein response element (UPRE). We demonstrated that the luciferase
activities of the BiP and CHOP promoters were upregulated by all the UPR genes,
whereas those of the XBP1 promoter and p5<U+2009>×<U+2009>ATF6-GL3 were upregulated by all the 
UPR genes except for BiP, CHOP, and ATF4 in HeLa cells. Therefore, an ERSE- and
UPRE-centered gene regulatory network of UPR genes could be responsible for the
robustness of the ER stress response. Finally, we revealed that BiP protein was
degraded when cells were treated with DNA-damaging reagents, such as etoposide
and doxorubicin; this finding suggests that the expression level of BiP is
tightly regulated at the post-translational level, rather than at the
transcriptional level, in the presence of DNA damage.

PMCID: PMC3508129
PMID: 22802018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dig Dis. 2012;30(4):341-6. doi: 10.1159/000338121. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and inflammation.

Adolph TE(1), Niederreiter L, Blumberg RS, Kaser A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress due to the presence of misfolded or unfolded
proteins in the ER invokes a fundamental biological response, termed the unfolded
protein response (UPR). The UPR is orchestrated by three main proximal effectors,
of which the IRE1/XBP1 pathway represents the evolutionarily most conserved one. 
Due to its high secretory burden, the intestinal epithelium is highly susceptible
to perturbations in the UPR as has been revealed by functional investigations
such as in mice that lack Xbp1 expression, specifically in the intestinal
epithelial cells. Genetic studies have revealed several ER stress/UPR-associated 
genes, including XBP1, ORMDL3, AGR2 and MUC19 as risk factors for IBD, and
specific functional, rare variants have been described for XBP1. Xbp1(<U+0394>)(IEC)
mice spontaneously develop small intestinal enteritis with crypt abscesses
reminiscent of human IBD, while Agr2(-/-) mice develop granulomatous ileocolitis.
Mechanistic studies into Xbp1(<U+0394>)(IEC) mice revealed a major effect on Paneth
cells associated with alterations in host-microbe interactions in the intestine, 
and the activation of key proinflammatory pathways in the host directly
associated with unresolved ER stress and hypomorphic Xbp1 function. Remarkably,
the intestinal epithelium of IBD patients commonly exhibits evidence of marked ER
stress, which cannot easily be attributed to these genetic risk factors alone and
indicates that the paradigm of ER stress-related inflammation might be both a
primary originator as well as a potent perpetuator of intestinal inflammation in 
IBD.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3423328
PMID: 22796794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 24;287(35):29921-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.363911. Epub
2012 Jul 11.

SLC33A1/AT-1 protein regulates the induction of autophagy downstream of IRE1/XBP1
pathway.

Pehar M(1), Jonas MC, Hare TM, Puglielli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

One of the main functions of the unfolded protein response is to ensure disposal 
of large protein aggregates that accumulate in the lumen of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) whereas avoiding, at least under nonlethal levels of ER stress,
cell death. When tightly controlled, autophagy-dependent ER-associated
degradation (ERAD(II)) allows the cell to recover from the transient accumulation
of protein aggregates; however, when unchecked, it can be detrimental and cause
autophagic cell death/type 2 cell death. Here we show that IRE1/XBP1 controls the
induction of autophagy/ERAD(II) during the unfolded protein response by
activating the ER membrane transporter SLC33A1/AT-1, which ensures continuous
supply of acetyl-CoA into the lumen of the ER. Failure to induce AT-1 leads to
widespread autophagic cell death. Mechanistically, the regulation of the
autophagic process involves N(e)-lysine acetylation of Atg9A.

PMCID: PMC3436137
PMID: 22787145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40144. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040144. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Inhibition of casein kinase 2 modulates XBP1-GRP78 arm of unfolded protein
responses in cultured glial cells.

Hosoi T(1), Korematsu K, Horie N, Suezawa T, Okuma Y, Nomura Y, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Graduate School of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan.
toruh@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Stress signals cause abnormal proteins to accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). Such stress is known as ER stress, which has been suggested to be involved 
in neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, obesity and cancer. ER stress activates 
the unfolded protein response (UPR) to reduce levels of abnormal proteins by
inducing the production of chaperon proteins such as GRP78, and to attenuate
translation through the phosphorylation of eIF2a. However, excessive stress leads
to apoptosis by generating transcription factors such as CHOP. Casein kinase 2
(CK2) is a serine/threonine kinase involved in regulating neoplasia, cell
survival and viral infections. In the present study, we investigated a possible
linkage between CK2 and ER stress using mouse primary cultured glial cells.
4,5,6,7-tetrabromobenzotriazole (TBB), a CK2-specific inhibitor, attenuated ER
stress-induced XBP-1 splicing and subsequent induction of GRP78 expression, but
was ineffective against ER stress-induced eIF2a phosphorylation and CHOP
expression. Similar results were obtained when endogenous CK2 expression was
knocked-down by siRNA. Immunohistochemical analysis suggested that CK2 was
present at the ER. These results indicate CK2 to be linked with UPR and to resist
ER stress by activating the XBP-1-GRP78 arm of UPR.

PMCID: PMC3387139
PMID: 22768244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):876-84. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1545. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Multiple myeloma cells expressing low levels of CD138 have an immature phenotype 
and reduced sensitivity to lenalidomide.

Kawano Y(1), Fujiwara S, Wada N, Izaki M, Yuki H, Okuno Y, Iyama K, Yamasaki H,
Sakai A, Mitsuya H, Hata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kumamoto,
Japan.

CD138 expression is a hallmark of plasma cells and multiple myeloma cells.
However, decreased expression of CD138 is frequently observed in plasma cells of 
myeloma patients, although the clinical significance of this is unclear. To
evaluate the significance of low expression of CD138 in MM, we examined the
phenotypes of MM cells expressing low levels of CD138. Flow cytometric analysis
of primary MM cells revealed a significant decrease in CD138 expression in
patients with relapsed/progressive disease compared with untreated MM patients.
Patients with low levels of CD138 had a worse overall survival compared with
patients with high levels of CD138, in newly diagnosed patients and patients
receiving high-dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem-cell
transplantation. Two MM cell lines, KYMM-1 (CD138- low) and KYMM-2 (CD138- high),
were established from a single MM patient with decreased CD138 expression. High
expression of BCL6 and PAX5, and downregulation of IRF4, PRDM1 and XBP1 was
observed in KYMM-1 compared with KYMM-2 cells, indicative of the immature
phenotype of KYMM-1. KYMM-1 was less sensitive to lenalidomide than KYMM-2, while
no difference in sensitivity to bortezomib was observed. KYMM-2 cells were
further divided in CD138+ and CD138- fractions using anti-CD138-coated magnetic
beads. CD138- cells sorted from the KYMM-2 cell line also showed high BCL6, low
IRF4 expression and decreased sensitivity to lenalidomide compared with CD138+
cells. Our observations suggest that low CD138 expression relates to i) poor
prognosis, ii) immature phenotype and iii) low sensitivity to lenalidomide. The
observed distinct characteristics of CD138 low MM cells, suggest this should be
recognized as a new clinical entity. Establishment of a treatment strategy for MM
cells expressing low levels of CD138 is needed to improve their poor outcome.

PMCID: PMC3582943
PMID: 22766978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1510-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200166. Epub 2012
Jul 2.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response promotes cytotoxic phenotype of CD8aß+
intraepithelial lymphocytes in a mouse model for Crohn's disease-like ileitis.

Chang JS(1), Ocvirk S, Berger E, Kisling S, Binder U, Skerra A, Lee AS, Haller D.

Author information: 
(1)Chair for Biofunctionality, Research Centre for Nutrition and Food Science,
Centre for Diet and Disease, Technical University of Munich, 85350
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein responses (UPR) are implicated in the
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. Cytotoxic CD8aß(+) intraepithelial
lymphocytes (IEL) contribute to the development of Crohn's disease-like ileitis
in TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) mice. In this study, we characterized the role of ER-UPR
mechanisms in contributing to the disease-associated phenotype of cytotoxic IEL
under conditions of chronic inflammation. Inflamed TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) mice exhibited
increased expression of Grp78, ATF6, ATF4, and spliced XBP1 in CD8aß(+) IEL but
not in CD8aa(+) IEL or in lamina propria lymphocytes. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in CD8aß(+) T cells showed selective recruitment of 
ER-UPR transducers to the granzyme B gene promoter. Heterozygous Grp78(-/+) mice 
exhibited an attenuated granzyme B-dependent cytotoxicity of CD8aß(+) T cells
against intestinal epithelial cells, suggesting a critical activity of this
ER-associated chaperone in maintaining a cytotoxic T cell phenotype. Granzyme
B-deficient CD8aß(+) T cells showed a defect in IL-2-mediated proliferation in
Grp78(-/+) mice. Adoptively transferred Grp78(-/+) CD8aß(+) T cells had a
decreased frequency of accumulation in the intestine of RAG2(-/-) recipient mice.
The tissue pathology in TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) × Grp78(-/+) mice was similar to TNF(<U+0394>ARE/+) 
mice, even though the cytotoxic effector functions of CD8aß(+) T cells were
significantly reduced. In conclusion, ER stress-associated UPR mechanisms promote
the development and maintenance of the pathogenic cytotoxic CD8aß(+) IEL
phenotype in the mouse model of Crohn's disease-like ileitis.

PMID: 22753943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;18(17):4850-60. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2776.
Epub 2012 Jul 2.

Myeloma-specific multiple peptides able to generate cytotoxic T lymphocytes: a
potential therapeutic application in multiple myeloma and other plasma cell
disorders.

Bae J(1), Smith R, Daley J, Mimura N, Tai YT, Anderson KC, Munshi NC.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

PURPOSE: The efficacy of peptide vaccines may be enhanced by stimulating immune
cells with multiple peptides derived from distinct tumor-associated antigens. We 
have evaluated the heteroclitic XBP1-US(184-192) (YISPWILAV), heteroclitic
XBP1-SP(367-375) (YLFPQLISV), native CD138(260-268) (GLVGLIFAV), and native
CS1(239-247) (SLFVLGLFL) peptides, which have strong HLA-A2 affinity and
immunogenicity in combination, for their ability to elicit multiple myeloma
antigen-specific responses.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Multipeptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (MP-CTL) were 
generated by the stimulation of CD3(+) T lymphocytes from HLA-A2(+) individuals
with either autologous mature dendritic cells or T2 cells pulsed with a cocktail 
of these four peptides.
RESULTS: The peptide cocktail did not compromise tumor antigen-specific activity 
of CTLs. MP-CTLs displayed increased total, effector memory (CCR7(-)CD45RO(+)),
and activated (CD69(+)) CD3(+)CD8(+) T lymphocytes. In addition, MP-CTL showed
IFN-<U+03B3> production, cell proliferation, and cytotoxicity against HLA-A2(+) multiple
myeloma cells, including cells of HLA-A2(+) patients with multiple myeloma.
Importantly, MP-CTLs showed specific responses in functional assays to each
relevant peptide but not to an irrelevant HLA-A2-specific CMV pp65 (NLVPMVATV)
peptide.
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the potential therapeutic application of
vaccination with a cocktail of HLA-A2-specific peptides to induce CTLs with a
broad spectrum of immune responses against multiple myeloma antigens.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3839582
PMID: 22753586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038616. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

X-box binding protein 1 is essential for the anti-oxidant defense and cell
survival in the retinal pigment epithelium.

Zhong Y(1), Li J, Wang JJ, Chen C, Tran JT, Saadi A, Yu Q, Le YZ, Mandal MN,
Anderson RE, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of
America.

Damage to the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is an early event in the
pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD). X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1) is a key transcription factor that regulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
homeostasis and cell survival. This study aimed to delineate the role of
endogenous XBP1 in the RPE. Our results show that in a rat model of light-induced
retinal degeneration, XBP1 activation was suppressed in the RPE/choroid complex, 
accompanied by decreased anti-oxidant genes and increased oxidative stress.
Knockdown of XBP1 by siRNA resulted in reduced expression of SOD1, SOD2,
catalase, and glutathione synthase and sensitized RPE cells to oxidative damage. 
Using Cre/LoxP system, we generated a mouse line that lacks XBP1 only in RPE
cells. Compared to wildtype littermates, RPE-XBP1 KO mice expressed less SOD1,
SOD2, and catalase in the RPE, and had increased oxidative stress. At age 3
months and older, these mice exhibited apoptosis of RPE cells, decreased number
of cone photoreceptors, shortened photoreceptor outer segment, reduced ONL
thickness, and deficit in retinal function. Electron microscopy showed abnormal
ultrastructure, Bruch's membrane thickening, and disrupted basal membrane
infolding in XBP1-deficient RPE. These results indicate that XBP1 is an important
gene involved in regulation of the anti-oxidant defense in the RPE, and that
impaired activation of XBP1 may contribute to RPE dysfunction and cell death
during retinal degeneration and AMD.

PMCID: PMC3371004
PMID: 22715395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Exp Eye Res. 2012 Sep;102:28-37. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2012.06.004. Epub 2012 Jun
17.

The unfolded protein response is activated in connexin 50 mutant mouse lenses.

Alapure BV(1), Stull JK, Firtina Z, Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, 327 Wolf Hall, The 
Green, Newark, DE 19716, USA.

The unfolded protein response is a set of cell signaling pathways recently
recognized to be activated in the lens during both normal development and
endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by either unfolded proteins or oxidative
damage. While mutations in the gene for connexin 50 are known to cause autosomal 
dominant cataracts, it has not been previously reported whether mutant connexins 
can activate the unfolded protein response in the lens. Mice homozygous for the
S50P or G22R mutation of connexin 50 have reduced amounts of connexin 50 protein 
at the cell membrane, with some intracellular staining consistent with retention 
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Connexin 50 mutants have elevated levels of BiP
expression in both lens epithelial and fiber cells from E15.5 with the most
robust elevation detected in newborns. While this elevation decreases in
magnitude postnatally, BiP expression is still abnormally high in adults,
particularly in the perinuclear endoplasmic reticulum of cell nuclei that are
inappropriately retained in adult homozygous mutant lenses. Xbp1 splicing was
elevated in lenses from both connexin mutants studied, while Atf4 and Atf6 levels
were not majorly affected. Overall, these data suggest that UPR may be a
contributing factor to the phenotype of connexin 50 mutant lenses even though the
relatively modest extent of the response suggests that it is unlikely to be a
major driver of the pathology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3461258
PMID: 22713599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Nov;132(11):2601-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.181. Epub 2012 
Jun 14.

Vitiligo-inducing phenols activate the unfolded protein response in melanocytes
resulting in upregulation of IL6 and IL8.

Toosi S(1), Orlow SJ, Manga P.

Author information: 
(1)The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Nov;132(11):2502-4.

Vitiligo is characterized by depigmented skin patches caused by loss of epidermal
melanocytes. Oxidative stress may have a role in vitiligo onset, while
autoimmunity contributes to disease progression. In this study, we sought to
identify mechanisms that link disease triggers and spreading of lesions. A
hallmark of melanocytes at the periphery of vitiligo lesions is dilation of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We hypothesized that oxidative stress results in
redox disruptions that extend to the ER, causing accumulation of misfolded
peptides, which activates the unfolded protein response (UPR). We used 4-tertiary
butyl phenol and monobenzyl ether of hydroquinone, known triggers of vitiligo. We
show that expression of key UPR components, including the transcription factor
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), is increased following exposure of melanocytes to
phenols. XBP1 activation increases production of immune mediators IL6 and IL8.
Co-treatment with XBP1 inhibitors reduced IL6 and IL8 production induced by
phenols, while overexpression of XBP1 alone increased their expression. Thus,
melanocytes themselves produce cytokines associated with activation of an immune 
response following exposure to chemical triggers of vitiligo. These results
expand our understanding of the mechanisms underlying melanocyte loss in vitiligo
and pathways linking environmental stressors and autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3443495
PMID: 22696056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jun 8;12:225. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-225.

ERLIN2 promotes breast cancer cell survival by modulating endoplasmic reticulum
stress pathways.

Wang G(1), Liu G, Wang X, Sethi S, Ali-Fehmi R, Abrams J, Zheng Z, Zhang K,
Ethier S, Yang ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

BACKGROUND: Amplification of the 8p11-12 region has been found in approximately
15% of human breast cancer and is associated with poor prognosis. Previous
genomic analysis has led us to identify the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lipid
raft-associated 2 (ERLIN2) gene as one of the candidate oncogenes within the
8p11-12 amplicon in human breast cancer, particularly in the luminal subtype.
ERLIN2, an ER membrane protein, has recently been identified as a novel mediator 
of ER-associated degradation. Yet, the biological roles of ERLIN2 and molecular
mechanisms by which ERLIN2 coordinates ER pathways in breast carcinogenesis
remain unclear.
METHODS: We established the MCF10A-ERLIN2 cell line, which stably over expresses 
ERLIN2 in human nontransformed mammary epithelial cells (MCF10A) using the
pLenti6/V5-ERLIN2 construct. ERLIN2 over expressing cells and their respective
parental cell lines were assayed for in vitro transforming phenotypes. Next, we
knocked down the ERLIN2 as well as the ER stress sensor IRE1a activity in the
breast cancer cell lines to characterize the biological roles and molecular basis
of the ERLIN2 in carcinogenesis. Finally, immunohistochemical staining was
performed to detect ERLIN2 expression in normal and cancerous human breast
tissues
RESULTS: We found that amplification of the ERLIN2 gene and over expression of
the ERLIN2 protein occurs in both luminal and Her2 subtypes of breast cancer.
Gain- and loss-of-function approaches demonstrated that ERLIN2 is a novel
oncogenic factor associated with the ER stress response pathway. The IRE1a/XBP1
axis in the ER stress pathway modulated expression of ERLIN2 protein levels in
breast cancer cells. We also showed that over expression of ERLIN2 facilitated
the adaptation of breast epithelial cells to ER stress by supporting cell growth 
and protecting the cells from ER stress-induced cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: ERLIN2 may confer a selective growth advantage for breast cancer
cells by facilitating a cytoprotective response to various cellular stresses
associated with oncogenesis. The information provided here sheds new light on the
mechanism of breast cancer malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3732090
PMID: 22681620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Dec;71(12):2035-43. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-201197.
Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Involvement of X-box binding protein 1 and reactive oxygen species pathways in
the pathogenesis of tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome.

Dickie LJ(1), Aziz AM, Savic S, Lucherini OM, Cantarini L, Geiler J, Wong CH,
Coughlan R, Lane T, Lachmann HJ, Hawkins PN, Robinson PA, Emery P, McGonagle D,
McDermott MF.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Rheumatology, National Institute for Health ResearchLeeds
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
Leeds, West Yorkshire, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate convergence of endoplasmic reticulum stress pathways
and enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, due to intracellular
retention of mutant tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1), as a disease
mechanism in TNFR-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS).
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with TRAPS (n=16) and
healthy controls (HC) (n=22) were studied alongside HEK293T cells expressing wild
type-TNFR1 or TRAPS-associated mutations. Unfolded protein response
(UPR)-associated proteins (protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase,
PERK), phosphorylated-PERK (p-PERK), phosphorylated inositol-requiring enzyme 1a 
(p-IRE1a) and spliced X-box binding protein 1 (sXBP1)) were measured by flow
cytometry. XBP1 splicing and UPR-associated transcript expression were assessed
by reverse transcription PCR/quantitative real-time PCR. ROS levels were measured
using CM-H(2)DCFDA and MitoSOX Red in patients' monocytes or HEK293T cells by
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Mutant TNFR1-expressing HEK293T cells had increased TNFR1 expression
associated with intracellular aggregation. TRAPS patients had increased sXBP1
transcripts (p<0.01) compared with HC. Raised p-PERK protein was seen, indicative
of an UPR, but other UPR-associated transcripts were normal. Increased ROS levels
were observed in TRAPS monocytes compared with HCs (p<0.02); these increased
further upon IL-6 stimulation (p<0.01). Lipopolysaccharide-stimulated peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells of patients with TRAPS, but not HCs, demonstrated
increased sXBP1 levels (p<0.01), which were reduced by antioxidant treatment
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with TRAPS have evidence of increased sXBP1 and PERK
expression but without other signs of classical UPR, and also with high ROS
generation that may contribute to the pro-inflammatory state associated with
TRAPS. The authors propose a non-traditional XBP1 pathway with enhanced sXBP1 as 
a novel disease-contributing mechanism in TRAPS.

PMID: 22679299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038202. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Early dengue virus protein synthesis induces extensive rearrangement of the
endoplasmic reticulum independent of the UPR and SREBP-2 pathway.

Peña J(1), Harris E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of Public Health,
University of California, Berkeley, California, United States of America.
jpena360@yahoo.com

The rearrangement of intracellular membranes has been long reported to be a
common feature in diseased cells. In this study, we used dengue virus (DENV) to
study the role of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and
sterol-regulatory-element-binding-protein-2 (SREBP-2) pathway in the
rearrangement and expansion of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) early after
infection. Using laser scanning confocal and differential interference contrast
microscopy, we demonstrate that rearrangement and expansion of the ER occurs
early after DENV-2 infection. Through the use of mouse embryonic fibroblast cells
deficient in XBP1 and ATF6, we show that ER rearrangement early after DENV
infection is independent of the UPR. We then demonstrate that enlargement of the 
ER is independent of the SREBP-2 activation and upregulation of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-Coenzyme-A reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the 
cholesterol biosynthesis pathway. We further show that this ER rearrangement is
not inhibited by the treatment of DENV-infected cells with the
cholesterol-inhibiting drug lovastatin. Using the transcription inhibitor
actinomycin D and the translation elongation inhibitor cycloheximide, we show
that de novo viral protein synthesis but not host transcription is necessary for 
expansion and rearrangement of the ER. Lastly, we demonstrate that viral
infection induces the reabsorption of lipid droplets into the ER. Together, these
results demonstrate that modulation of intracellular membrane architecture of the
cell early after DENV-2 infection is driven by viral protein expression and does 
not require the induction of the UPR and SREBP-2 pathways. This work paves the
way for further study of virally-induced membrane rearrangements and formation of
cubic membranes.

PMCID: PMC3366941
PMID: 22675522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2012 Aug;333(1):69-76. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2012.02600.x. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Comparative analysis of P2-type remnant prophage loci in Xenorhabdus bovienii and
Xenorhabdus nematophila required for xenorhabdicin production.

Morales-Soto N(1), Gaudriault S, Ogier JC, Thappeta KR, Forst S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI,
USA.

The xnp1 remnant P2-type prophage of Xenorhabdus nematophila produces
xenorhabdicin that is active against closely related species. Xenorhabdicin had
not been characterized previously in other Xenorhabdus species. Here, we show
xenorhabdicin production in six different strains of Xenorhabdus bovienii. The
sequenced genome of X. bovienii SS-2004 was found to possess a highly conserved
remnant P2-type cluster (xbp1). Inactivation of the xbpS1 sheath gene resulted in
loss of bacteriocin activity, indicating that the xbp1 locus was required for
xenorhabdicin production. xbp1 and xnp1 contain a CI-type repressor, a dinI gene 
involved in stabilization of ssDNA-RecA complexes and are inducible with
mitomycin C, suggesting that both loci are regulated by cleavage of the CI
repressor. Both xnp1 and xbp1 lack typical P2-type lysis genes but contain a
predicted endolysin gene (enp) that may be involved in cell lysis. The main tail 
fibers of xnp1 and xbp1 are mosaic structures with divergent C-terminal regions
suggesting they differ in host specificity. Several genes encoding C-terminal
tail fiber fragments are present in the same position in xnp1 and xbp1.
Recombination between the main fiber genes and the C-terminal fragments could
potentially expand the host range specificity of xenorhabdicin in the respective 
strains.

© 2012 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22612724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jun 20;53(7):3792-800. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-9235.

ER stress is involved in T17M rhodopsin-induced retinal degeneration.

Kunte MM(1), Choudhury S, Manheim JF, Shinde VM, Miura M, Chiodo VA, Hauswirth
WW, Gorbatyuk OS, Gorbatyuk MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: The human rhodopsin (Rho) mutation T17M leads to autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (adRP). The goal of our study was to elucidate the role of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in retinal degeneration in hT17M Rho mice and
identify potential candidates for adRP gene therapy.
METHODS: We used transgenic mice expressing the ER stress-activated indicator
(ERAI) and hT17M Rho to evaluate the activation of ER stress responses.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to analyze changes in
the expression of 30 unfolded protein response (UPR)-associated genes at P12, 15,
18, 21, and 25. The cytosolic fraction of hT17M Rho retinal cells was used to
measure the release of cytochrome C and apoptotic inducing factor-1 (AIF1) by
Western blotting. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) analysis was performed for
1-month-old hT17M Rho mice.
RESULTS: hT17M Rho was localized in the outer nuclear layer (ONL) of
T17M(+/-)ERAI(+/-) photoreceptors as well as C57BL/6 retinas injected with
AAV-hT17M Rho-GFP. In P15 hT17M Rho retinas, we observed an up-regulation of UPR 
genes (Atf4, Eif2a, Xbp1, Bip, Canx, and Hsp90), autophagy genes and proapoptotic
Bcl2 genes. OCT, and the downregulation of Nrl and Crx gene expression confirmed 
that cell death occurs in 55% of photoreceptors via the up-regulation of
caspase-3 and caspase-12, and the release of AIF1 from the mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: The ER stress response is involved in retinal degeneration in hT17M 
Rho mice. The final demise of photoreceptors occurs via apoptosis involving ER
stress-associated and mitochondria-induced caspase activation. We identified
Atg5, Atg7, Bax, Bid, Bik, and Noxa as potential therapeutic targets for adRP
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3390184
PMID: 22589437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Diabetologia. 2012 Aug;55(8):2276-84. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2573-6. Epub 2012
May 14.

Central nervous system endoplasmic reticulum stress in a murine model of type 2
diabetes.

Sims-Robinson C(1), Zhao S, Hur J, Feldman EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, 5017 AATBSRB, 109 Zina
Pitcher Place, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Type 2 diabetes is associated with complications in the central 
nervous system (CNS), including learning and memory, and an increased risk for
neurodegenerative diseases. The mechanism underlying this association is not
understood. The aim of this study was to gain greater insight into the possible
mechanisms of diabetes-induced cognitive decline.
METHODS: We used microarray technology to identify and examine changes in gene
expression in the hippocampus of a murine model of type 2 diabetes, the db/db
mouse. Bioinformatics approaches were then used to investigate the biological
significance of these genes. To validate the biological significance we evaluated
mRNA and protein levels.
RESULTS: At 8 and 24 weeks, 256 and 822 genes, respectively, were differentially 
expressed in the db/db mice. The most significantly enriched biological functions
were related to mitochondria, heat shock proteins, or the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), the majority of which were downregulated. The ER-enriched cluster was one
of the clusters that contained the highest number of differentially expressed
genes. Several of the downregulated genes that were differentially expressed at
24 but not at 8 weeks are directly involved in the unfolded protein response
(UPR) pathway and include two heat shock proteins (encoded by Hspa5 and Hsp90b1),
a transcriptional factor (x-box binding protein 1, encoded by Xbp1), and an
apoptotic mediator (DNA-damage inducible transcript 3, encoded by Ddit3).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The changes that we observed in the UPR pathway due
to ER stress may play a role in the pathogenesis of CNS complications in
diabetes. The results of this study are a foundation for the development of
pharmacological targets to reduce ER stress in diabetic hippocampi.

PMCID: PMC3391332
PMID: 22581041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jun 14;518(1):45-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.04.053. Epub
2012 May 2.

Protective effects of XBP1 against oxygen and glucose deprivation/reoxygenation
injury in rat primary hippocampal neurons.

Ibuki T(1), Yamasaki Y, Mizuguchi H, Sokabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Qs' Research Institute, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., 463-10 Kagasuno,
Kawauchi, Tokushima 771-0192, Japan.

The accumulation of misfolded and unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) induces ER stress, activating the unfolded protein response (UPR). One of
the effectors of the UPR is XBP1, a critical transcriptional factor for genes
responsible for cell survival. ER stress is also known to play a vital role in
mediating ischemic reperfusion damage in the brain. In this study, we
investigated the role of XBP1 in rat primary hippocampal neurons subjected to
oxygen and glucose deprivation followed by reoxygenation (OGD/R) stress, an in
vitro model of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Primary neurons subjected to
OGD had increased levels of spliced XBP1 (XBP1s) mRNA. Interestingly, the level
of XBP1s decreased during the initial reoxygenation stress period. The
combination of OGD and the subsequent 20-h reoxygenation stress period
significantly increased the apoptotic death of primary cells. Overexpression of
XBP1s suppressed cell death induced by OGD/R stress. These results suggest that
suppression of XBP1 activation accelerates neuronal cell death after I/R and that
activation of the XBP1 pathway may provide a therapeutic approach for the
treatment of cerebral I/R injury.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Immunol. 2012 Jul;51(3-4):347-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.04.001. Epub
2012 May 1.

The specialized unfolded protein response of B lymphocytes: ATF6a-independent
development of antibody-secreting B cells.

Aragon IV(1), Barrington RA, Jackowski S, Mori K, Brewer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, 5851 USA Drive North, Mobile, AL 36688, United States.

B lymphocytes, like all mammalian cells, are equipped with the unfolded protein
response (UPR), a complex signaling system allowing for both pro- and
mal-adaptive responses to increased demands on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
The UPR is comprised of three signaling pathways initiated by the ER
transmembrane stress sensors, IRE1a/ß, PERK and ATF6a/ß. Activation of IRE1
yields XBP1(S), a transcription factor that directs expansion of the ER and
enhances protein biosynthetic and secretory machinery. XBP1(S) is essential for
the differentiation of B lymphocytes into antibody-secreting cells. In contrast, 
the PERK pathway, a regulator of translation and transcription, is dispensable
for the generation of antibody-secreting cells. Functioning as a transcription
factor, ATF6a can augment ER quality control processes and drive ER expansion,
but the potential role of this UPR pathway in activated B cells has not been
investigated. Here, we report studies of ATF6a-deficient B cells demonstrating
that ATF6a is not required for the development of antibody-secreting cells. Thus,
when B cells are stimulated to secrete antibody, a specialized UPR relies
exclusively on the IRE1-XBP1 pathway to remodel the ER and expand cellular
secretory capacity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3358488
PMID: 22555069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Sep;38(1):66-77. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.04.005. Epub 2012
Apr 30.

Identification and characterization of Inositol-requiring enzyme-1 and X-box
binding protein 1, two proteins involved in the unfolded protein response of
Litopenaeus vannamei.

Chen YH(1), Zhao L, Pang LR, Li XY, Weng SP, He JG.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety/State Key Laboratory for
Biocontrol, School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 135 Xingang Road
West, Guangzhou, PR China.

The inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1)-X-box binding protein 1 (IRE1-XBP1)
pathway is the key branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR). To investigate 
the role of the IRE1-XBP1 pathway in reducing environmental stress and increasing
anti-viral immunity in Litopenaeus vannamei, homologues of IRE1 (designated as
LvIRE1) and XBP1 (designated as LvXBP1) were identified and characterized. The
full-length cDNA of LvIRE1 is 4908bp long, with an open reading frame (ORF) that 
encodies a putative 1174 amino acid protein. The full-length cDNA of LvXBP1 is
1746bp long. It contains two ORFs that encode putative 278 amino acid and 157
amino acid proteins, respectively. LvXBP1 mRNA has the predicted IRE1 splicing
motifs CNG'CNGN located within the loop regions of two short hairpins. Sequencing
of the splicing fragment induced by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress showed a
3bp or 4bp frame shift from the predicted sites. The spliced form LvXBP1
(LvXBP1s) contained an ORF encodes a putative 463 amino acid protein. The
reporter gene assays indicated that LvXBP1s activates the promoter of L. vannamei
immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (LvBip), an important UPR effector.
RT-PCR showed that LvXBP1 was spliced during the experiments. For heat shock
treatment, the total LvXBP1 expression was increased and peaked at about 36h,
whereas the percentages of the two isoforms were relatively stable. For the WSSV 
challenge, LvXBP1 was upregulated during the experiment and the percentage of the
spliced form continuously declined after 18h of infection. Knock-down of LvXBP1
by RNA interference resulted in a lower cumulative mortality of L. vannamei under
WSSV infection. Furthermore, the expression profiles of LvIRE1 and LvXBP1 in the 
gills, hemocytes, intestines, and hepatopancreas of the WSSV-challenged shrimp
were detected using real-time RT-PCR. Taken together, these results confirm that 
the IRE1-XBP1 pathway is important for L. vannamei environmental stress
resistance, suggest that L. vannamei IRE1-XBP1 may activated by WSSV and be
annexed to serve the virus.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22554476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jun 20;211(3):325-33. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.009. Epub 
2012 Apr 18.

The role of the IRE1 pathway in PBDE-47-induced toxicity in human neuroblastoma
SH-SY5Y cells in vitro.

Jiang C(1), Zhang S, Liu H, Zeng Q, Xia T, Chen Y, Kuang G, Zhao G, Wu X, Zhang
X, Wang A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Hangkong Road 13, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, PR China.

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) are widely used as flame retardants. As
one of the dominant congeners, 2,2', 4,4'-tetrabromodiphenyl ether (PBDE-47) has 
been shown to be neurotoxic to neuronal cells although the mechanisms remain
unclear. To test whether PBDE-47's toxicity was related to endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR), human neuroblastoma cells
(SH-SY5Y cells) were treated with different concentrations of PBDE-47. Reactive
oxygen species (ROS), apoptosis and the expressions of the inositol-requiring
enzyme 1 (IRE1) pathway-related molecules were detected. PBDE-47 exposure
increased ROS production and activated the UPR by increasing the expressions of
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), IRE1, X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1),
phosphorylation of c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and GADD153/C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP) genes in SH-SY5Y cells. The apoptotic rate increased with the
remarkable up-regulation of the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio after IRE1 knockdown,
demonstrating the anti-apoptotic role of IRE1. Furthermore, the expressions of
CHOP, XBP1 and JNK were down-regulated indicating that IRE1 may activate these
key molecules related to apoptosis. PBDE-47 exposure can increase ROS production 
and activate the IRE1 pathway of the UPR in SH-SY5Y cells contributing to its
toxicity. The IRE1 pathway may have both protective and proapoptotic effects on
SH-SY5Y cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22543052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Virus Res. 2012 Oct;169(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.04.006. Epub 2012
Apr 19.

HCV NS4B induces apoptosis through the mitochondrial death pathway.

Zhao P(1), Han T, Guo JJ, Zhu SL, Wang J, Ao F, Jing MZ, She YL, Wu ZH, Ye LB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, PR China.

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS4B protein is known to induce the formation of a
membranous web that is thought to be the site of viral RNA replication. However, 
the exact functions of NS4B remain poorly characterized. In this study, we found 
that NS4B induced apoptosis in 293T cells and Huh7 cells, as confirmed by Hoechst
staining, DNA fragmentation, and annexin V/PI assays. Furthermore, protein
immunoblot analysis demonstrated that NS4B triggered the cleavage of caspase 3,
caspase 7, and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). Further studies revealed that 
NS4B induced the activation of caspase 9, the reduction of mitochondrial membrane
potential and the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria. However, NS4B
expression did not trigger XBP1 mRNA splicing and increase the expression of
binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP, or GRP78) and C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP), which serves as the indicators of ER stress. Taken together, our results 
suggest that HCV NS4B induces apoptosis through the mitochondrial death pathway.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22542667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Dairy Sci. 2012 May;95(5):2562-6. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4806.

Short communication: Endoplasmic reticulum stress gene network expression in
bovine mammary tissue during the lactation cycle.

Invernizzi G(1), Naeem A, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian NutriPhysioGenomics, Division of Nutritional Sciences, Department of
Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a crucial role in cellular metabolism. Recent 
studies in nonruminants discovered that components of the ER stress pathway,
induced during the unfolded protein response, play critical roles in regulating
lipogenesis. The bovine mammary gland faces extreme metabolic stress at the onset
of lactation due primarily to the increase in flux through pathways associated
with milk fat and protein synthesis. Our objective was to study, via quantitative
real-time PCR, the expression of the ER stress pathway components P58IPK, PERK,
XBP1, ATF4, ATF3, ATF6, CHOP, MBTPS1, GRP94, and BiP in mammary tissue (n=7 cows 
× 5 time points) collected at -15, 1, 15, 60, and 240 d relative to parturition. 
Expression of P58IPK and ATF4 increased to a peak at d 60, followed by a decrease
by d 240 postpartum. Despite the decrease in expression by 240 d, P58IPK remained
higher than prepartal levels (d -15). Expression patterns of ATF3 and CHOP were
similar and peaked at d 15, followed by a decrease through d 240, at which point 
CHOP expression was still greater than prepartal levels. The sharp increase in
milk production postpartum (d 15) as well as apoptosis during late lactation (240
d) may have induced a pseudo unfolded protein response state. This is supported
by the similar expression patterns of P58IPK and PERK. In the context of
lactation, however, transcriptional changes in the ER stress pathway at different
stages of the lactation cycle are a normal aspect of the tissue's adaptation to
the changing physiological state.

Copyright © 2012 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):5772-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-366633. Epub 2012 
Apr 26.

Blockade of XBP1 splicing by inhibition of IRE1a is a promising therapeutic
option in multiple myeloma.

Mimura N(1), Fulciniti M, Gorgun G, Tai YT, Cirstea D, Santo L, Hu Y, Fabre C,
Minami J, Ohguchi H, Kiziltepe T, Ikeda H, Kawano Y, French M, Blumenthal M, Tam 
V, Kertesz NL, Malyankar UM, Hokenson M, Pham T, Zeng Q, Patterson JB, Richardson
PG, Munshi NC, Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome Lipper Multiple Myeloma Center, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Multiple myeloma (MM) cells are characterized by high protein synthesis resulting
in chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which is adaptively managed by the 
unfolded protein response. Inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a) is activated to
splice X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, thereby increasing XBP1s protein,
which in turn regulates genes responsible for protein folding and degradation
during the unfolded protein response. In this study, we examined whether
IRE1a-XBP1 pathway is a potential therapeutic target in MM using a small-molecule
IRE1a endoribonuclease domain inhibitor MKC-3946. MKC-3946 triggered modest
growth inhibition in MM cell lines, without toxicity in normal mononuclear cells.
Importantly, it significantly enhanced cytotoxicity induced by bortezomib or
17-AAG, even in the presence of bone marrow stromal cells or exogenous IL-6. Both
bortezomib and 17-AAG induced ER stress, evidenced by induction of XBP1s, which
was blocked by MKC-3946. Apoptosis induced by these agents was enhanced by
MKC-3946, associated with increased CHOP. Finally, MKC-3946 inhibited XBP1
splicing in a model of ER stress in vivo, associated with significant growth
inhibition of MM cells. Taken together, our results demonstrate that blockade of 
XBP1 splicing by inhibition of IRE1a endoribonuclease domain is a potential
therapeutic option in MM.

PMCID: PMC3382937
PMID: 22538852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012 Jun 1;4(6). pii: a012278. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a012278.

New insights into translational regulation in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded 
protein response.

Pavitt GD(1), Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
graham.pavitt@manchester.ac.uk

Homeostasis of the protein-folding environment in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
is maintained by signal transduction pathways that collectively constitute an
unfolded protein response (UPR). These affect bulk protein synthesis and thereby 
the levels of ER stress, but also culminate in regulated expression of specific
mRNAs, such as that encoding the transcription factor ATF4. Mechanisms linking
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) phosphorylation to control of unfolded
protein load in the ER were elucidated more than 10 years ago, but recent work
has highlighted the diversity of processes that impinge on eIF2 activity and
revealed that there are multiple mechanisms by which changes in eIF2 activity can
modulate the translation of individual mRNAs. In addition, the potential for
affecting this step of translation initiation pharmacologically is becoming
clearer. Furthermore, it is now clear that another strand of the UPR, controlled 
by the endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), also affects rates of
protein synthesis in stressed cells and that its effector function, mediated by
the transcription factor X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), is subject to important 
mRNA-specific translational regulation. These new insights into the convergence
of translational control and the UPR will be reviewed here.

PMCID: PMC3367556
PMID: 22535228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Endocrinology. 2012 Jul;153(7):3017-28. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-2090. Epub 2012 Apr 
23.

Mild endoplasmic reticulum stress augments the proinflammatory effect of IL-1ß in
pancreatic rat ß-cells via the IRE1a/XBP1s pathway.

Miani M(1), Colli ML, Ladrière L, Cnop M, Eizirik DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Erasmus Hospital, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, B-1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2012 Jul;153(7):2949-52.

The prevalence of obesity and type 1 diabetes in children is increasing
worldwide. Insulin resistance and augmented circulating free fatty acids
associated with obesity may cause pancreatic ß-cell endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. We tested the hypothesis that mild ER stress predisposes ß-cells to an
exacerbated inflammatory response when exposed to IL-1ß or TNF-a, cytokines that 
contribute to the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes. INS-1E cells or primary rat
ß-cells were exposed to a low dose of the ER stressor cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) or
free fatty acids, followed by low-dose IL-1ß or TNF-a. ER stress signaling was
inhibited by small interfering RNA. Cells were evaluated for proinflammatory gene
expression by RT-PCR and ELISA, gene reporter activity, p65 activation by
immunofluorescence, and apoptosis. CPA pretreatment enhanced IL-1ß- induced, but 
not TNF-a-induced, expression of chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2, chemokine (C-X-C
motif) ligand 1, inducible nitric oxide synthase, and Fas via augmented nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activation. X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and
inositol-requiring enzyme 1, but not CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous
protein, knockdown prevented the CPA-induced exacerbation of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
genes and decreased IL-1ß-induced NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity. XBP1 modulated NF-<U+03BA>B
activity via forkhead box O1 inhibition. In conclusion, rat ß-cells facing mild
ER stress are sensitized to IL-1ß, generating a more intense and protracted
inflammatory response through inositol-requiring enzyme 1/XBP1 activation. These 
observations link ß-cell ER stress to the triggering of exacerbated local
inflammation.

PMID: 22529213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neurochem Res. 2012 Aug;37(8):1707-17. doi: 10.1007/s11064-012-0780-7. Epub 2012 
Apr 21.

Differential activation of the ER stress factor XBP1 by oligomeric assemblies.

Castillo-Carranza DL(1), Zhang Y, Guerrero-Muñoz MJ, Kayed R, Rincon-Limas DE,
Fernandez-Funez P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555, USA.

Several neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by protein misfolding, a
phenomenon that results in perturbation of cellular homeostasis. We recently
identified the protective activity of the ER stress response factor XBP1 (X-box
binding protein 1) against Amyloid-ß1-42 (Aß42) neurotoxicity in cellular and
Drosophila models of Alzheimer's disease. Additionally, subtoxic concentrations
of Aß42 soluble aggregates (oligomers) induced accumulation of spliced (active)
XBP1 transcripts, supporting the involvement of the ER stress response in Aß42
neurotoxicity. Here, we tested the ability of three additional disease-related
amyloidogenic proteins to induce ER stress by analyzing XBP1 activation at the
RNA level. Treatment of human SY5Y neuroblastoma cells with homogeneous
preparations of a-Synuclein (a-Syn), Prion protein (PrP106-126), and British
dementia amyloid peptide (ABri1-34) confirmed the high toxicity of oligomers
compared to monomers and fibers. Additionally, a-Syn oligomers, but not monomers 
or fibers, demonstrated potent induction of XBP1 splicing. On the other hand,
PrP106-126 and ABri1-34 did not activate XBP1. These results illustrate the
biological complexity of these structurally related assemblies and argue that
oligomer toxicity depends on the activation of amyloid-specific cellular
responses.

PMCID: PMC3387497
PMID: 22528838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):19687-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.350934. Epub 2012
Apr 19.

Transient aggregation of ubiquitinated proteins is a cytosolic unfolded protein
response to inflammation and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Liu XD(1), Ko S, Xu Y, Fattah EA, Xiang Q, Jagannath C, Ishii T, Komatsu M, Eissa
NT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Failure to maintain protein homeostasis (proteostasis) leads to accumulation of
unfolded proteins and contributes to the pathogenesis of many human diseases.
Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) elicits
unfolded protein response (UPR) that serves to attenuate protein translation, and
increase protein refolding or degradation. In contrast to UPR in the ER, the
regulatory molecules operative in cytosolic responses and their potential
relation to ER stress are not well elucidated. Aggresome-like induced structures 
(ALIS) have been described as transient aggregation of ubiquitinated proteins in 
the cytosol. In this study, we show that cells respond to inflammation, infection
or ER stress by cytosolic formation of ALIS, indicating that ALIS formation
represents an early event in cellular adjustment to altered proteostasis that
occurs under these conditions. This response was aided by rapid transcriptional
up-regulation of polyubiqutin-binding protein p62. NF-<U+03BA>B and mTOR activation were
also required for ALIS formation. Importantly, we show a cross talk between UPR
in the ER and cytosolic ALIS. Down-regulation of ER UPR in XBP1 deficient cells
increases cyotosolic ALIS formation. Furthermore, lysosomal activity but not
macroautophagy is responsible for ALIS clearance. This study reveals the
underlying regulatory mechanisms of ALIS formation and clearance, and provides a 
previously unrecognized common adaptive mechanism for cellular responses against 
inflammation and ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3366003
PMID: 22518844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cell Cycle. 2012 May 1;11(9):1746-7. doi: 10.4161/cc.20184. Epub 2012 May 1.

Pro-apoptotic signaling pathway by CDK5 and MEKK1.

Ryoo HD.

PMCID: PMC3372387
PMID: 22510567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034412. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B deficiency potentiates PERK/eIF2a signaling in
brown adipocytes.

Bettaieb A(1), Matsuo K, Matsuo I, Wang S, Melhem R, Koromilas AE, Haj FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California Davis, Davis, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a physiological regulator 
of glucose homeostasis and body mass, and has been implicated in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Herein, we assess the role of PTP1B in ER stress in brown 
adipocytes, which are key regulators of thermogenesis and metabolic response.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To determine the role of PTP1B in ER stress, we
utilized brown adipose tissue (BAT) from mice with adipose-specific PTP1B
deletion, and brown adipocytes deficient in PTP1B and reconstituted with PTP1B
wild type (WT) or the substrate-trapping PTP1B D181A (D/A) mutant. PTP1B
deficiency led to upregulation of PERK-eIF2a phosphorylation and IRE1a-XBP1
sub-arms of the unfolded protein response. In addition, PTP1B deficiency
sensitized differentiated brown adipocytes to chemical-induced ER stress.
Moreover, PERK activation and tyrosine phosphorylation were increased in BAT and 
adipocytes lacking PTP1B. Increased PERK activity resulted in the induction of
eIF2a phosphorylation at Ser51 and better translatability of ATF4 mRNA in
response to ER stress. At the molecular level, we demonstrate direct interaction 
between PTP1B and PERK and identify PERK Tyr615 as a mediator of this
association.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the data demonstrate that PTP1B is a
physiologically-relevant modulator of ER stress in brown adipocytes and that
PTP1B deficiency modulates PERK-eIF2a phosphorylation and protein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3317973
PMID: 22509299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(12):6712-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00200-12. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Murine cytomegalovirus targets transcription factor ATF4 to exploit the
unfolded-protein response.

Qian Z(1), Xuan B, Chapa TJ, Gualberto N, Yu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

The unfolded-protein response (UPR), activated by sensor molecules PERK, ATF6,
and IRE1 to resolve endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, has emerged as a key
target for host cells and viruses to control the infection outcomes. The UPR
regulates ER protein folding, controls cell fate upon ER stress, and plays an
important role in innate immunity. We and others have shown that human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) modulates the UPR. We show here that murine CMV (MCMV),
the widely used CMV model for small animal infection, regulated the UPR in a
manner similar to that of HCMV. This modulatory ability was triggered by virion
entry and enhanced by viral immediate-early and early gene expression. Thus,
while vulnerable at early times, MCMV became resistant to exogenous ER stress at 
late times of infection. MCMV activated the PERK-ATF4 pathway but only induced a 
subset of representative ATF4 targets at levels somewhat lower than those by the 
ER stress inducer tunicamycin. Moreover, MCMV induced ER chaperone Bip but
actively blocked IRE1-mediated Xbp1(s) protein accumulation. ATF4 depletion
severely attenuated viral growth at a low multiplicity of infection by modestly
reducing viral DNA synthesis and more pronouncedly inhibiting late gene
transcription. Collectively, we show that the UPR is a conserved target of CMVs
and identify ATF4, a key UPR component, as a factor critical for MCMV infection. 
This work sets the stage for using the MCMV model to explore the role of this
stress response in CMV biology, particularly during infection of the host, which 
is difficult to study in HCMV.

PMCID: PMC3393534
PMID: 22496230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 May 31;53(6):3241-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8406.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in retinal vascular degeneration: protective role of
resveratrol.

Li C(1), Wang L, Huang K, Zheng L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

PURPOSE: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been demonstrated to contribute to
neurodegeneration in multiple ocular diseases. However, whether ER stress can
induce vascular degeneration in the retina remains unknown. We investigated the
possible role of ER stress in retinal vascular degeneration in vivo, and the
effects of resveratrol on tunicamycin and ischemia and reperfusion (I/R)-induced 
retinal vascular degeneration.
METHODS: Different dosages of tunicamycin, an ER stress inducer, were injected
into the vitreous of mouse eyes. Retinal I/R injury was induced by elevating the 
intraocular pressure for 60 minutes followed by reperfusion in mice. Two dosages 
of resveratrol (5 and 25 mg/kg body weight per day) were administrated 2 days
before retinal I/R injury, while 100 µM resveratrol were injected into the
vitreous together with tunicamycin. Formation of acellular capillaries was
assessed 7 days after I/R injury and tunicamycin injection, while cell bodies in 
ganglion cell layer and brain-specific homeobox/POU domain protein 3A (Brn3a)
staining on retinal flat-mounts were analyzed 4 days after I/R injury. ER stress 
markers, including eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), CCAAT
enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), immunoglobulin binding
protein (Bip), inositol requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a), C-jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK)1/2 and Xbp1 splicing, were examined by RT-PCR, or Western blots or
immunostaining from retinas 1 or 2 days after tunicamycin injection and I/R
injury.
RESULTS: Tunicamycin caused ER stress and capillary degeneration in vivo, both of
which were inhibited by resveratrol. Pretreatment of high dosage of resveratrol
also significantly inhibited retinal I/R injury-induced capillary degeneration;
however, neither of the dosages prevented the injury-induced neurodegeneration.
Levels of CHOP, phosphorylated eIF2a, IRE1a, phosphorylated JNK1/2, Xbp1 splicing
and Bip were elevated after I/R injury. High dosage of resveratrol pretreatment
inhibited the injury-induced up-regulation of eIF2a-CHOP and IRE1a-XBP1 pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: ER stress is an important contributor to vascular degeneration in
retina. Resveratrol suppresses I/R injury and tunicamycin-induced vascular
degeneration by inhibiting ER stress.

PMID: 22491413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 20;420(4):882-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.094. Epub 2012 Mar 24.

Inhibition of enterovirus 71 entry by transcription factor XBP1.

Jheng JR(1), Lin CY, Horng JT, Lau KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, 
Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa First Road, Kweishan, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) plays an important role in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), or unfolded protein, stress response by activating its downstream
transcription factor X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). We demonstrated previously
that enterovirus 71 (EV71) upregulated XBP1 mRNA levels but did not activate
spliced XBP1 (XBP1s) mRNA or its downstream target genes, EDEM and chaperones. In
this study, we investigated further this regulatory mechanism and found that IRE1
was phosphorylated and activated after EV71 infection, whereas its downstream
XBP1s protein level decreased. We also found that XBP1s was not cleaved directly 
by 2A(pro), but that cleavage of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4G by
the EV71 2A(pro) protein may contribute to the decrease in XBP1s expression.
Knockdown of XBP1 increased viral protein expression, and the synthesis of EV71
viral protein and the production of EV71 viral particles were inhibited in
XBP1-overexpressing RD cells. When incubated with replication-deficient and
UV-irradiated EV71, XBP1-overexpressing RD cells exhibited reduced viral RNA
levels, suggesting that the inhibition of XBP1s by viral infection may underlie
viral entry, which is required for viral replication. Our findings are the first 
indication of the ability of XBP1 to inhibit viral entry, possibly via its
transcriptional activity in regulating molecules in the endocytic machinery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22469468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034169. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Activation of ERAD pathway by human hepatitis B virus modulates viral and
subviral particle production.

Lazar C(1), Macovei A, Petrescu S, Branza-Nichita N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy, Department of Viral
Glycoproteins, Bucharest, Romania.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family of enveloped DNA
viruses. It was previously shown that HBV can induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and activate the IRE1-XBP1 pathway of the unfolded protein response (UPR),
through the expression of the viral regulatory protein X (HBx). However, it
remained obscure whether or not this activation had any functional consequences
on the target genes of the UPR pathway. Of these targets, the ER
degradation-enhancing, mannosidase-like proteins (EDEMs) are thought to play an
important role in relieving the ER stress during UPR, by recognizing terminally
misfolded glycoproteins and delivering them to the ER-associated degradation
(ERAD). In this study, we investigated the role of EDEMs in the HBV life-cycle.
We found that synthesis of EDEMs (EDEM1 and its homologues, EDEM2 and EDEM3) is
significantly up-regulated in cells with persistent or transient HBV replication.
Co-expression of the wild-type HBV envelope proteins with EDEM1 resulted in their
massive degradation, a process reversed by EDEM1 silencing. Surprisingly, the
autophagy/lysosomes, rather than the proteasome were involved in disposal of the 
HBV envelope proteins. Importantly, inhibition of the endogenous EDEM1 expression
in HBV replicating cells significantly increased secretion of both, enveloped
virus and subviral particles. This is the first report showing that HBV activates
the ERAD pathway, which, in turn, reduces the amount of envelope proteins,
possibly as a mechanism to control the level of virus particles in infected cells
and facilitate the establishment of chronic infections.

PMCID: PMC3312915
PMID: 22461906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Toxicol In Vitro. 2012 Aug;26(5):663-71. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2012.03.005. Epub
2012 Mar 16.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress mediates aristolochic acid I-induced apoptosis in
human renal proximal tubular epithelial cells.

Zhu S(1), Wang Y, Jin J, Guan C, Li M, Xi C, Ouyang Z, Chen M, Qiu Y, Huang M,
Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006,
PR China.

Aristolochic acid (AA), derived from the Aristolochia species, has been
associated with aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN), which has emerged as a
worldwide disease. Aristolochic acid I (AAI) is the main ingredient of AA, and
the underlying mechanisms for AAI-induced nephrotoxicity are still unclear. In
this study, we investigated whether endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was
involved in AAI-induced nephrotoxicity. The results showed that treatment of HK-2
cells (a human proximal tubular epithelial cell line) with AAI caused an increase
in eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF2a) phosphorylation, X-box binding protein
1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing and the expression of glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78
and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP). These events
represent typical markers of the ER stress-related signaling pathway.
Pretreatment with 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) or salubrinal (Sal) significantly
inhibited AAI-induced apoptosis, indicating the role of ER stress in AAI-induced 
apoptosis. In addition, AAI-induced cell death followed an increase of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) formation in HK-2 cells. Pretreatment with N-acetyl cysteine
(NAC) or glutathione (GSH) significantly inhibited AAI-induced ER stress proteins
and cell death, suggesting that ROS mediate AAI-induced ER stress. Taken
together, these results suggest that the ER stress response is involved in
apoptosis induced by AAI in HK-2 cells, thus offering a new insight into the
nephrotoxicity of AAI.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22445861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Apr 13;420(3):558-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.03.033. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

AAV-mediated delivery of the transcription factor XBP1s into the striatum reduces
mutant Huntingtin aggregation in a mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Zuleta A(1), Vidal RL, Armentano D, Parsons G, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by mutations that expand a polyglutamine
region in the amino-terminal domain of Huntingtin (Htt), leading to the
accumulation of intracellular inclusions and progressive neurodegeneration.
Recent reports indicate the engagement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
responses in human HD post mortem samples and animal models of the disease.
Adaptation to ER stress is mediated by the activation of the unfolded protein
response (UPR), an integrated signal transduction pathway that attenuates protein
folding stress by controlling the expression of distinct transcription factors
including X-Box binding protein 1 (XBP1). Here we targeted the expression of XBP1
on a novel viral-based model of HD. We delivered an active form of XBP1 locally
into the striatum of adult mice using adeno-associated vectors (AAVs) and
co-expressed this factor with a large fragment of mutant Htt as a fusion protein 
with RFP (Htt588(Q95)-mRFP) to directly visualize the accumulation of Htt
inclusions in the brain. Using this approach, we observed a significant reduction
in the accumulation of Htt588(Q95)-mRFP intracellular inclusion when XBP1 was
co-expressed in the striatum. These results contrast with recent findings
indicating a protective effect of XBP1 deficiency in neurodegeneration using
knockout mice, and suggest a potential use of gene therapy strategies to
manipulate the UPR in the context of HD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22445760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Cell Biol. 2012 Mar 19;196(6):689-98. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201201077.

MicroRNA-30c-2* limits expression of proadaptive factor XBP1 in the unfolded
protein response.

Byrd AE(1), Aragon IV, Brewer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers the unfolded protein response
(UPR), a multifaceted signaling system coordinating translational control and
gene transcription to promote cellular adaptation and survival. Microribonucleic 
acids (RNAs; miRNAs), single-stranded RNAs that typically function as
posttranscriptional modulators of gene activity, have been shown to inhibit
translation of certain secretory pathway proteins during the UPR. However, it
remains unclear whether miRNAs regulate UPR signaling effectors directly. In this
paper, we report that a star strand miRNA, miR-30c-2* (recently designated
miR-30c-2-3p), is induced by the protein kinase RNA activated-like ER kinase
(PERK) pathway of the UPR and governs expression of XBP1 (X-box binding protein
1), a key transcription factor that augments secretory capacity and promotes cell
survival in the adaptive UPR. These data provide the first link between an miRNA 
and direct regulation of the ER stress response and reveal a novel molecular
mechanism by which the PERK pathway, via miR-30c-2*, influences the scale of
XBP1-mediated gene expression and cell fate in the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3308703
PMID: 22431749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(3):e1001280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001280. Epub 2012 Mar 
13.

Combinatorial activation and repression by seven transcription factors specify
Drosophila odorant receptor expression.

Jafari S(1), Alkhori L, Schleiffer A, Brochtrup A, Hummel T, Alenius M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University,
Linköping, Sweden.

The mechanism that specifies olfactory sensory neurons to express only one
odorant receptor (OR) from a large repertoire is critical for odor discrimination
but poorly understood. Here, we describe the first comprehensive analysis of OR
expression regulation in Drosophila. A systematic, RNAi-mediated knock down of
most of the predicted transcription factors identified an essential function of
acj6, E93, Fer1, onecut, sim, xbp1, and zf30c in the regulation of more than 30
ORs. These regulatory factors are differentially expressed in antennal sensory
neuron classes and specifically required for the adult expression of ORs. A
systematic analysis reveals not only that combinations of these seven factors are
necessary for receptor gene expression but also a prominent role for
transcriptional repression in preventing ectopic receptor expression. Such
regulation is supported by bioinformatics and OR promoter analyses, which
uncovered a common promoter structure with distal repressive and proximal
activating regions. Thus, our data provide insight into how combinatorial
activation and repression can allow a small number of transcription factors to
specify a large repertoire of neuron classes in the olfactory system.

PMCID: PMC3302810
PMID: 22427741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Blood. 2012 May 3;119(18):4205-14. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-353300. Epub 2012
Mar 16.

Expression of XBP1s in bone marrow stromal cells is critical for myeloma cell
growth and osteoclast formation.

Xu G(1), Liu K, Anderson J, Patrene K, Lentzsch S, Roodman GD, Ouyang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15240, USA.

BM stromal cells (BMSCs) are key players in the microenvironmental support of
multiple myeloma (MM) cell growth and bone destruction. A spliced form of the
X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1s), a major proximal effector of unfolded protein
response signaling, is highly expressed in MM cells and plays an indispensable
role in MM pathogenesis. In the present study, we found that XBP1s is induced in 
the BMSCs of the MM microenvironment. XBP1s overexpression in healthy human BMSCs
enhanced gene and/or protein expression of VCAM-1, IL-6, and receptor activator
of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL), enhancing BMSC support of MM cell growth and osteoclast 
formation in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, deficiency of XBP1 in healthy donor
BMSCs displayed a range of effects on BMSCs that were opposite to those cells
with overexpression of XBP1s. Knock-down of XBP1 in MM patient BMSCs greatly
compromised their increased VCAM-1 protein expression and IL-6 and RANKL
secretion in response to TNFa and reversed their enhanced support of MM-cell
growth and osteoclast formation. Our results demonstrate that XBP1s is a
pathogenic factor underlying BMSC support of MM cell growth and osteoclast
formation and therefore represents a therapeutic target for MM bone disease.

PMCID: PMC3359740
PMID: 22427205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Eur J Neurosci. 2012 Mar;35(5):652-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08008.x.

The unfolded protein response in models of human mutant G93A amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Prell T(1), Lautenschläger J, Witte OW, Carri MT, Grosskreutz J.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Jena, Hans-Berger Department of Neurology,
Friedrich-Schiller University, Erlanger Allee 101, D-07747, Germany.
tino.prell@med.uni-jena.de

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2012 Mar;35(5):651.

Recent studies indicate that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in the
pathogenesis of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ER
stress occurs when the ER-mitochondria calcium cycle (ERMCC) is disturbed and
misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER. To cope with ER stress, the cell engages
the unfolded protein response (UPR). While activation of the UPR has been shown
in some ALS models and tissues, ER stress elements have not been studied directly
in motor neurons. Here we investigated the expression of XBP1 and ATF6a and
phosphorylation of eIF2a, and their modulation, in mutated SOD1(G93A) NSC34 and
animal model of ALS. Expression of XBP1 and ATF6a mRNA and protein was enhanced
in SOD1(G93A) NSC34 cells. Activation of ATF6a and XBP1 and phosphorylation of
eIF2a were detectable in mutated SOD1(G93A) motor but not in wild-type motor
neurons. Treatment with the ER stressor thapsigargin enhanced phosphorylation of 
eIF2a and activated proteolysis of ATF6a and splicing of XBP1 in NSC34 and motor 
neurons in a time-dependent manner. The present study thus provides direct
evidence of activated UPR in motor neurons which overexpress human pathogenic
mutant SOD1(G93A) , providing evidence that ER stress plays a major role in ALS.

© 2012 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2012 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22390177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Cycle. 2012 Mar 15;11(6):1118-22. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.6.19529. Epub 2012 Mar 
15.

SENP1 deficiency promotes ER stress-induced apoptosis by increasing XBP1
SUMOylation.

Jiang Z(1), Fan Q, Zhang Z, Zou Y, Cai R, Wang Q, Zuo Y, Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The transcription factor X box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a key component of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Recently, it has been reported that
the spliced XBP1 (XBP1s), an activated XBP1 during ER stress, can be SUMOylated. 
Here, we identify Sentrin/SUMO-specific protease 1 (SENP1) as a specific
de-SUMOylation protease for XBP1. SENP1 can increase the transcriptional activity
of XBP1. In Senp1 (-/-) cells, the SUMOylated XBP1 is accumulated, and the
expression of XBP1 target genes is downregulated in response to ER stress.
Moreover, SENP1 deficiency significantly increases ER stress-induced apoptosis
through accumulating XBP1 SUMOylation. These results reveal an essential function
of SENP1 in ER stress response through regulating XBP1 SUMOylation.

PMID: 22370484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030816. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Differing endoplasmic reticulum stress response to excess lipogenesis versus
lipid oversupply in relation to hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance.

Ren LP(1), Chan SM, Zeng XY, Laybutt DR, Iseli TJ, Sun RQ, Kraegen EW, Cooney GJ,
Turner N, Ye JM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology for Diabetes Group, Health Innovations Research
Institute and School of Health Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress have been
implicated in hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance. The present study
investigated their roles in the development of hepatic steatosis and insulin
resistance during de novo lipogenesis (DNL) compared to extrahepatic lipid
oversupply. Male C57BL/6J mice were fed either a high fructose (HFru) or high fat
(HFat) diet to induce DNL or lipid oversupply in/to the liver. Both HFru and HFat
feeding increased hepatic triglyceride within 3 days (by 3.5 and 2.4 fold) and
the steatosis remained persistent from 1 week onwards (p<0.01 vs Con). Glucose
intolerance (iAUC increased by ~60%) and blunted insulin-stimulated hepatic Akt
and GSK3ß phosphorylation (~40-60%) were found in both feeding conditions (p<0.01
vs Con, assessed after 1 week). No impairment of mitochondrial function was found
(oxidation capacity, expression of PGC1a, CPT1, respiratory complexes, enzymatic 
activity of citrate synthase & ß-HAD). As expected, DNL was increased (~60%) in
HFru-fed mice and decreased (32%) in HFat-fed mice (all p<0.05). Interestingly,
associated with the upregulated lipogenic enzymes (ACC, FAS and SCD1), two
(PERK/eIF2a and IRE1/XBP1) of three ER stress pathways were significantly
activated in HFru-fed mice. However, no significant ER stress was observed in
HFat-fed mice during the development of hepatic steatosis. Our findings indicate 
that HFru and HFat diets can result in hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance
without obvious mitochondrial defects via different lipid metabolic pathways. The
fact that ER stress is apparent only with HFru feeding suggests that ER stress is
involved in DNL per se rather than resulting from hepatic steatosis or insulin
resistance.

PMCID: PMC3280252
PMID: 22355328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Transl Res. 2012;4(1):102-13. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Pharmacological ER stress promotes hepatic lipogenesis and lipid droplet
formation.

Lee JS, Mendez R, Heng HH, Yang ZQ, Zhang K.

Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress refers to a condition of accumulation of
unfolded or misfolded proteins in the ER lumen. A variety of biochemical stimuli 
or pathophysiologic conditions can directly or indirectly induce ER stress,
leading to activation of an ER-originated adaptive signaling response called
Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). Recent studies demonstrated that ER stress and
UPR signaling are critically involved in the initiation and progression of many
diseases, such as metabolic disease, cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative
disease, and cancer. In this study, we show that ER stress induced by
pharmacologic reagents, including tunicamycin (TM) and thapsigargin (Tg),
promotes hepatic lipogenesis and lipid droplet formation. Using quantitative gene
expression analysis, we identified 3 groups of key lipogenic regulators or
enzymes that are inducible by pharmacological ER stress in a human hepatoma cell 
line Huh-7. These ER stress-inducible lipogenic factors include: 1) lipogenic
trans-activators including CCAAT/ enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPa),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), PPAR<U+03B3> coacti-vator
1-alpha (PGC1a), and Liver X receptor alpha (LXRa); 2) components of lipid
droplets including fat-specific protein 27 (FSP27), adipose differentiation
related protein (ADRP), fat-inducing transcript 2 (FIT2), and adipocyte
lipid-binding protein (AP2); 3) key enzymes involved in de novo lipogenesis
including acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1) and stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD1).
Supporting the role of pharmacologic ER stress in up-regulating de novo
lipogenesis, TM or Tg treatment significantly increased accumulation of cytosolic
lipid droplet formation in the hepatocytes. Moreover, we showed that forced
expression of an activated form of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a potent UPR
trans-activator, can dramatically increase expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa in
Huh-7 cells. The identification of ER stress-inducible lipogenic regulators
provides important insights into the molecular basis by which acute ER stress
promotes de novo lipogenesis. In summary, the findings from this study have
important implication in understanding the link between ER stress and metabolic
disease.

PMCID: PMC3276380
PMID: 22347525  [PubMed]


65. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 May 15;21(10):2245-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds040. Epub 2012 Feb
14.

Targeting the UPR transcription factor XBP1 protects against Huntington's disease
through the regulation of FoxO1 and autophagy.

Vidal RL(1), Figueroa A, Court FA, Thielen P, Molina C, Wirth C, Caballero B,
Kiffin R, Segura-Aguilar J, Cuervo AM, Glimcher LH, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Neuroscience Biomedical Institute, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Mutations leading to expansion of a poly-glutamine track in Huntingtin (Htt)
cause Huntington's disease (HD). Signs of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress have 
been recently reported in animal models of HD, associated with the activation of 
the unfolded protein response (UPR). Here we have investigated the functional
contribution of ER stress to HD by targeting the expression of two main UPR
transcription factors, XBP1 and ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4), in
full-length mutant Huntingtin (mHtt) transgenic mice. XBP1-deficient mice were
more resistant to developing disease features, associated with improved neuronal 
survival and motor performance, and a drastic decrease in mHtt levels. The
protective effects of XBP1 deficiency were associated with enhanced
macroautophagy in both cellular and animal models of HD. In contrast, ATF4
deficiency did not alter mHtt levels. Although, XBP1 mRNA splicing was observed
in the striatum of HD transgenic brains, no changes in the levels of classical ER
stress markers were detected in symptomatic animals. At the mechanistic level, we
observed that XBP1 deficiency led to augmented expression of Forkhead box O1
(FoxO1), a key transcription factor regulating autophagy in neurons. In agreement
with this finding, ectopic expression of FoxO1 enhanced autophagy and mHtt
clearance in vitro. Our results provide strong evidence supporting an involvement
of XBP1 in HD pathogenesis probably due to an ER stress-independent mechanism
involving the control of FoxO1 and autophagy levels.

PMCID: PMC3335312
PMID: 22337954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Feb 16;3:e272. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.8.

Activation of the unfolded protein response enhances motor recovery after spinal 
cord injury.

Valenzuela V(1), Collyer E, Armentano D, Parsons GB, Court FA, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a major cause of paralysis, and involves multiple
cellular and tissular responses including demyelination, inflammation, cell death
and axonal degeneration. Recent evidence suggests that perturbation on the
homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is observed in different SCI
models; however, the functional contribution of this pathway to this pathology is
not known. Here we demonstrate that SCI triggers a fast ER stress reaction (1-3
h) involving the upregulation of key components of the unfolded protein response 
(UPR), a process that propagates through the spinal cord. Ablation of
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) or activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4)
expression, two major UPR transcription factors, leads to a reduced locomotor
recovery after experimental SCI. The effects of UPR inactivation were associated 
with a significant increase in the number of damaged axons and reduced amount of 
oligodendrocytes surrounding the injury zone. In addition, altered microglial
activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression were observed in ATF4
deficient mice after SCI. Local expression of active XBP1 into the spinal cord
using adeno-associated viruses enhanced locomotor recovery after SCI, and was
associated with an increased number of oligodendrocytes. Altogether, our results 
demonstrate a functional role of the UPR in SCI, offering novel therapeutic
targets to treat this invalidating condition.

PMCID: PMC3288350
PMID: 22337234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Physiol Behav. 2012 May 15;106(2):158-63. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2012.01.024.
Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Cage food location alters energy balance and endoplasmic reticulum stress in the 
brain of mice.

Park-York M(1), Kim Y, York DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Utah State University, 4715 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT
84322, USA.

We have previously shown that voluntary wheel running activity in mice is
associated with an increase in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) Unfolded Protein
stress response in multiple regions of the brain. Mice that are given access to
running wheels show large variations in individual running activity. In contrast,
when food is placed on the lid of their cages, rather than within the cage, all
mice must undertake significant physical activity in order to gain access to
their food. Hence we investigated the effects of food location on food intake and
growth of C57BL/6 mice and on the activity of the ER stress system in the brain
as reflected in the expression of two marker genes, Xbp1 and Atf6. Mice that had 
food in cups within their cages and allowed access to running wheels showed the
anticipated changes in food intake, body weight and ER stress in the hippocampus 
compared to mice with no access to running wheels. Locating the food on the lid
had no effect on food intake but reduced weight gain significantly. Likewise,
locating food on the lid increased the expression of both Xbp1 and Atf6 in the
hippocampi in the absence of any running wheel activity. Voluntary wheel running 
activity was reduced in mice whose food was located on the cage lid and this
running actually reduced the expression of the two marker ER stress genes. We
conclude that the usual practice of providing food for mice on their cage lids
provides a significant level of physical activity that alters the metabolic
status and increases ER stress. As such, this may not be the optimal model for
the majority of mouse studies that are reported in the literature and it may
significantly alter the interpretation of the effect of wheel running activity on
ER stress. The differential effects of food location on hippocampal Bdnf gene
expression also suggest that BDNF does not directly regulate UPR activity but may
be coordinately regulated in response to running activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22336738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neuron. 2012 Feb 9;73(3):405-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.009.

Life-or-death decisions upon axonal damage.

Roselli F(1), Caroni P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Maulbeerstrasse 66, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2012 Feb 9;73(3):445-52.

In this issue of Neuron, Hu et al. (2012) report that upon axonal damage, CHOP
and XBP1 unfolded protein response pathways are not recruited equally and have
opposite effects on neuronal survival. XBP1 pathway boosting may represent a
valuable neuroprotective strategy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22325193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Jun;14(6):949-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01769.x.
Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Activation of the unfolded protein response by Listeria monocytogenes.

Pillich H(1), Loose M, Zimmer KP, Chakraborty T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Justus-Liebig-University, D-35392 Giessen, 
Germany.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) responds to perturbation of homeostasis with
stress. To maintain ER function, a signalling-circuitry has evolved which, when
engaged, attempts to reduce a surplus of unfolded proteins by triggering the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Several studies have implicated UPR in viral
infections, neurodegenerative disorders and metabolic diseases but UPR has not
yet been widely linked to bacterial infections. Here we demonstrate that the
facultative intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes (Lm) induces ER
expansion and UPR prior to host cell entry. Lm activated protein kinase RNA-like 
ER kinase (PERK) evidenced by the phosphorylation of the a-subunit of eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor-2 (eIF2a), inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1) as
shown by detection of spliced X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) and activating
transcription factor-6 (ATF6) as demonstrated by depletion of its inactive form. 
A mutant Lm<U+0394>hly strain that did not produce listeriolysin (LLO) lacked the UPR
response. Conversely purified LLO activated UPR. Sustained infection with Lm
resulted in apoptosis. Induction of ER stress by thapsigargin or tunicamycin
reduced intracellular bacterial number. Our findings suggest that UPR plays an
important role in the cell autonomous defence responses to bacterial infection.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22321539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 10;109(15):E869-78. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1115623109. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

The molecular basis for selective inhibition of unconventional mRNA splicing by
an IRE1-binding small molecule.

Cross BC(1), Bond PJ, Sadowski PG, Jha BK, Zak J, Goodman JM, Silverman RH,
Neubert TA, Baxendale IR, Ron D, Harding HP.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and National Institute
for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge CB2 0QQ,
United Kingdom.

IRE1 couples endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein load to RNA cleavage events
that culminate in the sequence-specific splicing of the Xbp1 mRNA and in the
regulated degradation of diverse membrane-bound mRNAs. We report on the
identification of a small molecule inhibitor that attains its selectivity by
forming an unusually stable Schiff base with lysine 907 in the IRE1 endonuclease 
domain, explained by solvent inaccessibility of the imine bond in the
enzyme-inhibitor complex. The inhibitor (abbreviated 4µ8C) blocks substrate
access to the active site of IRE1 and selectively inactivates both Xbp1 splicing 
and IRE1-mediated mRNA degradation. Surprisingly, inhibition of IRE1 endonuclease
activity does not sensitize cells to the consequences of acute endoplasmic
reticulum stress, but rather interferes with the expansion of secretory capacity.
Thus, the chemical reactivity and sterics of a unique residue in the endonuclease
active site of IRE1 can be exploited by selective inhibitors to interfere with
protein secretion in pathological settings.

PMCID: PMC3326519
PMID: 22315414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2905-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102595. Epub 2012
Feb 6.

Spatiotemporal inhibition of innate immunity signaling by the Tbc1d23 RAB-GAP.

De Arras L(1), Yang IV, Lackford B, Riches DW, Prekeris R, Freedman JH, Schwartz 
DA, Alper S.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Health and University of 
Colorado, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

We previously identified Tbc1d23 as a candidate novel regulator of innate
immunity using comparative genomics RNA interference screens in Caenorhabditis
elegans and mouse macrophages. Using Tbc1d23 knockout mice and macrophages
engineered to overexpress Tbc1d23, we now show that Tbc1d23 is a general
inhibitor of innate immunity signaling, strongly inhibiting multiple TLR and
dectin-signaling pathways. Tbc1d23 likely acts downstream of the TLR-signaling
adaptors MyD88 and Trif and upstream of the transcription factor XBP1.
Importantly, like XBP1, Tbc1d23 affects the maintenance, but not the initiation, 
of inflammatory cytokine production induced by LPS. Tbc1d23 acts as a RAB-GAP to 
regulate innate immunity signaling. Thus, Tbc1d23 exerts its inhibitory effect on
innate immunity signaling in a spatiotemporal fashion. The identification of a
novel spatiotemporal regulator of innate immunity signaling validates the
comparative genomics approach for innate immunity gene discovery.

PMCID: PMC3293945
PMID: 22312129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Exp Med. 2012 Feb 13;209(2):307-18. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111298. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

IRE1a activation protects mice against acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity.

Hur KY(1), So JS, Ruda V, Frank-Kamenetsky M, Fitzgerald K, Koteliansky V,
Iwawaki T, Glimcher LH, Lee AH.

Author information: 
(1)Deartment of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The mammalian stress sensor IRE1a plays a central role in the unfolded protein,
or endoplasmic reticulum (ER), stress response by activating its downstream
transcription factor XBP1 via an unconventional splicing mechanism. IRE1a can
also induce the degradation of a subset of mRNAs in a process termed regulated
IRE1-dependent decay (RIDD). Although diverse mRNA species can be degraded by
IRE1a in vitro, the pathophysiological functions of RIDD are only beginning to be
explored. Acetaminophen (APAP) overdose is the most frequent cause of acute liver
failure in young adults in the United States and is primarily caused by CYP1A2-, 
CYP2E1-, and CYP3A4-driven conversion of APAP into hepatotoxic metabolites. We
demonstrate here that genetic ablation of XBP1 results in constitutive IRE1a
activation in the liver, leading to RIDD of Cyp1a2 and Cyp2e1 mRNAs, reduced JNK 
activation, and protection of mice from APAP-induced hepatotoxicity. A
pharmacological ER stress inducer that activated IRE1a suppressed the expression 
of Cyp1a2 and Cyp2e1 in WT, but not IRE1a-deficient mouse liver, indicating the
essential role of IRE1a in the down-regulation of these mRNAs upon ER stress. Our
study reveals an unexpected function of RIDD in drug metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3280871
PMID: 22291093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Struct Funct. 2012;37(1):49-53. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Ultraviolet a induces endoplasmic reticulum stress response in human dermal
fibroblasts.

Komori R(1), Taniguchi M, Ichikawa Y, Uemura A, Oku M, Wakabayashi S, Higuchi K, 
Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biochemistry, Graduate School of Life Science,
University of Hyogo, Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response is a cytoprotective mechanism
against the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER (ER stress) that consists
of three response pathways (the ATF6, IRE1 and PERK pathways) in mammals. These
pathways regulate the transcription of ER-related genes through specific
cis-acting elements, ERSE, UPRE and AARE, respectively. Because the mammalian ER 
stress response is markedly activated in professional secretory cells, its main
function was thought to be to upregulate the capacity of protein folding in the
ER in accordance with the increased synthesis of secretory proteins. Here, we
found that ultraviolet A (UVA) irradiation induced the conversion of an
ER-localized sensor pATF6a(P) to an active transcription factor pATF6a(N) in
normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDFs). UVA also induced IRE1-mediated splicing 
of XBP1 mRNA as well as PERK-mediated phosphorylation of an a subunit of
eukaryotic initiation factor 2. Consistent with these observations, we found that
UVA increased transcription from ERSE, UPRE and AARE elements. From these
results, we concluded that UVA irradiation activates all branches of the
mammalian ER stress response in NHDFs. This suggests that the mammalian ER stress
response is activated by not only intrinsic stress but also environmental stress.

PMID: 22251794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Chemosphere. 2012 Apr;87(4):423-34. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.12.046. Epub 
2012 Jan 13.

Silica nanoparticles and silver-doped silica nanoparticles induce endoplasmatic
reticulum stress response and alter cytochrome P4501A activity.

Christen V(1), Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life
Sciences, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Engineered silica nanoparticles (SiO(2)-NPs) find widespread application and may 
lead to exposure of humans and the environment. Here we compare the effects of
SiO(2)-NPs and SiO(2)-NPs doped with silver (SiO(2)-Ag-NPs) on survival and
cellular function of human liver cells (Huh7) and Pimephales promelas (fathead
minnow) fibroblast cells (FMH). In Huh7 cells we investigate effects on the
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER), including ER stress, and interactions of
nanoparticles (NPs) with metabolizing enzymes and efflux transporters. The NPs
formed agglomerates/aggregates in cell culture media as revealed by SEM and TEM. 
SiO(2) and SiO(2)-1% Ag-NPs were taken up into cells as demonstrated by
agglomerates occurring in vesicular-like structures or freely dispersed in the
cytosol. Cytotoxicity was more pronounced in Huh7 than in FMH cells, and
increased with silver content in silver-doped NPs. Dissolved silver was the most 
significant factor for cytotoxicity. At toxic and non-cytotoxic concentrations
SiO(2)-NPs and SiO(2)-1% Ag-NPs induced perturbations in the function of ER. In
Huh7 cells NPs induced the unfolded protein response (UPR), or ER stress
response, as demonstrated in induced expression of BiP and splicing of XBP1 mRNA,
two selective markers of ER stress. Additionally, SiO(2)-1% Ag-NPs and AgNO(3)
induced reactive oxygen species. Pre-treatment of Huh7 cells with SiO(2)-1%
Ag-NPs followed by exposure to the inducer benzo(a)pyrene caused a significant
reduced induction of CYP1A activity. NPs did not alter the activity of ABC
transporters. These data demonstrate for the first time that SiO(2)-NPs and
SiO(2)-1% Ag-NPs result in perturbations of the ER leading to the ER stress
response. This represents a novel and significant cellular signalling pathway
contributing to the cytotoxicity of NPs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029712. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus-infected hepatocytes induce ER-stress and
apoptosis crosstalk.

Rodrigues R(1), Paranhos-Baccalà G, Vernet G, Peyrefitte CN.

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Pathogens Laboratory, Fondation Mérieux, Lyon, France.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a widely distributed tick-borne 
member of the Nairovirus genus (Bunyaviridae) with a high mortality rate in
humans. CCHFV induces a severe disease in infected patients that includes, among 
other symptoms, massive liver necrosis and failure. The interaction between liver
cells and CCHFV is therefore important for understanding the pathogenesis of this
disease. Here, we described the in vitro CCHFV-infection and -replication in the 
hepatocyte cell line, Huh7, and the induced cellular and molecular response
modulation. We found that CCHFV was able to infect and replicate to high titres
and to induce a cytopathic effect (CPE). We also observed by flow cytometry and
real time quantitative RT-PCR evidence of apoptosis, with the participation of
the mitochondrial pathway. On the other hand, we showed that the replication of
CCHFV in hepatocytes was able to interfere with the death receptor pathway of
apoptosis. Furthermore, we found in CCHFV-infected cells the over-expression of
PUMA, Noxa and CHOP suggesting the crosstalk between the ER-stress and
mitochondrial apoptosis. By ELISA, we observed an increase of IL-8 in response to
viral replication; however apoptosis was shown to be independent from IL-8
secretion. When we compared the induced cellular response between CCHFV and DUGV,
a mild or non-pathogenic Nairovirus for humans, we found that the most striking
difference was the absence of CPE and apoptosis. Despite the XBP1 splicing and
PERK gene expression induced by DUGV, no ER-stress and apoptosis crosstalk was
observed. Overall, these results suggest that CCHFV is able to induce ER-stress, 
activate inflammatory mediators and modulate both mitochondrial and death
receptor pathways of apoptosis in hepatocyte cells, which may, in part, explain
the role of the liver in the pathogenesis of CCHFV.

PMCID: PMC3253088
PMID: 22238639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28863. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028863. Epub 2011 Dec 28.

The absence of MIST1 leads to increased ethanol sensitivity and decreased
activity of the unfolded protein response in mouse pancreatic acinar cells.

Alahari S(1), Mehmood R, Johnson CL, Pin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol abuse is a leading cause of pancreatitis in humans. However, 
rodent models suggest that alcohol only sensitizes the pancreas to subsequent
insult, indicating that additional factors play a role in alcohol-induced
pancreatic injury. The goal of this study was to determine if an absence of
MIST1, a transcription factor required for complete differentiation of pancreatic
acinar cells in mice, increased the sensitivity to alcohol.
METHODS: Two to four month-old mice lacking MIST1 (Mist1(-/-)) or congenic C57
Bl6 mice were placed on a Lieber-DeCarli diet (36% of total kcal from ethanol and
fat), a control liquid diet (36% kcal from fat) or a regular breeding chow diet
(22% kcal from fat). After six weeks, pancreatic morphology was assessed.
Biochemical and immunofluorescent analysis was used to assess mediators of the
unfolded protein response (UPR).
RESULTS: Ethanol-fed Mist1(-/-) mice developed periductal accumulations of
inflammatory cells that did not appear in wild type or control-fed Mist1(-/-)
mice. Wild type mice fed diets high in ethanol or fat showed enhancement of the
UPR based on increased accumulation of peIF2a and spliced XBP1. These increases
were not observed in Mist1(-/-) pancreatic tissue, which had elevated levels of
UPR activity prior to diet exposure. Indeed, exposure to ethanol resulted in a
reduction of UPR activity in Mist1(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that an absence of MIST1 increases the
sensitivity to ethanol that correlated with decreased activity of the UPR.
Therefore, events that affect the expression and/or function of MIST1 may be
confounding factors in pancreatitis.

© 2011 Alahari et al.

PMCID: PMC3247225
PMID: 22216129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(5):992-1003. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06665-11. Epub 2012 Jan 
3.

A novel feedback loop regulates the response to endoplasmic reticulum stress via 
the cooperation of cytoplasmic splicing and mRNA translation.

Majumder M(1), Huang C, Snider MD, Komar AA, Tanaka J, Kaufman RJ, Krokowski D,
Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nutrition, Case Western University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers 
transcriptional and translational reprogramming. This unfolded protein response
(UPR) protects cells during transient stress and can lead to apoptosis during
prolonged stress. Two key mediators of the UPR are PKR-like ER kinase (PERK),
which phosphorylates the a subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 
(eIF2a), resulting in decreased protein synthesis, and the a subunit of
inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1a), which initiates cytoplasmic splicing of the 
mRNA encoding the transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). XBP1
induces transcription of genes involved in protein quality control. This report
describes cross talk between these two pathways: phosphorylation of eIF2a was
required for maximal induction of spliced XBP1 (XBP1s) protein levels via a
mechanism that involved stabilization of XBP1s mRNA. By using mouse embryo
fibroblasts deficient in UPR signaling pathways, we demonstrate that
stress-induced stabilization of XBP1s mRNA requires cytoplasmic splicing of the
mRNA and inhibition of its translation. Because the XBP1s protein promotes
transcription of its own gene, the UPR-induced mRNA stabilization is part of a
positive feedback loop that induces XBP1s protein accumulation and transcription 
of target genes during stress. We propose a model in which eIF2a
phosphorylation-mediated control of mRNA turnover is a molecular switch that
regulates the stress response transcription program and the ER's capacity for
protein folding during stress.

PMCID: PMC3295193
PMID: 22215619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 Mar;50(3-4):1149-58. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2011.12.018. Epub
2011 Dec 21.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress response is involved in apoptosis induced by
aloe-emodin in HK-2 cells.

Zhu S(1), Jin J, Wang Y, Ouyang Z, Xi C, Li J, Qiu Y, Wan J, Huang M, Huang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center of Laboratory Animals, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510006, PR China.

Comment in
    Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Jan;51:458.

Aloe-emodin (AE; 1,8-dihydroxy-3-hydroxymethyl-9,10-anthracenedione) is one of
the primary active compounds in total rhubarb anthraquinones (TRAs), which induce
nephrotoxicity in rats. However, it is still not known whether AE has a similar
effect on human kidney cells. In this study,
3-(4,5,-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays showed
that AE decreases the viability of HK-2 cells (a human proximal tubular
epithelial cell line) in a dose- and time-dependent manner. AE induced G2/M
arrest of cell cycle in HK-2 cells, which was detected with propidium iodide (PI)
staining. This apoptosis was further investigated by Hoechst staining,
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), DNA fragmentation, and Annexin V/PI
staining. Apoptosis of the cells was associated with caspase 3 activation, which 
was detected by Western blot analysis and a caspase activity assay. In addition, 
changes in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) ultrastructure as observed by TEM
showed the effects of AE on ER. Treatment with AE also resulted in an increase in
eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF-2a) phosphorylation, X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1) mRNA splicing, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation,
glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78 and CAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous
protein (CHOP) accumulation. These results suggest that AE induces ER stress in
HK-2 cells, which is involved in AE-induced apoptosis. In conclusion, AE induces 
apoptosis in HK-2 cells, and the ER stress is involved in AE-induced apoptosis in
vitro. The implications of the toxic effects of AE for clinical use are unclear
and these findings should be taken into account in the risk assessment for human 
exposure.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22210228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cells. 2012 Oct 15;1(4):738-53. doi: 10.3390/cells1040738.

Intricately Regulated: A Cellular Toolbox for Fine-Tuning XBP1 Expression and
Activity.

Byrd AE(1), Brewer JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA. eab303@jaguar1.usouthal.edu. (2)Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of South Alabama,
Mobile, AL 36688, USA. jbrewer@southalabama.edu.

Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers the unfolded protein response
(UPR), a signaling mechanism that allows cellular adaptation to ER stress by
engaging pro-adaptive transcription factors and alleviating protein folding
demand. One such transcription factor, X-box binding protein (XBP1), originates
from the inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease 1 (IRE1) UPR
stress sensor. XBP1 up-regulates a pool of genes involved in ER protein
translocation, protein folding, vesicular trafficking and ER- associated protein 
degradation. Recent data suggest that the regulation of XBP1 expression and
transcriptional activity may be a tissue- and stress-dependent phenomenon.
Moreover, the intricacies involved in &ldquo;fine-tuning&rdquo; XBP1 activity in 
various settings are now coming to light. Here, we provide an overview of recent 
developments in understanding the regulatory mechanisms underlying XBP1
expression and activity and discuss the significance of these new insights.

PMCID: PMC3901129
PMID: 24710528  [PubMed]


80. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 27;86(4):128. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095059. Print
2012 Apr.

Effect of endoplasmic reticulum stress on porcine oocyte maturation and
parthenogenetic embryonic development in vitro.

Zhang JY(1), Diao YF, Oqani RK, Han RX, Jin DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science & Biotechnology, Research Center for Transgenic
Cloned Pigs, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) is an important regulator of a subset of genes
active during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In the present study, we
analyzed XBP1 level and location to explore the effect of ER stress on oocyte
maturation and developmental competency of porcine embryos in an in vitro culture
system. First, we examined the localization of XBP1 at different meiotic stages
of porcine oocytes and at early stages of parthenogenetic embryo development.
Fluorescence staining showed that expression of functional XBP1 was weak in
mature oocytes and at the 1-, 2-, and 8-cell stages of embryos but abundant at
the germinal vesicle (GV), 4-cell, morula, and blastocyst stages. In addition,
RT-PCR revealed that both spliced XBP1 (XBP1-s) and unspliced XBP1 (XBP1-u) were 
expressed at the GV, 4-cell, morula, and blastocyst stages. Tunicamycin, an ER
stress inducer, induced active XBP1 protein in nuclei of 4-cell embryos. Next,
porcine embryos cultured in the presence of tauroursodeoxycholate, an ER stress
inhibitor, were studied. Total cell numbers and the extent of the inner cell mass
increased (P < 0.05), whereas the rate of nuclear apoptosis decreased (P < 0.05).
Moreover, expression of the antiapoptotic gene BCL2 increased, whereas expression
of the proapoptotic genes BCL2L1 (Bcl-xl) and TP53 decreased. The results
indicated that inhibition of ER stress enhanced porcine oocyte maturation and
embryonic development by preventing ER stress-mediated apoptosis in vitro.

PMID: 22190710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2012 Feb;139(3):558-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.073858. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Deficient Notch signaling associated with neurogenic pecanex is compensated for
by the unfolded protein response in Drosophila.

Yamakawa T(1), Yamada K, Sasamura T, Nakazawa N, Kanai M, Suzuki E, Fortini ME,
Matsuno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, 
Noda, Chiba, 278-8510 Japan.

The Notch (N) signaling machinery is evolutionarily conserved and regulates a
broad spectrum of cell-specification events, through local cell-cell
communication. pecanex (pcx) encodes a multi-pass transmembrane protein of
unknown function, widely found from Drosophila to humans. The zygotic and
maternal loss of pcx in Drosophila causes a neurogenic phenotype (hyperplasia of 
the embryonic nervous system), suggesting that pcx might be involved in N
signaling. Here, we established that Pcx is a component of the N-signaling
pathway. Pcx was required upstream of the membrane-tethered and the nuclear forms
of activated N, probably in N signal-receiving cells, suggesting that pcx is
required prior to or during the activation of N. pcx overexpression revealed that
Pcx resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Disruption of pcx function
resulted in enlargement of the ER that was not attributable to the reduced N
signaling activity. In addition, hyper-induction of the unfolded protein response
(UPR) by the expression of activated Xbp1 or dominant-negative Heat shock protein
cognate 3 suppressed the neurogenic phenotype and ER enlargement caused by the
absence of pcx. A similar suppression of these phenotypes was induced by
overexpression of O-fucosyltransferase 1, an N-specific chaperone. Taking these
results together, we speculate that the reduction in N signaling in embryos
lacking pcx function might be attributable to defective ER functions, which are
compensated for by upregulation of the UPR and possibly by enhancement of N
folding. Our results indicate that the ER plays a previously unrecognized role in
N signaling and that this ER function depends on pcx activity.

PMID: 22190636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(11):7652-61. doi: 10.3390/ijms12117652. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Lidocaine induces endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated apoptosis in vitro and 
in vivo.

Hong DY(1), Kwon K, Lee KR, Choi YJ, Goo TW, Yu K, Kim SW, Kwon OY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul
143-729, Korea; E-Mails: sean1011@daum.net (D.Y.H.); lkrer@kuh.ac.kr (K.R.L.).

We demonstrated that upregulation of both gene expression of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress chaperones (BiP, calnexin, calreticulin, and PDI) and ER
stress sensors (ATF6, IRE1 and PERK) was induced by lidocaine, a local
anesthetic, in PC12 cells. In addition to gene regulation, lidocaine also induced
typical ER stress phenomena such as ART6 proteolytic cleavage, eIF2 alpha
phosphorylation, and XBP1 mRNA splicing. In in vivo experiments, while lidocaine 
downregulated gene expression of antiapoptotic factors (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xl),
pro-apoptotic factor (Bak and Bax) gene expression was upregulated. Furthermore, 
lidocaine induced apoptosis, as measured histochemically, and upregulated PARP1, 
a DNA damage repair enzyme. These results are the first to show that lidocaine
induces apoptosis through ER stress in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3233429
PMID: 22174623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Hum Reprod. 2012 May;18(5):229-42. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar076. Epub 2011 Dec 
7.

Embryo collection induces transient activation of XBP1 arm of the ER stress
response while embryo vitrification does not.

Abraham T(1), Pin CL, Watson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Western Ontario,
London, ON, Canada N6C 2V5.

Embryo cryopreservation has become a standard procedure in the practice of
assisted reproduction. While routinely performed in IVF labs, the effects of
embryo vitrification on the molecular mechanisms governing preimplantation
development remain largely unknown. The endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) 
response is an evolutionary conserved mechanism that cells employ to manage ER
stress. ER stress can be defined as an imbalance between protein synthesis and
secretion within the ER. The primary focus of this study was to investigate
whether standard embryo manipulations, including embryo collection, culture and
vitrification, result in activation of the ER stress pathway in vitro and to
determine whether the embryo utilizes the unfolded protein response as an
adaptive response. Our results indicate that the major ER stress pathway
constituents are present at all stages of preimplantation development and that
the activation of ER stress pathways can be induced at the 8-cell, morula and
blastocyst stages. Additionally, we have demonstrated that the IRE1a arm of the
ER Stress pathway is activated in freshly collected embryos but contrastingly,
this ER Stress arm is not activated following embryo vitrification. It is
important to understand the possible stresses that Assisted Reproductive
Technologies place on the embryo and the mechanisms the embryo employs to adapt
to these stresses. This study indicates that among the adaptive pathways
available, cultured mammalian embryos can employ the ER stress pathway. Assisted 
reproduction techniques should be aware that their activities may induce the ER
stress pathway in their patients' early embryos.

PMID: 22155729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2558-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.316760. Epub 2011 
Nov 28.

Dissociation of inositol-requiring enzyme (IRE1a)-mediated c-Jun N-terminal
kinase activation from hepatic insulin resistance in conditional X-box-binding
protein-1 (XBP1) knock-out mice.

Jurczak MJ(1), Lee AH, Jornayvaz FR, Lee HY, Birkenfeld AL, Guigni BA, Kahn M,
Samuel VT, Glimcher LH, Shulman GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06536-8012, USA.

Hepatic insulin resistance has been attributed to both increased endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and accumulation of intracellular lipids, specifically
diacylglycerol (DAG). The ER stress response protein, X-box-binding protein-1
(XBP1), was recently shown to regulate hepatic lipogenesis, suggesting that
hepatic insulin resistance in models of ER stress may result from defective lipid
storage, as opposed to ER-specific stress signals. Studies were designed to
dissociate liver lipid accumulation and activation of ER stress signaling
pathways, which would allow us to delineate the individual contributions of ER
stress and hepatic lipid content to the pathogenesis of hepatic insulin
resistance. Conditional XBP1 knock-out (XBP1<U+0394>) and control mice were fed fructose
chow for 1 week. Determinants of whole-body energy balance, weight, and
composition were determined. Hepatic lipids including triglyceride, DAGs, and
ceramide were measured, alongside markers of ER stress. Whole-body and
tissue-specific insulin sensitivity were determined by
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp studies. Hepatic ER stress signaling was
increased in fructose chow-fed XBP1<U+0394> mice as reflected by increased
phosphorylated eIF2a, HSPA5 mRNA, and a 2-fold increase in hepatic JNK activity. 
Despite JNK activation, XBP1<U+0394> displayed increased hepatic insulin sensitivity
during hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp studies, which was associated with
increased insulin-stimulated IRS2 tyrosine phosphorylation, reduced hepatic DAG
content, and reduced PKCe activity. These studies demonstrate that ER stress and 
IRE1a-mediated JNK activation can be disassociated from hepatic insulin
resistance and support the hypothesis that hepatic insulin resistance in models
of ER stress may be secondary to ER stress modulation of hepatic lipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3268415
PMID: 22128176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Calcium. 2012 Jan;51(1):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ceca.2011.10.003. Epub 2011 Nov
25.

Sarcalumenin plays a critical role in age-related cardiac dysfunction due to
decreases in SERCA2a expression and activity.

Jiao Q(1), Takeshima H, Ishikawa Y, Minamisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, Waseda University,
Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Impaired Ca(2+) reuptake into the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) underlies a primary
pathogenesis of heart failure in the aging heart. Sarcalumenin (SAR), a
Ca(2+)-binding glycoprotein located in the longitudinal SR, regulates Ca(2+)
reuptake by interacting with SR Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA). Here we found that the
expression levels of both SAR and SERCA2 proteins were significantly
downregulated in senescent wild-type mice (18-month old) and that downregulation 
of SAR protein preceded downregulation of SERCA2 protein. The downregulation of
SERCA2 protein was greater in senescent SARKO mice than in age-matched senescent 
wild-type mice, which was at least in part due to progressive degradation of
SERCA2 protein in SARKO mice. Senescent SARKO mice exhibited typical findings of 
heart failure such as increased sympathetic activity, impaired exercise
tolerance, and upregulation of biomarkers of cardiac stress. Consequently,
cardiac function was progressively decreased in senescent SARKO. We also found
that the expression levels of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-related genes
such as x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) were significantly increased in senescent 
SARKO mice, indicating that senescent SARKO mice exhibited ER stress. Thus we
uncovered the important role of SAR in maintaining Ca(2+) transport activity of
SERCA2a and cardiac function in the senescent population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22119571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Res Int. 2012;2012:738471. doi: 10.1155/2012/738471. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

UPR-Mediated Membrane Biogenesis in B Cells.

Brewer JW(1), Jackowski S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) can coordinate the regulation of gene
transcription and protein translation to balance the load of client proteins with
the protein folding and degradative capacities of the ER. Increasing evidence
also implicates the UPR in the regulation of lipid synthesis and membrane
biogenesis. The differentiation of B lymphocytes into antibody-secreting cells is
marked by significant expansion of the ER, the site for antibody synthesis and
assembly. In activated B cells, the demand for membrane protein and lipid
components leads to activation of the UPR transcriptional activator XBP1(S)
which, in turn, initiates a cascade of biochemical events that enhance supplies
of phospholipid precursors and build machinery for the synthesis, maturation, and
transport of secretory proteins. The alterations in lipid metabolism that occur
during this developmental transition and the impact of membrane phospholipid
restriction on B cell secretory characteristics are discussed in this paper.

PMCID: PMC3206326
PMID: 22110962  [PubMed]


87. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Mar;5(2):259-69. doi: 10.1242/dmm.008110. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Metformin differentially activates ER stress signaling pathways without inducing 
apoptosis.

Quentin T(1), Steinmetz M, Poppe A, Thoms S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine,
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. thomas.quentin@med.uni-goettingen.de

Endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling (ERSS) plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of diabetes and heart disease. The latter is a common comorbidity of
diabetes and worsens patient outcome. Results from clinical studies suggest
beneficial effects of metformin - a widely used oral drug for the treatment of
type 2 diabetes - on the heart of diabetic patients with heart failure. We
therefore analyzed the effect of metformin on ERSS in primary rat cardiomyocytes.
We found that metformin activates the PERK-ATF4 but not the ATF6 or IRE1-XBP1
branch in ERSS and leads to a strong upregulation of CHOP mRNA and protein.
Surprisingly, long-term induction of CHOP by metformin is not accompanied by
apoptosis even though CHOP is regarded to be a mediator of ER-stress-induced
apoptosis. In conclusion, metformin induces distinct ER stress pathways in
cardiomyocytes and our results indicate that CHOP is not necessarily a mediator
of apoptosis. Metformin might exert its cardioprotective effect through selective
activation of ERSS pathways in the cardiomyocyte.

PMCID: PMC3291647
PMID: 22107872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Clin Pathol. 2011 Dec;136(6):960-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCPDQNP2U5DZHVV.

Multiparametric flow cytometry for identification and fluorescence activated cell
sorting of five distinct B-cell subpopulations in normal tonsil tissue.

Kjeldsen MK(1), Perez-Andres M, Schmitz A, Johansen P, Boegsted M, Nyegaard M,
Gaihede M, Bukh A, Johnsen HE, Orfao A, Dybkaer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aalborg, Denmark.

The purpose of this study was to establish a procedure capable of isolating
distinct B-cell subpopulations from human tonsils as a basis for subsequent
molecular analyses. Overall, 5 distinct B-cell subpopulations were purified from 
fresh tonsils based on their fluorescence surface marker expression: naive B
cells, centroblasts, centrocytes, memory B cells, and plasmablasts. The
immunophenotypic identity of the subpopulations was verified by quantitative
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using the proliferation
marker MKI-67 and 6 B-cell-associated differentiation markers (BACH2, BCL6, PAX5,
IRF4, PRDM1, and XBP1). Furthermore, within the centroblast compartment, large
and small centroblasts could be distinguished and large centroblasts were shown
to proliferate with a morphologic appearance of a "centroblast"-like cell but
with lower gene expression of the germinal center markers BCL6 and BACH2 vs small
centroblasts. This study has established a detailed and fast procedure for
simultaneous sorting of up to 5 distinct maturation-associated B-cell
subpopulations from human tonsils.

PMID: 22095383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Leuk Res. 2012 May;36(5):646-55. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.10.019. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

Transcriptional deregulation of homeobox gene ZHX2 in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Schneider B, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, Macleod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Recently, we identified a novel chromosomal rearrangement in Hodgkin lymphoma
(HL), t(4;8)(q27;q24), which targets homeobox gene ZHX2 at the recurrent
breakpoint 8q24. This aberration deletes the far upstream region of ZHX2 and
results in silenced transcription pinpointing loss of activatory elements. Here, 
we have looked for potential binding sites within this deleted region to analyze 
the transcriptional deregulation of this tumor suppressor gene in B-cell
malignancies. SiRNA-mediated knockdown and reporter gene analyses identified two 
transcription factors, homeodomain protein MSX1 and bZIP protein XBP1, directly
regulating ZHX2 expression. Furthermore, MSX1-cofactor histone H1C mediated
repression of ZHX2 and showed enhanced expression levels in cell line L-1236. As 
demonstrated by fluorescence in situ hybridization and genomic array analysis,
the gene loci of MSX1 at 4p16 and H1C at 6p22 were rearranged in several HL cell 
lines, correlating with their altered expression activity. The expression of XBP1
was reduced in 6/7 HL cell lines as compared to primary hematopoietic cells.
Taken together, our results demonstrate multiple mechanisms decreasing expression
of tumor suppressor gene ZHX2 in HL cell lines: loss of enhancing binding sites, 
reduced expression of activators MSX1 and XBP1, and overexpression of
MSX1-corepressor H1C. Moreover, chromosomal deregulations of genes involved in
this regulative network highlight their role in development and malignancy of
B-cells.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22078940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Struct Funct. 2011;36(2):247-59. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Vertebrate unfolded protein response: mammalian signaling pathways are conserved 
in Medaka fish.

Ishikawa T(1), Taniguchi Y, Okada T, Takeda S, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

The accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates
the unfolded protein response (UPR). The ER stress signal is sensed and
transmitted by a transmembrane protein(s) in the ER. The number of these
transducers has increased with evolution, one in yeast, three in worm and fly,
and five in mammals. Here, we examined medaka fish, Oryzias latipes, as a
vertebrate model organism, and found that the medaka genome encodes five UPR
transducers. Analysis of a medaka embryonic cell line revealed that the mammalian
UPR signaling mechanisms are very well conserved. Thus, XBP1 mRNA, which encodes 
the transcription factor XBP1 downstream of the IRE1 pathway, was spliced in
response to ER stress, resulting in production of the active form of XBP1.
Translation was generally attenuated in response to ER stress, which
paradoxically induced the translation of ATF4, the transcription factor
downstream of the PERK pathway. ATF6 was constitutively synthesized as a
transmembrane protein and activated by ER stress-induced proteolysis. Results
obtained with the overexpression of active ATF6a, ATF6ß, and XBP1 strongly
suggested that ATF6a plays a major role in upregulating the major ER chaperone
BiP, contrary to the case in non-vertebrates, in which the IRE1 pathway is
essential to the induction of BiP. Physiological ER stress occurring during
embryonic development was visualized using transgenic medaka carrying the
enhanced green fluorescent protein gene under the control of the BiP promoter.
Thus, analysis of the vertebrate UPR using medaka will help provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the biology and physiology of the UPR.

PMID: 22067999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Plant J. 2012 Mar;69(6):946-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04844.x. Epub 2011 
Dec 12.

Signal transduction by IRE1-mediated splicing of bZIP50 and other stress sensors 
in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response of rice.

Hayashi S(1), Wakasa Y, Takahashi H, Kawakatsu T, Takaiwa F.

Author information: 
(1)Genetically Modified Organism Research Center, National Institute of
Agrobiological Sciences, Kannondai 2-1-2, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensor IRE1 transduces signals by inducing 
the unconventional splicing of mRNAs encoding key transcription factors: HAC1 in 
yeast and XBP1 in animals. However, no HAC1 or XBP1 homologues have been found in
plants, and until recently the substrate for plant IRE1 has remained unknown.
This study demonstrates that the Oryza sativa (rice) OsbZIP50 transcription
factor, an orthologue of Arabidopsis AtbZIP60, is regulated by IRE1-mediated
splicing of its RNA. Despite the presence of a transcriptional activation domain,
OsbZIP50 protein is not translocated into the nucleus efficiently in the absence 
of OsbZIP50 mRNA splicing. Unconventional splicing of OsbZIP50 mRNA causes a
frame shift, which results in the appearance of a nuclear localization signal in 
the newly translated OsbZIP50. OsbZIP50 mRNA is spliced in a similar manner to
HAC1 and XBP1 mRNAs; however, this splicing has very different effects on the
translation products, a finding that shows the diversity of IRE1-related
transcription factors in eukaryotes. In addition, the expression of OsbZIP50 is
affected by ER stress sensor proteins OsIRE1, OsbZIP39 and OsbZIP60. ER
stress-related genes differ with respect to their dependency on OsbZIP50 for
their expression. The findings of this study improve our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms underlying the plant ER stress response.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22050533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Mar;17(2):275-9. doi: 10.1007/s12192-011-0306-2.
Epub 2011 Oct 31.

A quantitative method for detection of spliced X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1)
mRNA as a measure of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.

van Schadewijk A(1), van't Wout EF, Stolk J, Hiemstra PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. A.van_Schadewijk@lumc.nl

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is increasingly recognized as an important
mechanism in a wide range of diseases including cystic fibrosis, alpha-1
antitrypsin deficiency, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, there is 
an increased need for reliable and quantitative markers for detection of ER
stress in human tissues and cells. Accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins
in the endoplasmic reticulum can cause ER stress, which leads to the activation
of the unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR signaling involves splicing of X-box 
binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA, which is frequently used as a marker for ER
stress. In most studies, the splicing of the XBP1 mRNA is visualized by gel
electrophoresis which is laborious and difficult to quantify. In the present
study, we have developed and validated a quantitative real-time RT-PCR method to 
detect the spliced form of XBP1 mRNA.

PMCID: PMC3273559
PMID: 22038282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 18;415(2):252-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.025. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

17ß-Estradiol attenuates saturated fatty acid diet-induced liver injury in
ovariectomized mice by up-regulating hepatic senescence marker protein-30.

Fukui M(1), Senmaru T, Hasegawa G, Yamazaki M, Asano M, Kagami Y, Ishigami A,
Maruyama N, Iwasa K, Kitawaki J, Itoh Y, Okanoue T, Ohta M, Obayashi H, Nakamura 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Japan.
michiaki@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Senescence marker protein-30 (SMP30) plays an important role in intracellular
Ca(2+) homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects
of estrogens on liver apoptotic damage and changes in SMP30 expression induced by
a high saturated fatty acid diet (HSFD). Ovariectomized mice (OVX) and
sham-operated mice (SHAM) were randomly divided into five groups: SHAM fed a
normal diet (SHAM/ND), SHAM fed HSFD (SHAM/HSFD), OVX fed ND (OVX/ND), OVX fed
HSFD (OVX/HSFD) and OVX fed HSFD with 17ß-estradiol (E2) supplementation using an
implanted slow-release pellet (OVX/HSFD+E2). After 8 weeks, markers of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and apoptosis, and levels of tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNFa and SMP30 expression were investigated. Compared with SHAM/ND,
OVX/HSFD mice showed significantly increased spliced X-box protein-1 (s-XBP1),
phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (p-eIF2a), glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GPR78), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), cytosolic cytochrome c,
caspase-3 activity, and TNFa, and significantly decreased SMP30. These
differences in OVX/HSFD mice were restored to the levels of SHAM/ND mice by E2
supplementation. These results suggest that E2 supplementation attenuates
HSFD-induced liver apoptotic death in ovariectomized mice by up-regulating SMP30.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22037452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 18;415(2):294-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.048. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Role of activating transcription factor 3 in low glucose- and
thapsigargin-induced apoptosis in cultured mouse islets.

Duprez J(1), Jonas JC.

Author information: 
(1)Université catholique de Louvain, Institute of Experimental and Clinical
Research, Pole of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Brussels, Belgium.

In vitro, survival and function of rat pancreatic ß-cells are optimally preserved
in the presence of 10 mmol/l glucose (G10) and markedly altered by prolonged
culture at either 2 mmol/l glucose (G2) or 30 mmol/l glucose (G30). The increase 
in islet cell apoptosis in G2 and G30 vs. G10 is preceded by parallel increases
in the mRNA levels of the integrated stress response (ISR) gene activating
transcription factor 3 (Atf3) and its putative target and proapoptotic gene
growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (Gadd153/Chop). In this study,
we used islets from Atf3 knockout (Atf3(-/-)) mice to test the role of ATF3 in
the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis under conditions associated with ISR
activation. The glucose sensitivity of Atf3(-/-) and WT islets for the
stimulation of insulin secretion and Xbp1 mRNA splicing during 18h culture was
similar, demonstrating that glucose metabolism was unaffected by Atf3 deletion.
However, the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis by the SERCA pump inhibitor
thapsigargin was slightly but significantly reduced in Atf3(-/-) vs. WT islets
despite similar level of expression of Gadd153 and Gadd34 mRNA. Also, the
stimulation of islet cell apoptosis by 7 days of culture in G2 was slightly but
significantly reduced in Atf3(-/-) vs. WT islets, and this effect was accompanied
by a significant reduction in Gadd153 mRNA expression. In conclusion, the
increase in Atf3 gene expression induced by thapsigargin and low glucose
concentrations slightly contributes to the stimulation of islet cell apoptosis
under these culture conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22033410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Curr Drug Deliv. 2012 Jul;9(4):326-32.

"Metabolic aspects" in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Kaser A(1), Tilg H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II (Gastroenterology and Hepatology), Medical
University Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
arthur.kaser@i-med.ac.at

Mesenteric fat hypertrophy is a common feature of inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBD), especially Crohn's disease. Although this "creeping fat" has been observed
in the early days of this disease, its biological relevance is not understood.
This adipose tissue has been recognized to release large amounts of various
cytokines such as TNFa and adipocytokines such as adiponectin or leptin. Whereas 
leptin is definitely a pro-inflammatory adipocytokine, the role of the prototypic
anti-inflammatory adipocytokine, namely adiponectin, in intestinal inflammation
is less clear. Some experimental studies suggest that it could exert also
pro-inflammatory activities in the gut. An important role for metabolic aspects
and potentially adipocytokines has also come from recent studies demonstrating
that ATG16L1- deficient mice show a strikingly enhanced expression of both
adiponectin and leptin in epithelial cells. Autophagy not only plays a key role
in intestinal inflammation, but is also involved in the regulation of lipid
metabolism. Another recently identified pathway in IBD, namely endoplasmic
stress/XBP1, regulates fatty acid synthesis and facilitates adipogenesis and
adipocyte differentiataion. Therefore, XBP1 could possibly link intestinal
inflammation with the development of "creeping fat" in Crohn's disease. Metabolic
aspects have evolved as of key importance in experimental colitis and human IBD, 
and certain adipocytokines, autophagy, and ER stress might reflect the central
players.

PMID: 22023201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Physiol Rev. 2011 Oct;91(4):1219-43. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00001.2011.

The unfolded protein response: integrating stress signals through the stress
sensor IRE1a.

Hetz C(1), Martinon F, Rodriguez D, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA. chetz@med.uchile.cl

Stress induced by accumulation of unfolded proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) is a classic feature of secretory cells and is observed in many tissues in
human diseases including cancer, diabetes, obesity, and neurodegeneration.
Cellular adaptation to ER stress is achieved by the activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR), an integrated signal transduction pathway that transmits 
information about the protein folding status at the ER to the nucleus and cytosol
to restore ER homeostasis. Inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endonuclease-1
(IRE1a), the most conserved UPR stress sensor, functions as an endoribonuclease
that processes the mRNA of the transcription factor X-box binding protein-1
(XBP1). IRE1a signaling is a highly regulated process, controlled by the
formation of a dynamic scaffold onto which many regulatory components assemble,
here referred to as the UPRosome. Here we provide an overview of the signaling
and regulatory mechanisms underlying IRE1a function and discuss the emerging role
of the UPR in adaptation to protein folding stress in specialized secretory cells
and in pathological conditions associated with alterations in ER homeostasis.

PMID: 22013210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41862-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.304956. Epub 2011
Oct 14.

The unfolded protein response (UPR)-activated transcription factor X-box-binding 
protein 1 (XBP1) induces microRNA-346 expression that targets the human antigen
peptide transporter 1 (TAP1) mRNA and governs immune regulatory genes.

Bartoszewski R(1), Brewer JW, Rab A, Crossman DK, Bartoszewska S, Kapoor N,
Fuller C, Collawn JF, Bebok Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama
35294-0005, USA. rafalbar@uab.edu

To identify endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced microRNAs (miRNA) that
govern ER protein influx during the adaptive phase of unfolded protein response, 
we performed miRNA microarray profiling and analysis in human airway epithelial
cells following ER stress induction using proteasome inhibition or tunicamycin
treatment. We identified miR-346 as the most significantly induced miRNA by both 
classic stressors. miR-346 is encoded within an intron of the glutamate receptor 
ionotropic delta-1 gene (GRID1), but its ER stress-associated expression is
independent of GRID1. We demonstrated that the spliced X-box-binding protein-1
(sXBP1) is necessary and sufficient for ER stress-associated miR-346 induction,
revealing a novel role for this unfolded protein response-activated transcription
factor. In mRNA profiling arrays, we identified 21 mRNAs that were reduced by
both ER stress and miR-346. The target genes of miR-346 regulate immune responses
and include the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I gene products,
interferon-induced genes, and the ER antigen peptide transporter 1 (TAP1).
Although most of the repressed mRNAs appear to be indirect targets because they
lack specific seeding sites for miR-346, we demonstrate that the human TAP1 mRNA 
is a direct target of miR-346. The human TAP1 mRNA 3'-UTR contains a 6-mer
canonical seeding site for miR-346. Importantly, the ER stress-associated
reduction in human TAP1 mRNA and protein levels could be reversed with an miR-346
antagomir. Because TAP function is necessary for proper MHC class I-associated
antigen presentation, our results provide a novel mechanistic explanation for
reduced MHC class I-associated antigen presentation that was observed during ER
stress.

PMCID: PMC3308892
PMID: 22002058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Feb;132(2):268-73. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.321. Epub 2011
Oct 13.

Six decades of vitiligo genetics: genome-wide studies provide insights into
autoimmune pathogenesis.

Spritz RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.
richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu

Generalized vitiligo (GV) is a complex disease in which patchy depigmentation
results from autoimmune loss of melanocytes from affected regions. Genetic
analyses of GV span six decades, with the goal of understanding biological
mechanisms and elucidating pathways that underlie the disease. The earliest
studies attempted to describe the mode of inheritance and genetic epidemiology.
Early genetic association studies of biological candidate genes resulted in some 
successes, principally HLA and PTPN22, but in hindsight many such reports now
seem to be false-positives. Later, genome-wide linkage studies of multiplex GV
families identified NLRP1 and XBP1, which appear to be valid GV susceptibility
genes that control key aspects of immune regulation. Recently, the application of
genome-wide association studies to analysis of GV has produced a rich yield of
validated GV susceptibility genes that encode components of biological pathways
reaching from immune cells to the melanocyte. These genes and pathways provide
insights into underlying pathogenetic mechanisms and possible triggers of GV,
establish relationships to other autoimmune diseases, and may provide clues to
potential new approaches to GV treatment and perhaps even prevention. These
results thus validate the hopes and efforts of the early investigators who first 
attempted to comprehend the genetic basis of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC3258303
PMID: 21993561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2011 Nov;31(11):847-56. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0132.
Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Interferon-inducible antiviral protein MxA enhances cell death triggered by
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Numajiri Haruki A(1), Naito T, Nishie T, Saito S, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

Human myxovirus resistance gene A (MxA) is a type I interferon-inducible protein 
and exhibits the antiviral activity against a variety of RNA viruses, including
influenza virus. Previously, we reported that MxA accelerates cell death of
influenza virus-infected cells through caspase-dependent and -independent
mechanisms. Similar to other viruses, influenza virus infection induces
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which is one of cell death inducers. Here, we 
have demonstrated that MxA enhances ER stress signaling in cells infected with
influenza virus. ER stress-induced events, such as expression of BiP mRNA and
processing of XBP1 mRNA, were upregulated in cells expressing MxA by treatment
with an ER stress inducer, tunicamycin (TM), as well as influenza virus
infection. TM-induced cell death was also accelerated by MxA. Furthermore, we
showed that MxA interacts with BiP and overexpression of BiP reduces MxA-promoted
ER stress signaling. Because cell death in virus-infected cells is one of
ultimate anti-virus mechanisms, we propose that MxA-enhanced ER stress signaling 
is a part of the antiviral activity of MxA by accelerating cell death.

PMID: 21992152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Open Biochem J. 2011;5:45-51. doi: 10.2174/1874091X01105010045. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

In the Huh7 Hepatoma Cells Diclofenac and Indomethacin Activate Differently the
Unfolded Protein Response and Induce ER Stress Apoptosis.

Franceschelli S(1), Moltedo O, Amodio G, Tajana G, Remondelli P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche e Biomediche, University of Salerno, via
Ponte Don Melillo, I-84084, Fisciano-Salerno, Italy.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are cyclooxygenases (COXs)
inhibitors frequently used in the treatment of acute and chronic inflammation.
Side effects of NSAIDs are often due to their ability to induce apoptosis.
Located at the Endoplasmic Reticulum membranes a tripartite signalling pathway,
collectively known as the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR), decides survival or
death of cells exposed to cytotoxic agents. To shed light on the molecular events
responsible for the cytotoxicity of NSAIDs, we analysed the ability of diclofenac
and indomethacin to activate the UPR in the human hepatoma cell line Huh7. We
report that both NSAIDs can induce differently the single arms of the UPR. We
show that indomethacin turns on the PERK and, only in part, the ATF6 and IRE1
pathways. Instead, diclofenac reduces the expression of ATF6 and does not
stimulate the IRE1 endonuclease, which drives the expression of the prosurvival
factor XBP1. Diclofenac, as well as indomethacin, is able to activate efficiently
only the PERK pathway of the UPR, which induces the expression of the
proapoptotic GADD153/CHOP protein. Our results highlight the importance of the
UPR in evaluating the potential of drugs to induce apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3182409
PMID: 21966325  [PubMed]


101. FASEB J. 2012 Jan;26(1):192-202. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-185983. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Disease-related amyloidogenic variants of human lysozyme trigger the unfolded
protein response and disturb eye development in Drosophila melanogaster.

Kumita JR(1), Helmfors L, Williams J, Luheshi LM, Menzer L, Dumoulin M, Lomas DA,
Crowther DC, Dobson CM, Brorsson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

We have created a Drosophila model of lysozyme amyloidosis to investigate the in 
vivo behavior of disease-associated variants. To achieve this objective,
wild-type (WT) protein and the amyloidogenic variants F57I and D67H were
expressed in Drosophila melanogaster using the UAS-gal4 system and both the
ubiquitous and retinal expression drivers Act5C-gal4 and gmr-gal4. The
nontransgenic w(1118) Drosophila line was used as a control throughout. We
utilized ELISA experiments to probe lysozyme protein levels, scanning electron
microscopy for eye phenotype classification, and immunohistochemistry to detect
the unfolded protein response (UPR) activation. We observed that expressing the
destabilized F57I and D67H lysozymes triggers UPR activation, resulting in
degradation of these variants, whereas the WT lysozyme is secreted into the fly
hemolymph. Indeed, the level of WT was up to 17 times more abundant than the
variant proteins. In addition, the F57I variant gave rise to a significant
disruption of the eye development, and this correlated to pronounced UPR
activation. These results support the concept that the onset of familial amyloid 
disease is linked to an inability of the UPR to degrade completely the
amyloidogenic lysozymes prior to secretion, resulting in secretion of these
destabilized variants, thereby leading to deposition and associated organ damage.

PMCID: PMC3250245
PMID: 21965601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):341-9. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.08.010. Epub 2011
Sep 15.

The genetic network controlling plasma cell differentiation.

Nutt SL(1), Taubenheim N, Hasbold J, Corcoran LM, Hodgkin PD.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia.

Upon activation by antigen, mature B cells undergo immunoglobulin class switch
recombination and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells, the
endpoint of the B cell developmental lineage. Careful quantitation of these
processes, which are stochastic, independent and strongly linked to the division 
history of the cell, has revealed that populations of B cells behave in a highly 
predictable manner. Considerable progress has also been made in the last few
years in understanding the gene regulatory network that controls the B cell to
plasma cell transition. The mutually exclusive transcriptomes of B cells and
plasma cells are maintained by the antagonistic influences of two groups of
transcription factors, those that maintain the B cell program, including Pax5,
Bach2 and Bcl6, and those that promote and facilitate plasma cell
differentiation, notably Irf4, Blimp1 and Xbp1. In this review, we discuss
progress in the definition of both the transcriptional and cellular events
occurring during late B cell differentiation, as integrating these two approaches
is crucial to defining a regulatory network that faithfully reflects the
stochastic features and complexity of the humoral immune response.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Oct 7;413(4):527-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.129. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Function of yeast and amphioxus tRNA ligase in IRE1alpha-dependent XBP1 mRNA
splicing.

Iwawaki T(1), Tokuda M.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Laboratory, Advanced Scientific Research Leaders Development Unit,
Gunma University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.
iwawaki@gunma-u.ac.jp

During their maturation step, transfer RNAs (tRNAs) undergo excision of their
introns by specific splicing. Although tRNA splicing is a molecular event
observed in all domains of life, the machinery of the ligation reaction has
diverged during evolution. Yeast tRNA ligase 1 (TRL1) is a multifunctional
protein that alone catalyzes RNA ligation in tRNA splicing, whereas three
molecules [RNA ligase (RNL), Clp1, and PNK/CPDase] are necessary for RNA ligation
in tRNA splicing in amphioxi. RNA ligation not only occurs in tRNA splicing, but 
also in yeast HAC1 mRNA splicing and in animal X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1)
mRNA splicing under conditions of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Yeast TRL1
is known to function as an RNA ligase for HAC1 mRNA splicing, whereas the RNA
ligase for XBP1 mRNA splicing is unknown in animals. We examined whether yeast
and amphioxus RNA ligases for tRNA splicing function in RNA ligation in mammalian
XBP1 splicing. Both RNA ligases functioned in RNA ligation in mammalian XBP1
splicing in vitro. Interestingly, Clp1, and PNK/CPDase were not necessary for
exon-exon ligation in XBP1 mRNA by amphioxus RNL. These results suggest that RNA 
ligase for tRNA splicing might therefore commonly function as an RNA ligase for
XBP1 mRNA splicing.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 15;187(8):3931-41. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101230. Epub 2011
Sep 14.

Characterization of a transitional preplasmablast population in the process of
human B cell to plasma cell differentiation.

Jourdan M(1), Caraux A, Caron G, Robert N, Fiol G, Rème T, Bolloré K, Vendrell
JP, Le Gallou S, Mourcin F, De Vos J, Kassambara A, Duperray C, Hose D, Fest T,
Tarte K, Klein B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité 1040, 34000 Montpellier, France.

The early steps of differentiation of human B cells into plasma cells are poorly 
known. We report a transitional population of CD20(low/-)CD38(-) preplasmablasts 
along differentiation of human memory B cells into plasma cells in vitro.
Preplasmablasts lack documented B cell or plasma cell (CD20, CD38, and CD138)
markers, express CD30 and IL-6R, and secrete Igs at a weaker level than do
plasmablasts or plasma cells. These preplasmablasts further differentiate into
CD20(-)CD38(high)CD138(-) plasmablasts and then CD20(-)CD38(high)CD138(+) plasma 
cells. Preplasmablasts were fully characterized in terms of whole genome
transcriptome profiling and phenotype. Preplasmablasts coexpress B and plasma
cell transcription factors, but at a reduced level compared with B cells,
plasmablasts, or plasma cells. They express the unspliced form of XBP1 mRNA
mainly, whereas plasmablasts and plasma cells express essentially the spliced
form. An in vivo counterpart (CD19(+)CD20(low/-)CD38(-)IL-6R(+) cells) of in
vitro-generated preplasmablasts could be detected in human lymph nodes (0.06% of 
CD19(+) cells) and tonsils (0.05% of CD19(+) cells). An open access "B to Plasma 
Cell Atlas," which makes it possible to interrogate gene expression in the
process of B cell to plasma cell differentiation, is provided. Taken together,
our findings show the existence of a transitional preplasmablast population using
an in vitro model of plasma cell generation and of its in vivo counterpart in
various lymphoid tissues.

PMID: 21918187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(1):323-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr714. Epub 2011 Sep 
9.

Non-targeting siRNA induces NPGPx expression to cooperate with exoribonuclease
XRN2 for releasing the stress.

Wei PC(1), Lo WT, Su MI, Shew JY, Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) target specific mRNAs for their degradation
mediated by RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). Persistent activation of
siRNA-RISC frequently leads to non-targeting toxicity. However, how cells mediate
this stress remains elusive. In this communication, we found that the presence of
non-targeting siRNA selectively induced the expression of an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)-resident protein, non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid
hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), but not other ER-stress proteins
including GRP78, Calnexin and XBP1. Cells suffering from constant non-targeting
siRNA stress grew slower and prolonged G1 phase, while NPGPx-depleted cells
accumulated mature non-targeting siRNA and underwent apoptosis. Upon the stress, 
NPGPx covalently bound to exoribonuclease XRN2, facilitating XRN2 to remove
accumulated non-targeting siRNA. These results suggest that NPGPx serves as a
novel responder to non-targeting siRNA-induced stress in facilitating XRN2 to
release the non-targeting siRNA accumulation.

PMCID: PMC3245931
PMID: 21908404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Placenta. 2011 Nov;32(11):823-9. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2011.08.005. Epub 2011
Sep 9.

Increased endoplasmic reticulum stress in decidual tissue from pregnancies
complicated by fetal growth restriction with and without pre-eclampsia.

Lian IA(1), Løset M, Mundal SB, Fenstad MH, Johnson MP, Eide IP, Bjørge L, Freed 
KA, Moses EK, Austgulen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Norwegian, University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Women and Children's
Centre, N-7006 Trondheim, Norway. ingrid.alsos.lian@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been implicated in both
pre-eclampsia (PE) and fetal growth restriction (FGR), and is characterised by
activation of three signalling branches: 1) PERK-pEIF2a, 2) ATF6 and 3) splicing 
of XBP1(U) into XBP1(S). To evaluate the contribution of ER stress in the
pathogenesis of PE relative to FGR, we compared levels of ER stress markers in
decidual tissue from pregnancies complicated by PE and/or FGR.
STUDY DESIGN: Whole-genome transcriptional profiling was performed on decidual
tissue from women with PE (n = 13), FGR (n = 9), PE+FGR (n = 24) and controls
(n = 58), and used for pathway and targeted transcriptional analyses of ER stress
markers. The expression and cellular localisation of ER stress markers was
assesses by Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses.
RESULTS: Increased ER stress was observed in FGR and PE+FGR, including both the
PERK-pEIF2a and ATF6 signalling branches, whereas ER stress was less evident in
isolated PE. However, these cases demonstrated elevated levels of XBP1(U)
protein. ATF6 and XBP1 immunoreactivity was detected in most (>80%) extravillous 
trophoblasts, decidual cells and macrophages. No difference in the proportion of 
immunopositive cells or staining pattern was observed between study groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased PERK-pEIF2a and ATF6 signalling have been associated with 
decreased cellular proliferation and may contribute to the impaired placental
growth characterising pregnancies with FGR and PE+FGR. XBP1(U) has been proposed 
as a negative regulator of ER stress, and increased levels in PE may reflect a
protective mechanism against the detrimental effects of ER stress.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3210381
PMID: 21907405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 30;413(3):436-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.114. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 activates NADPH oxidase to increase endoplasmic
reticulum stress and human coronary artery smooth muscle cell calcification.

Liberman M(1), Johnson RC, Handy DE, Loscalzo J, Leopold JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) increases oxidant stress and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress to stimulate differentiation of osteoblasts; however, the
role of these signaling pathways in the transition of smooth muscle cells to a
calcifying osteoblast-like phenotype remains incompletely characterized. We,
therefore, treated human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCSMC) with BMP-2
(100ng/mL) and found an increase in NADPH oxidase activity and oxidant stress
that occurred via activation of the bone morphogenetic protein receptor 2 and
Smad 1 signaling. BMP-2-mediated oxidant stress also increased endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress demonstrated by increased expression of GRP78,
phospho-IRE1a, and the transcription factor XBP1. Analysis of a 1kb segment of
the Runx2 promoter revealed an XBP1 binding site; electrophoretic mobility shift 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that XBP1 bound to the
Runx2 promoter at this site in BMP-2-treated HCSMC. Inhibition of oxidant stress 
or ER stress decreased Runx2 expression, intracellular calcium deposition, and
mineralization of BMP-2-treated HCSMC. Thus, in HCSMC, BMP-2 increases oxidant
stress and ER stress to increase Runx2 expression and promote vascular smooth
muscle cell calcification.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3197703
PMID: 21907184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Nov;41(11):3135-45. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141558. Epub 2011 Oct
18.

Bone morphogenetic proteins inhibit CD40L/IL-21-induced Ig production in human B 
cells: differential effects of BMP-6 and BMP-7.

Huse K(1), Bakkebø M, Oksvold MP, Forfang L, Hilden VI, Stokke T, Smeland EB,
Myklebust JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the TGF-ß superfamily. TGF-ß
can affect class switch recombination in human B cells, but whether BMPs also
play a role have not been tested. We investigated the functional effects of
exogenously added BMPs on CD27(-) naive and CD27(+) memory B cells from healthy
donors. BMP-2, -4, -6 and -7 inhibited CD40L/IL-21-induced production of IgM, IgG
and IgA. BMP-6 reduced Ig production by 70% in memory B cells and more than 55%
in naive B cells, whereas the other BMPs were slightly less potent. We observed a
striking difference in functional effects between the structurally similar BMP-6 
and BMP-7, as BMP-6 mainly inhibited plasmablast differentiation, and BMP-7
mainly induced apoptosis. In memory B cells, BMP-6 upregulated expression of
DNA-binding protein inhibitor genes, but potently inhibited CD40L/IL-21-induced
upregulation of the transcription factor XBP1, necessary for the late stages of
plasmacytic differentiation. Expression of transcription factors regulating
earlier stages (IRF4, PRDM1) was not affected by BMP-6. Taken together, these
results show that BMPs are potent suppressors of naive and memory B cells.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21898381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Acta Gastroenterol Belg. 2011 Jun;74(2):330-3.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and inflammatory bowel disease.

Niederreiter L(1), Kaser A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress arises from the accumulation of misfolded or
unfolded proteins in the ER and elicits the unfolded protein response (UPR), an
adaptive signalling pathway which aims at resolving ER stress. Genetic loci that 
confer risk for both forms of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) include genes that
are centrally involved in the UPR, including X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1),
anterior gradient protein-2 (AGR2) and orosomucoid-1-like 3 (ORMDL3). The
intestinal epithelium, in particular mucin-secreting goblet and antimicrobial
peptide-secreting Paneth cells appear particularly sensitive towards disturbances
of the UPR. Supportive of this view are mice with a genetic deletion of Xbp1
specifically in the intestinal epithelium, which develop spontaneous intestinal
inflammation histologically remarkably similar to human IBD. Apart from such
primary genetic factors that determine the threshold of tolerable ER stress
within the epithelium, secondary factors emanating from the environment might
intersect with the UPR as well. These secondary factors might include microbial
products, inflammatory mediators per se, hypoxia and glucose deprivation,
pharmacological agents, and many others. Interaction of such secondary factors in
a genetically susceptible host might provide the basis for intestinal
inflammation and might provide a framework to investigate gene-environment
interactions in human IBD, whereby a normally homeostatic adaptive response (i.e.
the UPR) transforms into a potent pathomechanism of intestinal inflammation in
the context of unresolved (i.e. unresolvable) ER stress.

PMID: 21861319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endocrine. 2011 Oct;40(2):212-21. doi: 10.1007/s12020-011-9522-x. Epub 2011 Aug
21.

Relationships of ESR1 and XBP1 expression in human breast carcinoma and stromal
cells isolated by laser capture microdissection compared to intact breast cancer 
tissue.

Andres SA(1), Wittliff JL.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Receptor Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
Brown Cancer Center and the Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design,
University of Louisville, Health Sciences Center A Bldg.-Room 604, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Results from investigations of human genomics which utilize intact tissue biopsy 
specimens maybe compromised due to a host of uncontrolled variables including
cellular heterogeneity of a sample collected under diverse conditions, then
processed and stored using different protocols. To determine the cellular origin 
and assess relationships of mRNA expression of two genes reported to be
co-expressed in human breast carcinoma (estrogen receptor-a, ESR1 and X-box
binding protein 1, XBP1), gene expression analyses were performed with intact
tissue sections and compared with those of laser capture microdissection
(LCM)-procured carcinoma and stromal cells from serial sections of the same
tissue. Frozen sections of human breast carcinomas were first evaluated for
structural integrity and pathology after hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining.
Total RNA preparations from intact tissue sections and LCM-procured carcinoma and
stromal cells were reverse transcribed for measurements of ESR1 and XBP1
expression by quantitative PCR (qPCR). These results were compared with those
obtained from microarray analyses of LCM-procured carcinoma cells. Levels of ESR1
and XBP1 were detected in the intact breast cancer tissue sections suggesting
coordinate gene expression. Although coordinate expression of these genes was
observed in the LCM-procured carcinoma cells, it was not discerned in
LCM-procured stromal cells. The origin of coordinate expression of ESR1 and XBP1 
observed in whole tissue sections of human breast cancer biopsies is due
principally to their co-expression in carcinoma cells and not in the surrounding 
stromal cells as substantiated using LCM-procured cells. Collectively, a
microgenomic process was established from human tissue preparation to RNA
characterization and analysis to identify molecular signatures of specific cell
types predicting clinical behavior.

PMID: 21858728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002177. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002177. Epub 2011
Aug 11.

Unique evolution of the UPR pathway with a novel bZIP transcription factor, Hxl1,
for controlling pathogenicity of Cryptococcus neoformans.

Cheon SA(1), Jung KW, Chen YL, Heitman J, Bahn YS, Kang HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Research Center for Biomolecules and Biosystems,
College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.

In eukaryotic cells, the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway plays a crucial 
role in cellular homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) during exposure to
diverse environmental conditions that cause ER stress. Here we report that the
human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans has evolved a unique UPR pathway
composed of an evolutionarily conserved Ire1 protein kinase and a novel bZIP
transcription factor encoded by HXL1 (HAC1 and XBP1-Like gene 1). C. neoformans
HXL1 encodes a protein lacking sequence homology to any known fungal or mammalian
Hac1/Xbp1 protein yet undergoes the UPR-induced unconventional splicing in an
Ire1-dependent manner upon exposure to various stresses. The structural
organization of HXL1 and its unconventional splicing is widely conserved in C.
neoformans strains of divergent serotypes. Notably, both C. neoformans ire1 and
hxl1 mutants exhibited extreme growth defects at 37°C and hypersensitivity to ER 
stress and cell wall destabilization. All of the growth defects of the ire1
mutant were suppressed by the spliced active form of Hxl1, supporting that HXL1
mRNA is a downstream target of Ire1. Interestingly, however, the ire1 and hxl1
mutants showed differences in thermosensitivity, expression patterns for a subset
of genes, and capsule synthesis, indicating that Ire1 has both Hxl1-dependent and
-independent functions in C. neoformans. Finally, Ire1 and Hxl1 were shown to be 
critical for virulence of C. neoformans, suggesting UPR signaling as a novel
antifungal therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3154848
PMID: 21852949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biomol Screen. 2011 Sep;16(8):825-35. doi: 10.1177/1087057111414893. Epub 2011 
Aug 15.

Complementary cell-based high-throughput screens identify novel modulators of the
unfolded protein response.

Fribley AM(1), Cruz PG, Miller JR, Callaghan MU, Cai P, Narula N, Neubig RR,
Showalter HD, Larsen SD, Kirchhoff PD, Larsen MJ, Burr DA, Schultz PJ, Jacobs RR,
Tamayo-Castillo G, Ron D, Sherman DH, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Carmen and Ann Adams Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Wayne State University, 421 E. Canfield, Detroit, MI 48201, 
USA.

Despite advances toward understanding the prevention and treatment of many
cancers, patients who suffer from oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) confront a 
survival rate that has remained unimproved for more than 2 decades, indicating
our ability to treat them pharmacologically has reached a plateau. In an ongoing 
effort to improve the clinical outlook for this disease, we previously reported
that an essential component of the mechanism by which the proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (PS-341, Velcade) induced apoptosis in OSCC required the activation of
a terminal unfolded protein response (UPR). Predicated on these studies, the
authors hypothesized that high-throughput screening (HTS) of large diverse
chemical libraries might identify more potent or selective small-molecule
activators of the apoptotic arm of the UPR to control or kill OSCC. They have
developed complementary cell-based assays using stably transfected CHO-K1 cell
lines that individually assess the PERK/eIF2a/CHOP (apoptotic) or the IRE1/XBP1
(adaptive) UPR subpathways. An 66 K compound collection was screened at the
University of Michigan Center for Chemical Genomics that included a unique
library of prefractionated natural product extracts. The mycotoxin
methoxycitrinin was isolated from a natural extract and found to selectively
activate the CHOP-luciferase reporter at 80 µM. A series of citrinin derivatives 
was isolated from these extracts, including a unique congener that has not been
previously described. In an effort to identify more potent compounds, the authors
examined the ability of citrinin and the structurally related mycotoxins
ochratoxin A and patulin to activate the UPR. Strikingly, it was found that
patulin at 2.5 to 10 µM induced a terminal UPR in a panel of OSCC cells that was 
characterized by an increase in CHOP, GADD34, and ATF3 gene expression and XBP1
splicing. A luminescent caspase assay and the induction of several BH3-only genes
indicated that patulin could induce apoptosis in OSCC cells. These data support
the use of this complementary HTS strategy to identify novel modulators of UPR
signaling and tumor cell death.

PMCID: PMC3374590
PMID: 21844328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Exp Anim. 2011;60(4):405-16.

Quantitative trait loci analysis for peripheral blood parameters in a (BALB/cW × 
C57BL/6J-Mpl (hlb219)/J) F(2) mice.

Strzalkowska A(1), Unrug-Bielawska K, Bluszcz A, Sandowska-Markiewicz Z,
Karaszewska J, Pysniak K, Gajewska M, Wirth-Dzieciolowska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Laboratory Animal Breeding, The Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, W. K. Roentgen
St. 5, 02-871 Warsaw, Poland.

The genetic basis of the peripheral blood cell parameters is not fully
elucidated. Thus, it is essential to research the correlation between blood cell 
counts levels and the genome in laboratory animals and subsequently in humans. In
the present study, we examined 288 F(2) mice from a cross between BALB/cW and
C57BL/6J-Mpl(hlb219)/J. The C57BL/6J-Mpl (hlb219)/J strain is a mouse model of
thrombocytopenia. We found very strong correlations for PLT counts and revealed
some highly significant correlations for RBC counts. On the basis of the obtained
results, we presume that genetic control of erythrocyte parameters is divided
into two pathways: first, the morphological determinants responsible for the red 
blood cell count (RBC), hematocrit (HCT), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and 
second, the functional pathway determining the hemoglobin content (HGB). The
locus on Chromosome 4 is the only detected quantitative trait locus (QTL)
influencing the analyzed platelets parameters. We also detected highly
significant correlations for erythrocyte parameters on Chromosome 1 (RBC, MCV,
MCH), Chr 7 (HGB), Chr 9 (MCHC), Chr 11 (RBC), and Chr 17 (MCH). Finally, with
regards to the given correlations, using the Mouse Genome Database resource, we
proposed candidate genes with possible meaning for the level of these parameters:
cytokine receptor genes (e.g., Mpl), transcription factor genes (e.g., Xbp1,
Ikzf1), hemoglobin chain genes (e.g., Hbb-b1, Hbb-ar), and many others localized 
in the confidence intervals of found QTLs.

PMID: 21791880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32300-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.247866. Epub
2011 Jul 22.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) dysfunction down-regulates
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) and sensitizes beta-cells to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Kirkpatrick CL(1), Wiederkehr A, Baquié M, Akhmedov D, Wang H, Gauthier BR,
Akerman I, Ishihara H, Ferrer J, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Centre Médical Universitaire,
Université de Genève, 1 Rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.

Correct endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function is critical for the health of
secretory cells, such as the pancreatic ß-cell, and ER stress is often a
contributory factor to ß-cell death in type 2 diabetes. We have used an
insulin-secreting cell line with inducible expression of dominant negative (DN)
HNF1a, a transcription factor vital for correct ß-cell development and function, 
to show that HNF1a is required for Xbp1 transcription and maintenance of the
normal ER stress response. DN HNF1a expression sensitizes the ß-cell to ER stress
by directly down-regulating Xbp1 transcription, whereas Atf6 is unaffected.
Furthermore, DN HNF1a alters calcium homeostasis, resulting in elevated
cytoplasmic calcium and increased store-operated calcium entry, whereas
mitochondrial calcium uptake is normal. Loss of function of XBP1 is toxic to the 
ß-cell and decreases production of the ER chaperone BiP, even in the absence of
ER stress. DN HNF1a-induced sensitivity to cyclopiazonic acid can be partially
rescued with the chemical chaperone tauroursodeoxycholate. Rat insulin 2
promoter-DN HNF1a mouse islets express lower levels of BiP mRNA, synthesize less 
insulin, and are sensitized to ER stress relative to matched control mouse
islets, suggesting that this mechanism is also operating in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3173152
PMID: 21784843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):3987-93. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1179-2. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

Heat stress activates ER stress signals which suppress the heat shock response,
an effect occurring preferentially in the cortex in rats.

Liu Y(1), Sakamoto H, Adachi M, Zhao S, Ukai W, Hashimoto E, Hareyama M, Ishida
T, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, S-1, W-16, Chuo-Ku, Sapporo, 060-8543, Japan.

Although heat stress induces a variety of illnesses, there have been few studies 
designed to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlining the illnesses. We here
demonstrate that heat activates ER stress, which inhibits heat shock responses
(HSR) via translational block. In heat-stressed rats, ER stress responses, as
represented by eIF2a phosphorylation and XBP1 splicing, occurred mainly in the
cortex, where the HSR was substantially inhibited. Heat exposure also activated
ER stress signals in primary cortical neurons. Since HSF1 knockdown enhanced
heat-induced ER stress and subsequent cell death, HSR inhibition in turn augments
ER stress, implying a vicious spiral of both stresses. Taken together,
heat-induced ER stress impairs the HSR and enhances cell damage, thereby
manifesting its unique effect on heat stress.

PMID: 21779805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Genet Genomics. 2011 Jul 20;38(7):271-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2011.05.005. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Recent progress in the genetics of generalized vitiligo.

Spritz RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu

Vitiligo is an acquired disease characterized principally by patchy
depigmentation of skin and overlying hair. Generalized vitiligo (GV), the
predominant form of the disorder, results from autoimmune loss of melanocytes
from affected regions. GV is a "complex trait", inherited in a non-Mendelian
polygenic, multifactorial manner. GV is epidemiologically associated with other
autoimmune diseases, both in GV patients and in their close relatives, suggesting
that shared genes underlie susceptibility to this group of diseases. Early
candidate gene association studies yielded a few successes, such as PTPN22, but
most such reports now appear to be false-positives. Subsequent genomewide linkage
studies identified NLRP1 and XBP1, apparent true GV susceptibility genes involved
in immune regulation, and recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of GV in 
Caucasian and Chinese populations have yielded a large number of additional
validated GV susceptibility genes. Together, these genes highlight biological
systems and pathways that reach from the immune cells to the melanocyte, and
provide insights into both disease pathogenesis and potential new targets for
both treatment and even prevention of GV and other autoimmune diseases in
genetically susceptible individuals.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3513342
PMID: 21777851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 2;286(35):30344-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.220541. Epub 2011
Jul 12.

Heightened induction of proapoptotic signals in response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress in primary fibroblasts from a mouse model of longevity.

Sadighi Akha AA(1), Harper JM, Salmon AB, Schroeder BA, Tyra HM, Rutkowski DT,
Miller RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA. asadighi@umich.edu

Previous work from our laboratory has shown that primary fibroblasts from
long-lived Snell dwarf mice display a higher sensitivity to the lethal effects of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stressors, such as thapsigargin, than cells from
normal mice. Here we show that thapsigargin induces higher expression of CHOP,
enhanced cleavage of caspase-12, higher caspase-3 activity, and increased
phosphorylation of c-JUN, all indicators of enhanced apoptosis, in dwarf
fibroblasts. Dwarf and normal fibroblasts show no genotypic difference in
up-regulating BiP, GRP94, and ERp72 proteins after exposure to thapsigargin.
However, dwarf fibroblasts express lower basal levels of a number of putative
XBP1 target genes including Armet, Edem1, Erdj3, p58(IPK) and Sec61a1, as well as
Ire1a itself. Furthermore, when exposed to thapsigargin, dwarf fibroblasts
display attenuated splicing of Xbp1, but similar phosphorylation of eIF2a, in
comparison to normal fibroblasts. These data support the notion that IRE1/XBP1
signaling is set at a lower level in dwarf fibroblasts. Diminished Xbp1 splicing 
in dwarf-derived fibroblasts may tilt the balance between prosurvival and
proapoptotic signals in favor of apoptosis, thereby leading to higher induction
of proapoptotic signals in these cells and ultimately their increased sensitivity
to ER stressors. These results, together with recent findings in Caenorhabditis
elegans daf-2 mutants, point to a potential interplay between insulin/IGF-1
signals and unfolded protein response signaling.

PMCID: PMC3162393
PMID: 21757703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 2;286(35):30859-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.273714. Epub 2011
Jul 13.

A conserved structural determinant located at the interdomain region of mammalian
inositol-requiring enzyme 1alpha.

Xue Z(1), He Y, Ye K, Gu Z, Mao Y, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Nutrition, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a), an endoplasmic reticulum-resident sensor
for mammalian unfolded protein response, is a bifunctional enzyme containing
kinase and RNase domains critical for trans-autophosphorylation and Xbp1 mRNA
splicing, respectively, in response to endoplasmic reticulum stress. However, the
amino acid residues important for its function and activation remain largely
unexplored. Here, through analysis of IRE1a mutants associated with human somatic
cancers, we have identified a highly conserved proline residue at position 830
(Pro(830)) that is critical for its structural integrity and hence, the
activation of both kinase and RNase domains. Structural analysis revealed that
Pro(830) may form a highly conserved structural linker with adjacent tryptophan
and tyrosine residues at positions 833 and 945 (Trp(833) and Tyr(945)), thereby
bridging the kinase and RNase domains. Indeed, mutation of Pro(830) to leucine
(P830L) completely abolished the kinase and RNase activities, significantly
decreased protein stability, and prevented oligomerization of IRE1a upon ER
stress; similar observations were made for mutations of Trp(833) to alanine
(W833A) and to a lesser extent for Y945A. Our finding may facilitate the
identification of small molecules to compromise IRE1a function specifically.

PMCID: PMC3162446
PMID: 21757700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(18):9414-24. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00281-11. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Autophagosome formation during varicella-zoster virus infection following
endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response.

Carpenter JE(1), Jackson W, Benetti L, Grose C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa Hospital/2501 JCP, 200 Hawkins Drive, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA.

Autophagy is a recently recognized component of the life cycle of
varicella-zoster virus (VZV). We have documented abundant autophagosome formation
in skin vesicles (final site of virion assembly) from randomly selected cases of 
varicella and zoster. The fact that autophagy was an early event in the VZV
replication cycle was documented by finding infected vesicle cells with the VZV
IE62 protein confined to the nucleus. Next, we pursued studies in VZV-infected
cultured cells to define whether autophagy was preceded by endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR). First, we demonstrated that 
autophagosome formation in infected cells closely resembled that seen after
treatment of cells with tunicamycin, a potent initiator of ER stress. Second, we 
demonstrated a marked expansion of ER size in both VZV-infected cells and cells
transfected with the predominant VZV glycoprotein complex gE/gI. An enlarged ER
is critical evidence of ER stress, which in turn is relieved by the UPR. To this 
end, we documented the UPR by detecting the alternatively spliced form of the
XBP1 protein as well as CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), both transcriptional
activators of other UPR genes in an ER stress-dependent manner. Because VZV does 
not encode inhibitors of autophagy, the above results suggested that autophagy
was a common event in VZV-infected cells and that it was provoked at least in
part by ER stress secondary to overly abundant VZV glycoprotein biosynthesis,
which led to UPR activation in an attempt to maintain cellular homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3165774
PMID: 21752906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Reproduction. 2011 Sep;142(3):401-8. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0152. Epub 2011 Jul 5.

Altered expression of Armet and Mrlp51 in the oocyte, preimplantation embryo, and
brain of mice following oocyte in vitro maturation but postnatal brain
development and cognitive function are normal.

Wang N(1), Wang L, Le F, Zhan Q, Zheng Y, Ding G, Chen X, Sheng J, Dong M, Huang 
H, Jin F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Genetics, Ministry of Education, Women's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, 1 Xueshi Road, Hangzhou 310006, China.

Despite the efforts to recapitulate the follicle environment, oocytes from in
vitro maturation (IVM) have poorer developmental potential than those matured in 
vivo and the effects on the resultant offspring are of concern. The aim of this
study was to determine altered gene expression in oocytes following IVM and to
evaluate the expression of the arginine rich, mutated in early stage of tumors
gene (Armet) and mitochondrial ribosomal protein L51 (Mrpl51) in embryos and
brains of fetal/postnatal mice and the brain development of IVM offspring. An IVM
mouse model was established while oocytes matured in vivo were used as the
controls. Suppressive subtractive hybridization (SSH) and RT-PCR/western blot
were used to analyze the differential expression of genes/proteins between IVM
and the control group. HE staining and water maze were used to assess the
histological changes in brain tissue and cognition of the offspring. The rates of
fertilization, cleavage, and live birth were significantly decreased in IVM
group. Thirteen genes were upregulated in IVM oocytes compared with the control, 
including Armet and Mrpl51. The higher level of Armet in IVM oocytes was retained
in brain of newborn mice, which could be related to the upregulation of
activating transcription factor 6 (Atf6) and X-box binding protein 1 (Xbp1),
while Mrpl51 was expressed normally in brain of postnatal mice. No significant
differences were detected in brain weight, neuronal counts, and the cognition in 
the offspring between the two groups. The present results suggested that IVM
could affect the pregnancy outcome and the Armet and Mrpl51 gene/protein
expression. The change in Armet expression lasted while the change of Mrpl51
disappeared after birth. However, the brain development of the offspring seemed
to be unaffected by IVM.

PMID: 21730110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. BMC Biol. 2011 Jul 6;9:47. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-9-47.

Structural and functional basis for RNA cleavage by Ire1.

Korennykh AV(1), Korostelev AA, Egea PF, Finer-Moore J, Stroud RM, Zhang C,
Shokat KM, Walter P.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University Of California, San Francisco,
Genentech Hall, 600-16th Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
akorenny@princeton.edu

BACKGROUND: The unfolded protein response (UPR) controls the protein folding
capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Central to this signaling pathway is 
the ER-resident bifunctional transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease Ire1. The
endoribonuclease (RNase) domain of Ire1 initiates a non-conventional mRNA
splicing reaction, leading to the production of a transcription factor that
controls UPR target genes. The mRNA splicing reaction is an obligatory step of
Ire1 signaling, yet its mechanism has remained poorly understood due to the
absence of substrate-bound crystal structures of Ire1, the lack of structural
similarity between Ire1 and other RNases, and a scarcity of quantitative
enzymological data. Here, we experimentally define the active site of Ire1 RNase 
and quantitatively evaluate the contribution of the key active site residues to
catalysis.
RESULTS: This analysis and two new crystal structures suggest that Ire1 RNase
uses histidine H1061 and tyrosine Y1043 as the general acid-general base pair
contributing =7.6 kcal/mol and 1.4 kcal/mol to transition state stabilization,
respectively, and asparagine N1057 and arginine R1056 for coordination of the
scissile phosphate. Investigation of the stem-loop recognition revealed that
additionally to the stem-loops derived from the classic Ire1 substrates HAC1 and 
Xbp1 mRNA, Ire1 can site-specifically and rapidly cleave anticodon stem-loop
(ASL) of unmodified tRNAPhe, extending known substrate specificity of Ire1 RNase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data define the catalytic center of Ire1 RNase and suggest a
mechanism of RNA cleavage: each RNase monomer apparently contains a separate
catalytic apparatus for RNA cleavage, whereas two RNase subunits contribute to
RNA stem-loop docking. Conservation of the key residues among Ire1 homologues
suggests that the mechanism elucidated here for yeast Ire1 applies to Ire1 in
metazoan cells, and to the only known Ire1 homologue RNase L.

PMCID: PMC3149027
PMID: 21729333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Exp Hematol. 2011 Oct;39(10):999-1006. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2011.06.007. Epub
2011 Jul 1.

Resveratrol triggers the pro-apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum stress response and 
represses pro-survival XBP1 signaling in human multiple myeloma cells.

Wang FM(1), Galson DL, Roodman GD, Ouyang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology and the Center for Bone Biology of 
UPMC, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pa., USA.

OBJECTIVE: Resveratrol, trans-3, 4', 5,-trihydroxystilbene, suppresses multiple
myeloma (MM). The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response component
inositol-requiring enzyme 1a (IRE1a)/X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) axis is
essential for MM pathogenesis. We investigated the molecular action of
resveratrol on IRE1a/XBP1 axis in human MM cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human MM cell lines ANBL-6, OPM2, and MM.1S were utilized 
to determine the molecular signaling events following treatment with resveratrol.
The stimulation of IRE1a/XBP1 axis was analyzed by Western blot and reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. The effect of resveratrol on the
transcriptional activity of spliced XBP1 was assessed by luciferase assays.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed to determine the effects of
resveratrol on the DNA binding activity of XBP1 in MM cells.
RESULTS: Resveratrol activated IRE1a as evidenced by XBP1 messenger RNA splicing 
and phosphorylation of both IRE1a and its downstream kinase c-Jun N-terminal
kinase in MM cells. These responses were associated with resveratrol-induced
cytotoxicity of MM cells. Resveratrol selectively suppressed the transcriptional 
activity of XBP1s while it stimulated gene expression of the molecules that are
regulated by the non-IRE1/XBP1 axis of the ER stress response. Luciferase assays 
indicated that resveratrol suppressed the transcriptional activity of XBP1s
through sirtuin 1, a downstream molecular target of resveratrol. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies revealed that resveratrol decreased the DNA binding
capacity of XBP1 and increased the enrichment of sirtuin 1 at the XBP1 binding
region in the XBP1 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Resveratrol exerts its chemotherapeutic effect on human MM cells
through mechanisms involving the impairment of the pro-survival XBP1 signaling
and the activation of pro-apoptotic ER stress response.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3261654
PMID: 21723843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Jan;27(1):120-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2011.06838.x.

Mitigating endoplasmic reticulum stress with revaprazan ameliorates
stress-related mucosal disease.

Kim JH(1), Kim EH, Ock C, Hong H, Kim YJ, Kwon KA, Park DK, Hahm KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology Gil Medical Center, Gachon Graduate School of
Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The term "stress-related mucosal disease" (SRMD) represents
conditions ranging from superficial mucosal damage to focal deep mucosal damage
in the stomach, of which pathogenesis is deduced to be violent mucosal ischemia
or excess oxidative stress, but not fully clarified yet. Under the hypothesis
that mucosal cell apoptosis subsequent to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress might
play a crucial role, we evaluated the efficacy and mechanism that novel acid pump
antagonist (APA), revaprazan, alleviated water immersion restraint stress (WIRS) 
induced SRMD in rats.
METHODS: In order to define whether WIRS-induced SRMD is associated with ER
stress, we checked the alteration in the expression of ER stress markers
including GRP78, CHOP, XBP-1, BiP as well as apoptosis in WIRS-induced SRMD. The 
efficacy of revaprazan on either alleviating ER stress or attenuating SRMD was
compared with proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and gastroprotectant.
RESULTS: Ten hours of WIRS induced a severe degree of SRMD, in which ER stress
markers including CHOP, XBP1, and BiP were significantly overexpressed in the
gastric tissues. However, these markers of ER stress were significantly decreased
in the group pretreated with revaprazan compared to PPI or gastroprotectant,
accompanied with a significant reduction in apoptotic index. In addition to ER
stress, revaprazan imposed anti-inflammatory benefit to limit SRMD based on
significant levels of inflammatory cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Endoplasmic reticulum stress accompanied with drastic apoptosis was
implicated in the development of SRMD, but revaprazan could rescue the stomach
from SRMD through alleviating ER stress in epithelial cells much better than
either PPI or gastroprotectant.

© 2011 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Blackwell
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21722181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Health Sci (Qassim). 2011 Jul;5(2):167-79.

Update on the genetics characterization of vitiligo.

Al-Shobaili HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Saudi
Arabia.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disorder in which autoimmune-mediated destruction 
of melanocytes caused depigmentation of skin patches. The complex genetics of
vitiligo involves multiple susceptibility loci, genetic heterogeneity and
incomplete penetrance with gene-gene and gene-environment interactions. In order 
to clarify the genetic factors, two different principal approaches have applied
for the identification of genomic regions or candidate genes that mediate
susceptibility to vitiligo. First approach is the genome-wide linkage analyses,
which is conducted by scanning of entire human genome for genomic regions that
are linked to the development of vitiligo. The other approach is functional
candidate gene association (FCGA) analyses that detect specific candidate genes, 
which are expected to involve in disease on the basis of their priori biological 
functions. Genomic-wide scans have provided a strong support for vitiligo
susceptibility genes on chromosomes 4q13-q21, 1p31, 7q22, 8p12 and 17p13, while
loci of interest at 6p, 6q, 14q, 9q, 13q, 19p and 22q required further follow-up.
Whereas, FCGA studies have identified some candidate genes which are associated
with vitiligo, such as HLA, AIRE, VIT1, CAT, FOXD3, ESR1, COMT, PTPN22, NALP1,
PDGFRA, MYG1, MITF, CD117, XBP1, FAS, COX2, EDN1 and ACE, but few of them reports
now appear to be false-positive. This review will provides an update on genetics 
of vitiligo based on the identification of novel candidate genes that represent, 
in my opinion as optimal utility for future therapeutic targets in the
pathogenesis of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC3521835
PMID: 23267294  [PubMed]


125. Gastroenterology. 2011 Oct;141(4):1463-72. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.06.045.
Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Extensive pancreas regeneration following acinar-specific disruption of Xbp1 in
mice.

Hess DA(1), Humphrey SE, Ishibashi J, Damsz B, Lee AH, Glimcher LH, Konieczny SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and the Purdue Center for Cancer Research,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-2064, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2011 Oct;141(4):1155-8.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Progression of diseases of the exocrine pancreas, which
include pancreatitis and cancer, is associated with increased levels of cell
stress. Pancreatic acinar cells are involved in development of these diseases
and, because of their high level of protein output, they require an efficient,
unfolded protein response (UPR) that mediates recovery from endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress following the accumulation of misfolded proteins.
METHODS: To study recovery from ER stress in the exocrine organ, we generated
mice with conditional disruption of Xbp1 (a principal component of the UPR) in
most adult pancreatic acinar cells (Xbp1fl/fl). We monitored the effects of
constitutive ER stress in the exocrine pancreas of these mice.
RESULTS: Xbp1-null acinar cells underwent extensive apoptosis, followed by a
rapid phase of recovery in the pancreas that included expansion of the
centroacinar cell compartment, formation of tubular complexes that contained
Hes1- and Sox9-expressing cells, and regeneration of acinar cells that expressed 
Mist1 from the residual, surviving Xbp1+ cell population.
CONCLUSIONS: XBP1 is required for homeostasis of acinar cells in mice; ER stress 
induces a regenerative response in the pancreas that involves acinar and
centroacinar cells, providing the needed capacity for organ recovery from
exocrine pancreas disease.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3186847
PMID: 21704586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Sep;22(9):374-81. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2011.05.002.
Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Stressed out about obesity: IRE1a-XBP1 in metabolic disorders.

Sha H(1), He Y, Yang L, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

The global obesity epidemic is associated with a series of health-threatening
diseases including type 2 diabetes. Accumulating evidence suggest that the
physiology and homeostasis of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is intimately
involved in the underlying mechanisms linking obesity and diabetes. Specifically,
recent studies indicate a crucial role for the inositol-requiring enzyme 1a
(IRE1a)/X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) pathway, the most conserved branch of the 
unfolded protein response (UPR), in glucose and lipid metabolism as well as in
insulin function. Focusing on the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway, we review recent advances
in our understanding of the role of UPR in obesity and obesity-associated
metabolic disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163776
PMID: 21703863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Oct 1;668(1-2):88-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.06.008.
Epub 2011 Jun 17.

20(S)-Protopanaxadiol, a metabolite of ginsenosides, induced cell apoptosis
through endoplasmic reticulum stress in human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cells.

Zhu GY(1), Li YW, Tse AK, Hau DK, Leung CH, Yu ZL, Fong WF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Inflammation Research, School of Chinese Medicine, Hong 
Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

20(S)-Protopanaxadiol (PPD), a metabolite of ginsenosides, has been demonstrated 
to possess cytotoxic effects on several cancer cell lines. The molecular
mechanism is, however, not well understood. In this study, we have shown that PPD
inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cells. 
PPD-treated cells showed a massive cytoplasmic vacuolization and a dramatic
change of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) morphology. The induction of ER stress is
associated with the upregulation of ER stress-associated genes and proteins. PPD 
activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) through the phosphorylation of PERK
and eIF2a, the splicing of XBP1 mRNA, and the cleavage of AFT6. PPD also induces 
the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways. It activates DR5, caspase-8, -9, 
-3, and promotes the cleavage of PARP while it downregulates Bcl-2, Bcl-x(L) and 
mitochondrial membrane potential. Knockdown of one of the three UPR limbs by
specific siRNAs did not affect PPD-induced apoptosis, which was however,
significantly suppressed by the downregulation of CHOP. Western blot analysis
showed that PPD-stimulated downregulation of Bcl-2 protein, increase of DR5
protein, activation of caspase-8 and cleavage of PARP were significantly
inhibited in CHOP siRNA-transfected cells. Taken together, we have identified ER 
as a molecular target of PPD and our data support the hypothesis that PPD induces
HepG2 cell apoptosis through the ER stress pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21703260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;27(5):525-38. doi: 10.1159/000329954. Epub 2011 Jun
15.

Inhibitory effect of unsaturated fatty acids on saturated fatty acid-induced
apoptosis in human pancreatic ß-cells: activation of caspases and ER stress
induction.

Nemcová-Fürstová V(1), James RF, Kovár J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology & Center for Research of Diabetes,
Metabolism and Nutrition, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Ruská
87, Prague, Czech Republic.

AIMS: In this study we have tested the effect of unsaturated fatty acids on the
proapoptotic effects of saturated fatty acids in the human pancreatic ß-cells
NES2Y.
RESULTS: We found that unsaturated palmitoleic and oleic acid at a concentration 
of 0.2 mM and higher are able to completely inhibit the proapoptotic effect of
their counterpart saturated palmitic and stearic acid at a concentration of 1 mM.
Apoptosis induced by stearic acid was associated with significant activation of
caspase-6, -7, -9, -2 and -8, but not with significant activation of caspase-3.
The activation of caspases was blocked by coincubation with oleic acid. Stearic
acid treatment was not associated with a significant change in mitochondrial
membrane potential, reactive oxygen species level and with cytochrome c release
from mitochondria. Furthermore, stearic acid treatment was not associated with
changes in p21(WAF1/CIP1), PIDD, Fas receptor and Fas ligand expression. However,
we detected endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers, i. e. a significant
upregulation of BiP and CHOP expression as well as XBP1 mRNA splicing. These
changes were inhibited by coincubation with oleic acid.
CONCLUSION: Presented data indicate that oleic acid inhibits apoptosis induction 
by stearic acid in NES2Y cells upstream of caspase activation and ER stress
induction. It does not involve an interference with the mitochondrial pathway of 
apoptosis induction, with p53 activation and PIDD expression as well as with Fas 
receptor and Fas ligand expression.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21691070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cell Signal. 2011 Nov;23(11):1708-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.06.002. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Prednisolone-induced beta cell dysfunction is associated with impaired
endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis in INS-1E cells.

Linssen MM(1), van Raalte DH, Toonen EJ, Alkema W, van der Zon GC, Dokter WH,
Diamant M, Guigas B, Ouwens DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Glucocorticoids (GCs), such as prednisolone (PRED), are widely prescribed
anti-inflammatory drugs, but their use may induce glucose intolerance and
diabetes. GC-induced beta cell dysfunction contributes to these diabetogenic
effects through mechanisms that remain to be elucidated. In this study, we
hypothesized that activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) following
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress could be one of the underlying mechanisms
involved in GC-induced beta cell dysfunction. We report here that PRED did not
affect basal insulin release but time-dependently inhibited glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion in INS-1E cells. PRED treatment also decreased both PDX1 and
insulin expression, leading to a marked reduction in cellular insulin content.
These PRED-induced detrimental effects were found to be prevented by prior
treatment with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) antagonist RU486 and associated
with activation of two of the three branches of the UPR. Indeed, PRED induced a
GR-mediated activation of both ATF6 and IRE1/XBP1 pathways but was found to
reduce the phosphorylation of PERK and its downstream substrate eIF2a. These
modulations of ER stress pathways were accompanied by upregulation of calpain 10 
and increased cleaved caspase 3, indicating that long term exposure to PRED
ultimately promotes apoptosis. Taken together, our data suggest that the
inhibition of insulin biosynthesis by PRED in the insulin-secreting INS-1E cells 
results, at least in part, from a GR-mediated impairment in ER homeostasis which 
may lead to apoptotic cell death.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21689745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. FASEB J. 2011 Sep;25(9):3115-29. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-182931. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

Peptides derived from the bifunctional kinase/RNase enzyme IRE1a modulate IRE1a
activity and protect cells from endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Bouchecareilh M(1), Higa A, Fribourg S, Moenner M, Chevet E.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1053, Avenir, Université Bordeaux 2, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076
Bordeaux, France.

Activation of the bifunctional kinase/RNase enzyme IRE1a is part of an adaptive
response triggered on accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). To facilitate recovery of ER homeostasis, IRE1a molecules
oligomerize, allowing for their transautophosphorylation and endoribonuclease
activation. These, in turn, induce the activation of specific transcriptional and
post-transcriptional programs. To identify novel and selective modulators of
IRE1a activity, we investigated IRE1a oligomerization properties using
IRE1a-derived peptides identified through an activity-based in vitro assay. We
then used these peptides to probe IRE1a activity in vitro and in vivo using both 
cultured human hepatocellular carcinoma-derived HuH7 cells and Caenorhabditis
elegans experimental systems. We identified a peptide derived from the kinase
domain of human IRE1a, which promoted IRE1a oligomerization in vitro, enhanced
its Xbp1 mRNA cleavage activity in vitro (1.7×) in cell culture (1.8×) and in
vivo (1.3×), and attenuated both ER stress-mediated JNK activation and regulated 
IRE1-dependent mRNA decay (RIDD). This was accompanied by a 2.5-fold increase in 
survival on tunicamycin-induced ER stress and reduced apoptosis by 1.4-fold in
cells expressing this peptide. Hence, targeted and selective activation of the
catalytic properties of IRE1a may consequently define new strategies to protect
cells from deleterious effects of ER stress signaling.

PMID: 21680894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 28;108(26):10562-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1107559108. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress enhances fibrotic remodeling in the lungs.

Lawson WE(1), Cheng DS, Degryse AL, Tanjore H, Polosukhin VV, Xu XC, Newcomb DC, 
Jones BR, Roldan J, Lane KB, Morrisey EE, Beers MF, Yull FE, Blackwell TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
william.lawson@vanderbilt.edu

Evidence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been found in lungs of patients
with familial and sporadic idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. We tested whether ER
stress causes or exacerbates lung fibrosis by (i) conditional expression of a
mutant form of surfactant protein C (L188Q SFTPC) found in familial interstitial 
pneumonia and (ii) intratracheal treatment with the protein misfolding agent
tunicamycin. We developed transgenic mice expressing L188Q SFTPC exclusively in
type II alveolar epithelium by using the Tet-On system. Expression of L188Q SFTPC
induced ER stress, as determined by increased expression of heavy-chain Ig
binding protein (BiP) and splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, but no
lung fibrosis was identified in the absence of a second profibrotic stimulus.
After intratracheal bleomycin, L188Q SFTPC-expressing mice developed exaggerated 
lung fibrosis and reduced static lung compliance compared with controls.
Bleomycin-treated L188Q SFTPC mice also demonstrated increased apoptosis of
alveolar epithelial cells and greater numbers of fibroblasts in the lungs. With a
complementary model, intratracheal tunicamycin treatment failed to induce lung
remodeling yet resulted in augmentation of bleomycin-induced fibrosis. These data
support the concept that ER stress produces a dysfunctional epithelial cell
phenotype that facilitates fibrotic remodeling. ER stress pathways may serve as
important therapeutic targets in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3127925
PMID: 21670280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011 Nov;11(11):1685-90. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.05.027. 
Epub 2011 Jun 12.

Cholecystokinin octapeptide inhibits immunoglobulin G1 production of
lipopolysaccharide-activated B cells.

Zhang JG(1), Cong B, Jia XX, Li H, Li QX, Ma CL, Feng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050017, People's
Republic of China.

Cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK-8) is a typical brain-gut peptide that exerts a 
variety of physiological actions in both the peripheral and central nervous
systems. Our laboratory has previously reported that CCK-8 produces
immunoregulatory action through activating CCK receptor (CCK1R/CCK2R) expression 
on immune cell surfaces. In the present study, we investigated the effect of
CCK-8 on immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) production in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-activated B cells in vitro. CCK-8 inhibited the proliferation and IgG1 mRNA
expression of LPS-activated B cells and therefore inhibited IgG1 production. The 
mechanism may be associated with the regulation of CCK-8 on transcription factors
Blimp1, Pax5, Xbp1 and Bcl6. CCK-8 inhibited the expression of Blimp1, while the 
effect on Pax5, Xbp1 and Bcl6 varied with time, suggesting that CCK-8 acted as a 
complex regulator of LPS-activated B cells. The inhibitory action of CCK-8 was
mainly mediated through the CCK2R pathway. These studies indicate that CCK-8
attenuates humoral immune responses and acts as endogenous immune deactivators in
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Leukemia. 2011 Oct;25(10):1610-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.120. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Identification of novel myeloma-specific XBP1 peptides able to generate cytotoxic
T lymphocytes: a potential therapeutic application in multiple myeloma.

Bae J(1), Carrasco R, Lee AH, Prabhala R, Tai YT, Anderson KC, Munshi NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The purpose of these studies was to identify human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2(+) 
immunogenic peptides derived from XBP1 antigens to induce a multiple myeloma
(MM)-specific immune response. Six native peptides from non-spliced XBP1 antigen 
and three native peptides from spliced XBP1 antigen were selected and evaluated
for their HLA-A2 specificity. Among them, XBP1(184-192), XBP1 SP(196-204) and
XBP1 SP(367-375) peptides showed the highest level of binding affinity, but not
stability to HLA-A2 molecules. Novel heteroclitic XBP1 peptides, YISPWILAV or
YLFPQLISV, demonstrated a significant improvement in HLA-A2 stability from their 
native XBP1(184-192) or XBP1 SP(367-375) peptide, respectively. Cytotoxic T
lymphocytes generated by repeated stimulation of CD3(+) T cells with each
HLA-A2-specific heteroclitic peptide showed an increased percentage of CD8(+)
(cytotoxic) and CD69(+)/CD45RO(+) (activated memory) T cells and a lower
percentage of CD4(+) (helper) and CD45RA(+)/CCR7(+) (naïve) T cells, which were
distinct from the control T cells. Functionally, the cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTL) demonstrated MM-specific and HLA-A2-restricted proliferation, interferon-<U+03B3> 
secretion and cytotoxic activity in response to MM cell lines and importantly,
cytotoxicity against primary MM cells. These data demonstrate the distinct
immunogenic characteristics of unique heteroclitic XBP1 peptides, which induce
MM-specific CTLs and highlights their potential application for immunotherapy to 
treat the patients with MM or its pre-malignant condition.

PMCID: PMC3483794
PMID: 21660045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 Nov;29(6):709-16. doi: 10.1007/s00774-011-0271-y. Epub
2011 Jun 3.

Identification of genes for bone mineral density variation by computational
disease gene identification strategy.

Li GH(1), Deng HW, Kung AW, Huang QY.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Lab of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of Life
Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.

We previously used five freely available bioinformatics tools (Prioritizer,
Geneseeker, PROSPECTR and SUSPECTS, Disease Gene Prediction, and Endeavour) to
analyze the thirteen well-replicated osteoporosis susceptibility loci and
identify a subset of most likely candidate osteoporosis susceptibility genes
(Huang et al. in J Hum Genet 53:644-655, 2008). In the current study, we
experimentally tested the association between bone mineral density (BMD) and the 
9 most likely candidate genes [LAMC2(1q25-q31), MATN3(2p24-p23), ITGAV(2q31-q32),
ACVR1(2q23-q24), TDGF1(3p21.31), EGF(4q25), IGF1(12q22-q23), ZIC2(13q32),
BMP2(20p12)] which were pinpointed by 4 or more bioinformatics tools. Forty tag
SNPs in nine candidate genes were genotyped in a southern Chinese female
case-control cohort consisting of 1643 subjects. Single- and multi-marker
association analyses were performed using logistic regression analysis
implemented by PLINK. Potential transcription factor binding sites were predicted
by MatInspector. The strongest association was observed between rs10178256
(MATN3) and trochanter (P < 0.001) and total hip BMD (P = 0.002). The SNP rs6214 
(IGF1) showed consistent association with BMD at all the four measured skeletal
sites (P = 0.005-0.044). Prediction of transcription factor binding suggested
that the minor allele G of rs10178256 might abolish the binding of MESP1 and
MESP2 which play vital roles in bone homeostasis, whereas the minor allele G of
rs6214 might create an additional binding site for XBP1, a constitutive regulator
of endoplasmic reticulum stress response. Our data suggested that variants in
MATN3 and IGF1 were involved in BMD regulation in southern Chinese women.

© The Japanese Society for Bone and Mineral Research and Springer 2011

PMID: 21638018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 8;286(27):24451-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.238758. Epub 2011 
May 23.

Enhanced biosynthesis of coagulation factor VIII through diminished engagement of
the unfolded protein response.

Brown HC(1), Gangadharan B, Doering CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service,
Emory University School of Medicine and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Human and porcine coagulation factor VIII (fVIII) display a biosynthetic
efficiency differential that is being exploited for the development of new
protein and gene transfer-based therapies for hemophilia A. The cellular and/or
molecular mechanism(s) responsible for this phenomenon have yet to be uncovered, 
although it has been temporally localized to post-translational biosynthetic
steps. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular adaptation to
structurally distinct (e.g. misfolded) or excess protein in the endoplasmic
reticulum and is known to be induced by heterologous expression of recombinant
human fVIII. Therefore, it is plausible that the biosynthetic differential
between human and porcine fVIII results from differential UPR activation. In the 
current study, UPR induction was examined in the context of ongoing fVIII
expression. UPR activation was greater during human fVIII expression when
compared with porcine fVIII expression as determined by ER response element
(ERSE)-luciferase reporter activity, X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, and
immunoglobulin-binding protein (BiP) up-regulation. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of fVIII expressing cells revealed that human fVIII was notably absent in the
Golgi apparatus, confirming that endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport is
rate-limiting. In contrast, a significant proportion of porcine fVIII was
localized to the Golgi indicating efficient transit through the secretory
pathway. Overexpression of BiP, an integral UPR protein, reduced the secretion of
human fVIII by 50%, but had no effect on porcine fVIII biosynthesis. In contrast,
expression of BiP shRNA increased human fVIII expression levels. The current data
support the model of differential engagement of UPR by human and porcine fVIII as
a non-traditional mechanism for regulation of gene product biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC3129224
PMID: 21606503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. BMC Mol Biol. 2011 May 24;12:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-12-25.

Functional characterization of the ER stress induced X-box-binding protein-1
(Xbp-1) in the porcine system.

Zhang JY(1), Lee KS, Kim JS, Song BS, Jin DI, Koo DB, Yu K.

Author information: 
(1)Aging Research Centre, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an evolutionary conserved
adaptive reaction for increasing cell survival under endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress conditions. X-box-binding protein-1 (Xbp1) is a key transcription factor
of UPR that activates genes involved in protein folding, secretion, and
degradation to restore ER function. The UPR induced by ER stress was extensively 
studied in diseases linked to protein misfolding and aggregations. However, in
the porcine system, genes in the UPR pathway were not investigated. In this
study, we isolated and characterized the porcine Xbp1 (pXbp1) gene in ER stress
using porcine embryonic fibroblast (PEF) cells and porcine organs. ER stress was 
induced by the treatment of tunicamycin and cell viability was investigated by
the MTT assay. For cloning and analyzing the expression pattern of pXbp1, RT-PCR 
analysis and Western blot were used. Knock-down of pXbp1 was performed by the
siRNA-mediated gene silencing.
RESULTS: We found that the pXbp1 mRNA was the subject of the IRE1a-mediated
unconventional splicing by ER stress. Knock-down of pXbp1 enhanced ER
stress-mediated cell death in PEF cells. In adult organs, pXbp1 mRNA and protein 
were expressed and the spliced forms were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: It was first found that the UPR mechanisms and the function of pXbp1
in the porcine system. These results indicate that pXbp1 plays an important role 
during the ER stress response like other animal systems and open a new
opportunity for examining the UPR pathway in the porcine model system.

PMCID: PMC3112107
PMID: 21605464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. RNA Biol. 2011 Jul-Aug;8(4):552-6. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.4.15396. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Conserved RNA structures in the non-canonical Hac1/Xbp1 intron.

Hooks KB(1), Griffiths-Jones S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester UK.

The unconventional splicing of Hac1 by the ribonuclease Ire1 is a key event in
the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. This splicing is independent of the spliceosome and is mediated by a 
secondary structure at the intron-exon boundaries of the mRNA. Similar
unconventional splicing was also described for the gene Xbp1 in human, mouse, C. 
elegans and D. melanogaster, and for Hac1 in five other fungi. We used reported
RNA structures to build a multiple sequence alignment and the Infernal package to
search for homologous structures. We identified homologous non-canonical intron
structures in 128 out of 156 searched eukaryotic genomes. Our results show that
the sequence of the Hac1/Xbp1 intron is highly conserved only around the splice
sites recognized by Ire1. The consensus structure of the Hac1/Xbp1 mRNA is well
conserved in Fungi and Metazoa and resembles structures previously described. We 
show that a typical Hac1/Xbp1 intron is very short, only 20-26 bases, whereas
yeast species have a long intron (> 100 bases). We identified six species with
unambiguous Hac1/Xbp1 homologs that have lost the non-canonical intron structure.
We propose that these species use a different mechanism to regulate the UPR.

PMCID: PMC3225973
PMID: 21593604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. RNA Biol. 2011 Jul-Aug;8(4):637-47. doi: 10.4161/rna.8.4.15395. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Programmed ribosomal frameshifting in the expression of the regulator of
intestinal stem cell proliferation, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC).

Baranov PV(1), Wills NM, Barriscale KA, Firth AE, Jud MC, Letsou A, Manning G,
Atkins JF.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
brave.oval.pan@gmail.com

A programmed ribosomal frameshift (PRF) in the decoding of APC (adenomatous
polyposis coli) mRNA has been identified and characterized in Caenorhabditis
worms, Drosophila and mosquitoes. The frameshift product lacks the C-terminal
approximately one-third of the product of standard decoding and instead has a
short sequence encoded by the -1 frame which is just 13 residues in C. elegans,
but is 125 in D. melanogaster. The frameshift site is A_AA.A_AA.C in
Caenorhabditids, fruit flies and the mosquitoes studied while a variant
A_AA.A_AA.A is found in some other nematodes. The predicted secondary RNA
structure of the downstream stimulators varies considerably in the species
studied. In the twelve sequenced Drosophila genomes, it is a long stem with a
four-way junction in its loop. In the five sequenced Caenorhabditis species, it
is a short RNA pseudoknot with an additional stem in loop 1. The efficiency of
frameshifting varies significantly, depending on the particular stimulator within
the frameshift cassette, when tested with reporter constructs in rabbit
reticulocyte lysates. Phylogenetic analysis of the distribution of APC programmed
ribosomal frameshifting cassettes suggests it has an ancient origin and raises
questions about a possibility of synthesis of alternative protein products during
expression of APC in other organisms such as humans. The origin of APC as a PRF
candidate emerged from a prior study of evolutionary signatures derived from
comparative analysis of the 12 fly genomes. Three other proposed PRF candidates
(Xbp1, CG32736, CG14047) with switches in conservation of reading frames are
likely explained by mechanisms other than PRF.

PMCID: PMC3225980
PMID: 21593603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Immunology. 2011 Jul;133(3):379-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2011.03453.x. Epub
2011 May 17.

Expression of MHC class I dimers and ERAP1 in an ankylosing spondylitis patient
cohort.

Campbell EC(1), Fettke F, Bhat S, Morley KD, Powis SJ.

Author information: 
(1)St Andrews Medical School, University of St Andrews, Fife Ninewells Hospital, 
Dundee, UK.

The human leucocyte antigen HLA-B27 is strongly associated with ankylosing
spondylitis, a form of seronegative inflammatory arthritis. In this study aspects
related to several hypothesized mechanisms of disease pathogenesis have been
investigated. Blood monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC) from a small patient
cohort of 29 patients with ankylosing spondylitis and one with reactive
arthritis, were compared with DC from 34 healthy control subjects, of whom four
were found to be HLA-B27 positive. The ability of HLA-B27 to form heavy-chain
dimers reactive with monoclonal antibody HC10 was tested, along with the
induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, assessed by splicing xbp1 mRNA
and immunoblotting of Immunoglobulin Binding Protein (BiP). Additionally, the
protein expression levels of the ER resident aminopeptidase gene ERAP1 in
patients with ankylosing spondylitis was also determined, following its recent
identification as a novel disease-associated gene. No significant difference was 
noted in the global levels of HC10-reactive MHC class I dimers formed in either
the patient or control DC populations. Stress on the ER, as determined by xbp1
mRNA splicing, was not detected but lower levels of BiP were observed in the DC
from patients. Of further potential interest, in this patient cohort the
expression of ERAP1 appeared to be higher in a number of patient DC samples when 
compared with controls, suggesting over-expression of ERAP1 as a mechanism
promoting ankylosing spondylitic pathogenesis.

© 2011 The Authors. Immunology © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3112347
PMID: 21574996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem J. 2011 Aug 1;437(3):469-75. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110479.

Calcium homoeostasis modulator 1 (CALHM1) reduces the calcium content of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and triggers ER stress.

Gallego-Sandín S(1), Alonso MT, García-Sancho J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (IBGM), Universidad de Valladolid y
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), C/ Sanz y Forés, 3,
47003-Valladolid, Spain.

CALHM1 (calcium homoeostasis modulator 1), a membrane protein with similarity to 
NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor channels that localizes in the plasma
membrane and the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) of neurons, has been shown to
generate a plasma-membrane Ca(2+) conductance and has been proposed to influence 
Alzheimer's disease risk. In the present study we have investigated the effects
of CALHM1 on intracellular Ca(2+) handling in HEK-293T [HEK (human embryonic
kidney)-293 cells expressing the large T-antigen of SV40 (simian virus 40)] cells
by using targeted aequorins for selective monitorization of Ca(2+) transport by
organelles. We find that CALHM1 increases Ca(2+) leak from the ER and, more
importantly, reduces ER Ca(2+) uptake by decreasing both the transport capacity
and the Ca(2+) affinity of SERCA (sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum
Ca(2+)-ATPase). As a result, the Ca(2+) content of the ER is drastically
decreased. This reduction in the Ca(2+) content of the ER triggered the UPR
(unfolded protein response) with induction of several ER stress markers, such as 
CHOP [C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein)-homologous protein], ERdj4, GRP78
(glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa) and XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1). Thus
CALHM1 might provide a relevant link between Ca(2+) homoeostasis disruption, ER
stress and cell damage in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.

© The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Biochemical Society

PMID: 21574960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 11;12(1):225. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-225.

Strengthening insights into host responses to mastitis infection in ruminants by 
combining heterogeneous microarray data sources.

Genini S(1), Badaoui B, Sclep G, Bishop SC, Waddington D, Pinard van der Laan MH,
Klopp C, Cabau C, Seyfert HM, Petzl W, Jensen K, Glass EJ, de Greeff A, Smith HE,
Smits MA, Olsaker I, Boman GM, Pisoni G, Moroni P, Castiglioni B, Cremonesi P,
Del Corvo M, Foulon E, Foucras G, Rupp R, Giuffra E.

Author information: 
(1)Parco Tecnologico Padano - CERSA, Via Einstein, 26900 Lodi, Italy.
geninis@vet.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling studies of mastitis in ruminants have
provided key but fragmented knowledge for the understanding of the disease. A
systematic combination of different expression profiling studies via
meta-analysis techniques has the potential to test the extensibility of
conclusions based on single studies. Using the program Pointillist, we performed 
meta-analysis of transcription-profiling data from six independent studies of
infections with mammary gland pathogens, including samples from cattle challenged
in vivo with S. aureus, E. coli, and S. uberis, samples from goats challenged in 
vivo with S. aureus, as well as cattle macrophages and ovine dendritic cells
infected in vitro with S. aureus. We combined different time points from those
studies, testing different responses to mastitis infection: overall (common
signature), early stage, late stage, and cattle-specific.
RESULTS: Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of affected genes showed that the four
meta-analysis combinations share biological functions and pathways (e.g. protein 
ubiquitination and polyamine regulation) which are intrinsic to the general
disease response. In the overall response, pathways related to immune response
and inflammation, as well as biological functions related to lipid metabolism
were altered. This latter observation is consistent with the milk fat content
depression commonly observed during mastitis infection. Complementarities between
early and late stage responses were found, with a prominence of metabolic and
stress signals in the early stage and of the immune response related to the lipid
metabolism in the late stage; both mechanisms apparently modulated by few genes, 
including XBP1 and SREBF1.The cattle-specific response was characterized by
alteration of the immune response and by modification of lipid metabolism.
Comparison of E. coli and S. aureus infections in cattle in vivo revealed that
affected genes showing opposite regulation had the same altered biological
functions and provided evidence that E. coli caused a stronger host response.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis approach reinforces previous findings but also
reveals several novel themes, including the involvement of genes, biological
functions, and pathways that were not identified in individual studies. As such, 
it provides an interesting proof of principle for future studies combining
information from diverse heterogeneous sources.

PMCID: PMC3118214
PMID: 21569310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 24;108(21):8885-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105564108. Epub 2011 May 9.

Dual and opposing roles of the unfolded protein response regulated by IRE1alpha
and XBP1 in proinsulin processing and insulin secretion.

Lee AH(1), Heidtman K, Hotamisligil GS, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. ahlee@hsph.harvard.edu

As a key regulator of the unfolded protein response, the transcription factor
XBP1 activates genes in protein secretory pathways and is required for the
development of certain secretory cells. To elucidate the function of XBP1 in
pancreatic ß-cells, we generated ß-cell-specific XBP1 mutant mice.
Xbp1(f/f);RIP-cre mice displayed modest hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance
resulting from decreased insulin secretion from ß-cells. Ablation of XBP1
markedly decreased the number of insulin granules in ß-cells, impaired proinsulin
processing, increased the serum proinsulin:insulin ratio, blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, and inhibited cell proliferation. Notably, 
XBP1 deficiency not only compromised the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in
ß-cells but also caused constitutive hyperactivation of its upstream activator,
IRE1a, which could degrade a subset of mRNAs encoding proinsulin-processing
enzymes. Hence, the combined effects of XBP1 deficiency on the canonical unfolded
protein response and its negative feedback activation of IRE1a caused ß-cell
dysfunction in XBP1 mutant mice. These results demonstrate that IRE1a has dual
and opposing roles in ß-cells, and that a precisely regulated feedback circuit
involving IRE1a and its product XBP1s is required to achieve optimal insulin
secretion and glucose control.

PMCID: PMC3102350
PMID: 21555585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Gastroenterology. 2011 May;140(6):1738-47. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.02.048.

Autophagy, microbial sensing, endoplasmic reticulum stress, and epithelial
function in inflammatory bowel disease.

Kaser A(1), Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Increasing evidence has emerged that supports an important intersection between 3
fundamental cell biologic pathways in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel
disease. These include the intersection between autophagy, as revealed by the
original identification of ATG16L1 and IRGM as major genetic risk factors for
Crohn's disease, and intracellular bacterial sensing, as shown by the importance 
of NOD2 in autophagy induction upon bacterial entry into the cell. A pathway
closely linked to autophagy and innate immunity is the unfolded protein response,
initiated by endoplasmic reticulum stress due to the accumulation of misfolded
proteins, which is genetically related to ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease 
(XBP1 and ORMDL3). Hypomorphic ATG16L1, NOD2, and X box binding protein-1 possess
the common attribute of profoundly affecting Paneth cells, specialized epithelial
cells at the bottom of intestinal crypts involved in antimicrobial function.
Together with their functional juxtaposition in the environmentally exposed
intestinal epithelial cell, their remarkable functional convergence on Paneth
cells and their behavior in response to environmental factors, including
microbes, these 3 pathways are of increasing importance to understanding the
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. Moreover, in conjunction with studies
that model deficient nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B function, these studies suggest a central 
role for altered intestinal epithelial cell function as one of the earliest
events in the development of inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592160
PMID: 21530740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Apr 28;2:e149. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.31.

Induction of ER stress in response to oxygen-glucose deprivation of cortical
cultures involves the activation of the PERK and IRE-1 pathways and of
caspase-12.

Badiola N(1), Penas C, Miñano-Molina A, Barneda-Zahonero B, Fadó R, Sánchez-Opazo
G, Comella JX, Sabriá J, Zhu C, Blomgren K, Casas C, Rodríguez-Alvarez J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurociencies and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.

Disturbance of calcium homeostasis and accumulation of misfolded proteins in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are considered contributory components of cell death
after ischemia. However, the signal-transducing events that are activated by ER
stress after cerebral ischemia are incompletely understood. In this study, we
show that caspase-12 and the PERK and IRE pathways are activated following
oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) of mixed cortical cultures or neonatal
hypoxia-ischemia (HI). Activation of PERK led to a transient phosphorylation of
eIF2a, an increase in ATF4 levels and the induction of gadd34 (a subunit of an
eIF2a-directed phosphatase). Interestingly, the upregulation of ATF4 did not lead
to an increase in the levels of CHOP. Additionally, IRE1 activation was mediated 
by the increase in the processed form of xbp1, which would be responsible for the
observed expression of edem2 and the increased levels of the chaperones GRP78 and
GRP94. We were also able to detect caspase-12 proteolysis after HI or OGD.
Processing of procaspase-12 was mediated by NMDA receptor and calpain activation.
Moreover, our data suggest that caspase-12 activation is independent of the
unfolded protein response activated by ER stress.

PMCID: PMC3122062
PMID: 21525936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hepatology. 2011 Aug;54(2):452-62. doi: 10.1002/hep.24349. Epub 2011 May 2.

Lack of de novo phosphatidylinositol synthesis leads to endoplasmic reticulum
stress and hepatic steatosis in cdipt-deficient zebrafish.

Thakur PC(1), Stuckenholz C, Rivera MR, Davison JM, Yao JK, Amsterdam A, Sadler
KC, Bahary N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, and Childrens Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

Hepatic steatosis is the initial stage of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and may predispose to more severe hepatic disease, including
hepatocellular carcinoma. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been recently
implicated as a novel mechanism that may lead to NAFLD, although the genetic
factors invoking ER stress are largely unknown. During a screen for liver defects
from a zebrafish insertional mutant library, we isolated the mutant
cdipthi559Tg/+ (hi559). CDIPT is known to play an indispensable role in
phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) synthesis. Here we show that cdipt is expressed in 
the developing liver, and its disruption in hi559 mutants abrogates de novo
PtdIns synthesis, resulting in hepatomegaly at 5 days postfertilization. The
hi559 hepatocytes display features of NAFLD, including macrovesicular steatosis, 
ballooning, and necroapoptosis. Gene set enrichment of microarray profiling
revealed significant enrichment of endoplasmic reticulum stress response (ERSR)
genes in hi559 mutants. ER stress markers, including atf6, hspa5, calr, and xbp1,
are selectively up-regulated in the mutant liver. The hi559 expression profile
showed significant overlap with that of mammalian hepatic ER stress and NAFLD.
Ultrastructurally, the hi559 hepatocytes display marked disruption of ER
architecture with hallmarks of chronic unresolved ER stress. Induction of ER
stress by tunicamycin in wild-type larvae results in a fatty liver similar to
hi559, suggesting that ER stress could be a fundamental mechanism contributing to
hepatic steatosis.CONCLUSION: cdipt-deficient zebrafish exhibit hepatic ER stress
and NAFLD pathologies, implicating a novel link between PtdIns, ER stress, and
steatosis. The tractability of hi559 mutant provides a valuable tool to dissect
ERSR components, their contribution to molecular pathogenesis, and evaluation of 
novel therapeutics of NAFLD.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3140628
PMID: 21488074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cell Res. 2011 Nov;21(11):1619-33. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.58. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Xbp1-mediated histone H4 deacetylation contributes to DNA double-strand break
repair in yeast.

Tao R(1), Chen H, Gao C, Xue P, Yang F, Han JD, Zhou B, Chen YG.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Department
of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.

Xbp1 has been shown to regulate the cell cycle as a transcriptional repressor in 
budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this study, we demonstrated that Xbp1 
regulates DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair in S. cerevisiae. Xbp1 physically 
and genetically interacts with the histone deacetylase Rpd3 complex. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that Xbp1 is required for efficient deacetylation of
histone H4 flanking DSBs by the Rpd3 complex. Deletion of XBP1 leads to the
delayed deacetylation of histone H4, which is coupled with increased nucleosome
displacement, increased DNA end resection and decreased non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ). In response to DNA damage, Xbp1 is upregulated in a
Mec1-Rad9-Rad53 checkpoint pathway-dependent manner and undergoes
dephosphorylation. Cdk1, a central regulator of S. cerevisiae cell cycle, is
responsible for Xbp1 phosphorylation at residues Ser146, Ser271 and Ser551.
Substitution of these serine residues with alanine not only increases the
association of Xbp1 with the Rpd3 complex and its recruitment to a DSB, but also 
promotes DSB repair. Together, our findings reveal a role for Xbp1 in DSB repair 
via NHEJ through regulation of histone H4 acetylation and nucleosome displacement
in a positive feedback manner.

PMCID: PMC3364731
PMID: 21467995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Endocrinology. 2011 Jun;152(6):2247-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1036. Epub 2011 Mar 
29.

Constitutive role for IRE1a-XBP1 signaling pathway in the insulin-mediated
hepatic lipogenic program.

Ning J(1), Hong T, Ward A, Pi J, Liu Z, Liu HY, Cao W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Biology, The Hamner Institutes for Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The role of the IRE1a-X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) pathway in the
insulin-mediated hepatic lipogenic program and associated mechanisms were
investigated in this study. We observed that phosphorylation of IRE1a (an
upstream activator of XBP1) and splicing (activation) of XBP1 were elevated in
the liver of the C57BL/6 mice with insulin resistance/hyperinsulinemia induced by
high-fat diet. Treatment of nonobese diabetic mice with insulin activated hepatic
XBP1. In cultured primary mouse hepatocytes, prolonged exposure to insulin
induced IRE1a phosphorylation and XBP1 splicing significantly in the presence of 
insulin resistance. Overexpression of the activated XBP1 elevated the promoter
activities of the sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1c and fatty 
acid synthase (FAS) genes. Knockdown of either the IRE1a or XBP1 gene by small
interfering RNA prevented the insulin-stimulated promoter activities of both
SREBP-1 and FAS genes. In investigating the associated mechanisms, we found a
direct interaction between XBP1 and SREBP-1 promoter detected by the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore, the XBP1-mediated stimulation of the FAS
promoter was eliminated by knocking down the SREBP-1c gene (Srebf1). Finally, we 
observed that insulin activation of the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway was prevented by
inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin-dependent protein synthesis. In
conclusion, our results show that the IRE1a-XBP1-mediated unfolded protein
response pathway is an integrated part of the insulin-induced hepatic lipogenic
program and functions at an increased basal level in the presence of insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia. Besides, the insulin-mediated protein synthesis 
is tightly connected with the insulin-mediated lipogenic program.

PMCID: PMC3100623
PMID: 21447637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Oct;18(10):1617-27. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.24. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Autophagy, and BiP level decrease are early key events in retrograde degeneration
of motoneurons.

Penas C(1), Font-Nieves M, Forés J, Petegnief V, Planas A, Navarro X, Casas C.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Neuroplasticity and Regeneration, Institute of Neurosciences,
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain.

Disconnection of the axon from the soma of spinal motoneurons (MNs) leads either 
to a retrograde degenerative process or to a regenerative reaction, depending on 
the severity and the proximity to the soma of the axonal lesion. The endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) is a continuous membranous network that extends from the nucleus
to the entire cytoplasm of the neuronal soma, axon and dendrites. We investigated
whether axonal injury is sensed by the ER and triggers the activation of
protective mechanisms, such as the unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy.
We found early (at 3 days) accumulation of beclin1, LC3II and Lamp-1, hallmarks
of autophagy, in both degenerating MNs after spinal root avulsion and in
non-degenerating MNs after distal nerve section, although Lamp-1 disappeared by 5
days only in the former. In contrast, only degenerating MNs presented early
activation of IRE1a, revealed by an increase of the spliced isoform of Xbp1 and
accumulation of ATF4 in their nucleus, two branches of the UPR, and late BiP
downregulation in association with cytoskeletal and organelle disorganization. We
conclude that BiP decrease is a signature of the degenerating process, as its
overexpression led to an increase in MN survival after root avulsion. Besides,
Bcl2 is strongly implicated in the survival pathway activated by BiP
overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3172115
PMID: 21436843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. EMBO Rep. 2011 May;12(5):451-7. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.34. Epub 2011 Mar 18.

The IRE1a-XBP1 pathway is essential for osteoblast differentiation through
promoting transcription of Osterix.

Tohmonda T(1), Miyauchi Y, Ghosh R, Yoda M, Uchikawa S, Takito J, Morioka H,
Nakamura M, Iwawaki T, Chiba K, Toyama Y, Urano F, Horiuchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-aging Orthopedic Research, School of Medicine, Keio
University, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

During skeletal development, osteoblasts produce large amounts of extracellular
matrix proteins and must therefore increase their secretory machinery to handle
the deposition. The accumulation of unfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum
induces an adoptive mechanism called the unfolded protein response (UPR). We show
that one of the most crucial UPR mediators, inositol-requiring protein 1a
(IRE1a), and its target transcription factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), are 
essential for bone morphogenic protein 2-induced osteoblast differentiation.
Furthermore, we identify Osterix (Osx, a transcription factor that is
indispensible for bone formation) as a target gene of XBP1. The promoter region
of the Osx gene encodes two potential binding motifs for XBP1, and we show that
XBP1 binds to these regions. Thus, the IRE1a-XBP1 pathway is involved in
osteoblast differentiation through promoting Osx transcription.

PMCID: PMC3090012
PMID: 21415858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Apr;41(4):898-901. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141497. Epub 2011 Mar 
17.

Integration of ER stress and viral nucleotide sensing in DCs: mounting a response
commensurate to the threat?

Dalod M(1), Pierre P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Université de la Méditerranée, Parc 
scientifique et technologique de Luminy, Marseille, France.
dalod@ciml.univ-mrs.fr

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2011 Apr;41(4):1086-97.

In response to inflammatory stimulation, DCs have a remarkable pattern of
differentiation, including the triggering of specific mechanisms to control the
immune response. In this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, a study
reports that concomitant stimulation of pattern-recognition receptors by
viral-type nucleic acids and induction of the unfolded protein response by
chemicals synergize in DCs to augment type I interferon and pro-inflammatory
cytokine production. Expression of the transcription factor XBP1 was shown to be 
necessary and sufficient to induce this synergistic effect. These findings
confirm the existence of important connections between the unfolding protein
response/ER stress pathway and the production of inflammatory cytokines, which
have been recently revealed in different models and immune contexts, as discussed
in this Commentary.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21413007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jun 1;20(11):2144-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr100. Epub 2011 Mar 
9.

The ER stress factor XBP1s prevents amyloid-beta neurotoxicity.

Casas-Tinto S(1), Zhang Y, Sanchez-Garcia J, Gomez-Velazquez M, Rincon-Limas DE, 
Fernandez-Funez P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an incurable neurodegenerative disorder clinically
characterized by progressive cognitive impairment. A prominent pathologic
hallmark in the AD brain is the abnormal accumulation of the amyloid-ß 1-42
peptide (Aß), but the exact pathways mediating Aß neurotoxicity remain enigmatic.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is induced during AD, and has been indirectly
implicated as a mediator of Aß neurotoxicity. We report here that Aß activates
the ER stress response factor X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) in transgenic flies 
and in mammalian cultured neurons, yielding its active form, the transcription
factor XBP1s. XBP1s shows neuroprotective activity in two different AD models,
flies expressing Aß and mammalian cultured neurons treated with Aß oligomers.
Trying to identify the mechanisms mediating XBP1s neuroprotection, we found that 
in PC12 cells treated with Aß oligomers, XBP1s prevents the accumulation of free 
calcium (Ca(2+)) in the cytosol. This protective activity can be mediated by the 
downregulation of a specific isoform of the ryanodine Ca(2+) channel, RyR3. In
support of this observation, a mutation in the only ryanodine receptor (RyR) in
flies also suppresses Aß neurotoxicity, indicating the conserved mechanisms
between the two AD models. These results underscore the functional relevance of
XBP1s in Aß toxicity, and uncover the potential of XBP1 and RyR as targets for AD
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3090193
PMID: 21389082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 22;286(16):14226-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.222703. Epub
2011 Mar 8.

Dengue virus modulates the unfolded protein response in a time-dependent manner.

Peña J(1), Harris E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of Public Health, and 
Graduate Group in Microbiology, Department of Plant and Microbial Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-7354, USA.
jpena360@yahoo.com

Flaviviruses, such as dengue virus (DENV), depend on the host endoplasmic
reticulum for translation, replication, and packaging of their genomes. Here we
report that DENV-2 infection modulates the unfolded protein response in a
time-dependent manner. We show that early DENV-2 infection triggers and then
suppresses PERK-mediated eIF2a phosphorylation and that in mid and late DENV-2
infection, the IRE1-XBP1 and ATF6 pathways are activated, respectively.
Activation of IRE1-XBP1 correlated with induction of downstream targets GRP78,
CHOP, and GADD34. Furthermore, induction of CHOP did not induce apoptotic
markers, such as suppression of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, activation of
caspase-9 or caspase-3, and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Finally, we 
show that DENV-2 replication is affected in PERK(-/-) and IRE1(-/-) mouse embryo 
fibroblasts when compared with wild-type mouse embryo fibroblasts. These results 
demonstrate that time-dependent activation of the unfolded protein response by
DENV-2 can override inhibition of translation, prevent apoptosis, and prolong the
viral life cycle.

PMCID: PMC3077624
PMID: 21385877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1015959108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Light-dependent and circadian clock-regulated activation of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein, X-box-binding protein 1, and heat shock factor pathways.

Hatori M(1), Hirota T, Iitsuka M, Kurabayashi N, Haraguchi S, Kokame K, Sato R,
Nakai A, Miyata T, Tsutsui K, Fukada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The circadian clock is phase-delayed or -advanced by light when given at early or
late subjective night, respectively. Despite the importance of the
time-of-day-dependent phase responses to light, the underlying molecular
mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we performed a comprehensive analysis of
light-inducible genes in the chicken pineal gland, which consists of
light-sensitive clock cells representing a prototype of the clock system. Light
stimulated expression of 62 genes and 40 ESTs by >2.5-fold, among which genes
responsive to the heat shock and endoplasmic reticulum stress as well as their
regulatory transcription factors heat shock factor (HSF)1, HSF2, and
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) were strongly activated when a light pulse was
given at late subjective night. In contrast, the light pulse at early subjective 
night caused prominent induction of E4bp4, a key regulator in the phase-delaying 
mechanism of the pineal clock, along with activation of a large group of
cholesterol biosynthetic genes that are targets of sterol regulatory
element-binding protein (SREBP) transcription factor. We found that the light
pulse stimulated proteolytic formation of active SREBP-1 that, in turn,
transactivated E4bp4 expression, linking SREBP with the light-input pathway of
the pineal clock. As an output of light activation of cholesterol biosynthetic
genes, we found light-stimulated pineal production of a neurosteroid,
7a-hydroxypregnenolone, demonstrating a unique endocrine function of the pineal
gland. Intracerebroventricular injection of 7a-hydroxypregnenolone activated
locomotor activities of chicks. Our study on the genome-wide gene expression
analysis revealed time-of-day-dependent light activation of signaling pathways
and provided molecular connection between gene expression and behavior through
neurosteroid release from the pineal gland.

PMCID: PMC3064327
PMID: 21383147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cell Death Dis. 2011 Feb 10;2:e118. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2011.1.

Anti-apoptotic function of Xbp1 as an IL-3 signaling molecule in hematopoietic
cells.

Kurata M(1), Yamazaki Y, Kanno Y, Ishibashi S, Takahara T, Kitagawa M, Nakamura
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Cytokine signaling is critical for proliferation, survival and differentiation of
hematopoietic cell, and interleukin-3 (IL-3) is required for maintenance of many 
hematopoietic cell lines, such as BaF3. We have isolated apoptosis-resistant
clones of BaF3 using retroviral insertional mutagenesis and the Xbp1 locus was
identified as a retroviral integration site. Expression and splicing of the Xbp1 
transcript was conserved in the resistant clone but was promptly disappeared on
IL-3 withdrawal in parental BaF3. IL-3 stimulation of BaF3 cells enhanced Xbp1
promoter activity and induced phosphorylation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress
sensor protein IRE1, resulting in the increase in Xbp1S that activates unfolded
protein response. When downstream signaling from IL-3 was blocked by LY294002
and/or dn-Stat5, Xbp1 expression was downregulated and IRE1 phosphorylation was
suppressed. Inhibition of IL-3 signaling as well as knockdown of Xbp1-induced
apoptosis in BaF3 cells. In contrast, constitutive expression of Xbp1S protected 
BaF3 from apoptosis during IL-3 depletion. However, cell cycle arrest at the G1
stage was observed in BaF3 and myeloid differentiation was induced in
IL-3-dependent 32Dcl3 cells. Expression of apoptosis-, cell cycle- and
differentiation-related genes was modulated by Xbp1S expression. These results
indicate that the proper transcriptional and splicing regulation of Xbp1 by IL-3 
signaling is important in homeostasis of hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC3101701
PMID: 21368889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Toxicology. 2011 Jul 11;285(1-2):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2011.02.006. Epub 2011
Feb 24.

Bupropion, an atypical antidepressant, induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and
caspase-dependent cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells.

Jang EH(1), Park CS, Kang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Medicinal Toxicology Research Center, Inha
Research Institute for Medical Sciences, Inha University, Incheon, Republic of
Korea.

Bupropion is an atypical antidepressant that is currently used as a smoking
cessation aid. Bupropion interferes with monoamine reuptake and is potentially
neurotoxic, although this is yet to be confirmed. In this study, we evaluated the
cytotoxicity of bupropion using SH-SY5Y human catecholaminergic cells as the in
vitro model. Exposure of the cells to bupropion for 24h reduced their viability
in a concentration-dependent manner. Treatment of the cells with a toxic
concentration of bupropion (100µg/mL) induced the phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor alpha (EIF-2a), c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) within 1h, which later declined to
baseline levels. However, bupropion failed to splice X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1) mRNA. Bupropion caused mitochondrial cytochrome c release and activated
caspases 9, 8, and 3 in a time-dependent manner. The reduction in cell viability 
was significantly inhibited by a caspase 3 inhibitor. Bupropion also induced the 
mRNA expression of the death receptors DR4 (TRAILR1) and DR5 (TRAILR2). However, 
bupropion did not increase the level of cellular oxidative stress. Taken
together, our data indicate that bupropion activates caspase 3 through the
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress responses and activation of JNK, and
consequently induces apoptotic cell death in SH-SY5Y cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2011 Mar;5(1):35-44.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress, the unfolded protein response, and gene network
modeling in antiestrogen resistant breast cancer.

Clarke R(1), Shajahan AN, Wang Y, Tyson JJ, Riggins RB, Weiner LM, Bauman WT,
Xuan J, Zhang B, Facey C, Aiyer H, Cook K, Hickman FE, Tavassoly I, Verdugo A,
Chen C, Zwart A, Wärri A, Hilakivi-Clarke LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, 
DC 20057, U.S.A. ; Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20057, U.S.A.

Lack of understanding of endocrine resistance remains one of the major challenges
for breast cancer researchers, clinicians, and patients. Current reductionist
approaches to understanding the molecular signaling driving resistance have
offered mostly incremental progress over the past 10 years. As the field of
systems biology has begun to mature, the approaches and network modeling tools
being developed and applied therein offer a different way to think about how
molecular signaling and the regulation of critical cellular functions are
integrated. To gain novel insights, we first describe some of the key challenges 
facing network modeling of endocrine resistance, many of which arise from the
properties of the data spaces being studied. We then use activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR) following induction of endoplasmic reticulum
stress in breast cancer cells by antiestrogens, to illustrate our approaches to
computational modeling. Activation of UPR is a key determinant of cell fate
decision making and regulation of autophagy and apoptosis. These initial studies 
provide insight into a small subnetwork topology obtained using differential
dependency network analysis and focused on the UPR gene XBP1. The XBP1 subnetwork
topology incorporates BCAR3, BCL2, BIK, NF<U+03BA>B, and other genes as nodes; the
connecting edges represent the dependency structures amongst these nodes. As data
from ongoing cellular and molecular studies become available, we will build
detailed mathematical models of this XBP1-UPR network.

PMCID: PMC3734561
PMID: 23930139  [PubMed]


157. J Neurosci Res. 2011 May;89(5):661-73. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22583. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Partial XBP1 knockdown does not affect viability of oligodendrocyte precursor
cells exposed to new models of hypoxia and ischemia in vitro.

Kraskiewicz H(1), FitzGerald U.

Author information: 
(1)NCBES, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signaling pathway has been implicated in
tissue injury in several rodent models of brain ischemia. To understand better
the effects of ischemia on white matter in particular, we developed several in
vitro models of hypoxia and ischemia in oligodendrocyte precursors. For the first
time, we present data showing that exposure of rat oligodendrocyte precursor
cells (OPCs) to cobalt chloride (CoCl(2)), antimycin A (AA), or oxygen, glucose
and nutrient deprivation (OGND) causes up-regulation of glucose-regulated protein
78/B-cell immunoglobulin-binding protein (Grp78/BiP), C/EBP homologous binding
protein (CHOP), and spliced X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). To mimic the effects 
of ischemia, OPCs supplemented with 5% normal growth medium and 95% Hank's
balanced salt solution were incubated in a hypoxia chamber set at 0.1% oxygen.
Because the toxic effects of AA on OPCs more closely resembled those seen when
OPCs were subjected to OGND, we found AA treatment preferable to CoCl(2) as an in
vitro model. To investigate the role of XBP1 in survival following an ischemic
insult, we generated a stable XBP1 knockdown OPC cell line and subjected it to
simulated hypoxia or ischemia. Surprisingly, 65% XBP1 knockdown had no effect on 
viability following chemical treatment or OGND. These data strengthen the case
for targeting the ER stress signalling pathway in an effort to develop new early 
treatments for ischemic stroke patients but at the same time demonstrate that
partial knockdown of XBP1 is not sufficient to protect precursor oligodendrocytes
from ischemic damage.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21337367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Methods Enzymol. 2011;491:293-308. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385928-0.00016-X.

Quantitative measurement of events in the mammalian unfolded protein response.

Shang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

When the homeostasis of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is disturbed by the
accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins, a series of signaling responses
collectively called the unfolded protein response (UPR) is triggered. UPR
transducers IRE1, PERK, ATF6, and UPR-responsive genes such as GRP78/BiP, ERAD
genes such as EDEM, and synthesis of the protein N-linked glycosylation donor
lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLOs) are mobilized. This chapter provides methods
used in our laboratory to quantitatively measure the accumulation of mRNAs
encoding BiP and EDEM, splicing of XBP1, cleavage of ATF6, inhibition of protein 
synthesis by PERK, and extension of LLOs under control and stress conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Methods Enzymol. 2011;491:261-92. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385928-0.00015-8.

Measuring signaling by the unfolded protein response.

Cox DJ(1), Strudwick N, Ali AA, Paton AW, Paton JC, Schröder M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Durham University, Durham,
United Kingdom.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated by accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The unfolded protein response is
associated with many diseases, including cancer, metabolic diseases such as type 
II diabetes and fatty liver diseases, and neurodegenerative diseases, for
example, Alzheimer's disease. The UPR is also activated by numerous toxic
chemicals and modulates drug action. Therefore, the UPR becomes increasingly
important in toxicological and pharmacological research. In mammals, the UPR is
transduced through three parallel signaling pathways originating at the
ER-resident transmembrane protein kinase-endoribonucleases (RNase) IRE1, the
protein kinase PERK, and a family of type II transmembrane transcription factors,
whose most prominent member is ATF6a. We discuss methods to experimentally
activate the UPR in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and in cultured mammalian 
cells. We summarize methods to monitor activation of the three arms of the UPR,
while providing detailed protocols for select, reliable assays. To monitor
activation of the IRE1 branch, a Northern blotting protocol to monitor splicing
of HAC1 mRNA in yeast and a reverse transcriptase-PCR assay for processing of the
IRE1 RNase substrate XBP1 in mammalian cells are presented. Activation of the
IRE1 kinase activity can be assayed by immunoblotting for IRE1
autophosphorylation. Activation of the PERK branch is monitored via
phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2a, induction of CHOP at 
the mRNA and protein level, and induction of ATF4 at the protein level.
Activation of ATF6 is assayed in Western blots through the appearance of its
processed 50 kDa soluble cytosolic fragment. We summarize reverse
transcriptase-PCR protocols to measure activation of target genes selectively
induced by the three branches of the UPR and histological assays for UPR
activation in tissue sections. This repertoire of methods will enable the
newcomer to the UPR field to comprehensively assess the activation status of the 
UPR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Methods Enzymol. 2011;491:127-42. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385928-0.00008-0.

Analysis of nelfinavir-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Brüning A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, University Hospital Munich, Campus Innenstadt
and Grosshadern, Munich, Germany.

Nelfinavir (Viracept®) is an HIV protease inhibitor that has been shown to induce
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress reaction in human cancer cells. Although
the presumed drug doses needed for an efficient ER stress reaction and ensuing
apoptosis in cancer cells is somewhat higher than those prescribed for
HIV-infected persons, nelfinavir represents one of the few clinically applicable 
ER stress-inducing agents, and is currently being tested in clinical studies on
cancer patients. Therefore, this chapter describes how to obtain and use
nelfinavir for in vitro and in vivo studies. In addition, methods are described
that might facilitate the analysis and monitoring of the nelfinavir-induced ER
stress response either in cancer cells in cell culture or in cancer tissue
biopsies. These methods include various fluorescence-based ER staining techniques
and the expression analysis of primary and secondary ER stress markers by
immunoblotting and RT-PCR analysis. Among the several methods presented, the
analysis of an unconventional XBP1 splicing, caused by the ER stress sensor IRE1,
is shown to present the most sensitive and most specific marker for
nelfinavir-induced ER stress. Primers and PCR conditions suitable for XBP1 PCR
and splicing analysis are presented. Such a PCR-based XBP1 splicing analysis
might not only be suitable to monitor nelfinavir-induced ER stress, but could
also be applied in drug screening programs to test for other ER stress-inducing
agents with similar activities or synergistic activities with nelfinavir.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;17(8):2101-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2945.
Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Identification of loss of p16 expression and upregulation of MDR-1 as genetic
events resulting from two novel chromosomal translocations found in a
plasmablastic lymphoma of the uterus.

Matsuki E(1), Miyakawa Y, Asakawa S, Tsukada Y, Yamada T, Yokoyama K, Kudoh J,
Ikeda Y, Okamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. erie@kk.iij4u.or.jp

PURPOSE: To establish cell lines from the patient with plasmablastic lymphoma,
who was immunologically competent including negative human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) serology, and analyze the unique chromosomal translocations seen in the
cell lines in order to unveil the pathogenesis of this tumor, which had no
evidence of Epstein-Barr virus involvement.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Establishment of the cell lines was attempted by inoculating
the patient's lymph node biopsy specimen subcutaneously to immunodeficient mice. 
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array and FISH analysis were performed to
identify breakpoints of the two chromosomal translocations. Of the 4 candidate
genes identified by FISH analysis to be involved in the translocations, reverse
transcription-PCR, Western blot, flow cytometry, and proliferation assay were
performed to identify the exact genes involved.
RESULTS: Analysis of the cell lines identified loss of p16 at the protein level
by chromosomal translocation of t(9;13) and upregulation of MDR-1 by t(4;7). The 
cell lines expressing MDR-1 acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic agents such
as cisplatin and doxorubicin, but not bortezomib. Expression of B lymphoid
lineage marker genes of these cell lines was negative for paired box 5 (Pax5) or 
PR domain containing 1, with ZNF domain (PRDM1), but was positive for X-box
binding protein 1 (Xbp1).
CONCLUSIONS: We established three novel cell lines of plasmablastic lymphoma.
Characterization of the unique chromosomal translocation identified loss of p16
and upregulation of MDR-1 at protein level. Expression of Xbp1(s), which is
involved in the maturation of plasma cells, corresponded to the plasmablastic
appearance of the tumor. These cell lines may be a useful tool to understand the 
pathophysiology of the disease and to develop novel treatment strategies.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21325069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. EMBO J. 2011 Mar 2;30(5):894-905. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.18. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Structure of the Ire1 autophosphorylation complex and implications for the
unfolded protein response.

Ali MM(1), Bagratuni T, Davenport EL, Nowak PR, Silva-Santisteban MC, Hardcastle 
A, McAndrews C, Rowlands MG, Morgan GJ, Aherne W, Collins I, Davies FE, Pearl LH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Structural Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Chester
Beatty Laboratories, London, UK. maruf.ali@imperial.ac.uk

Ire1 (Ern1) is an unusual transmembrane protein kinase essential for the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded protein response (UPR). Activation of Ire1 by
association of its N-terminal ER luminal domains promotes autophosphorylation by 
its cytoplasmic kinase domain, leading to activation of the C-terminal
ribonuclease domain, which splices Xbp1 mRNA generating an active Xbp1s
transcriptional activator. We have determined the crystal structure of the
cytoplasmic portion of dephosphorylated human Ire1a bound to ADP, revealing the
'phosphoryl-transfer' competent dimeric face-to-face complex, which precedes and 
is distinct from the back-to-back RNase 'active' conformation described for yeast
Ire1. We show that the Xbp1-specific ribonuclease activity depends on
autophosphorylation, and that ATP-competitive inhibitors staurosporin and
sunitinib, which inhibit autophosphorylation in vitro, also inhibit Xbp1 splicing
in vivo. Furthermore, we demonstrate that activated Ire1a is a competent protein 
kinase, able to phosphorylate a heterologous peptide substrate. These studies
identify human Ire1a as a target for development of ATP-competitive inhibitors
that will modulate the UPR in human cells, which has particular relevance for
myeloma and other secretory malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3049214
PMID: 21317875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2011;75(2):284-8. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Quinotrierixin inhibited ER stress-induced XBP1 mRNA splicing through inhibition 
of protein synthesis.

Yamamoto K(1), Tashiro E, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.

Quinotrierixin was isolated from microbes as an inhibitor of ER stress-induced
XBP1 mRNA splicing, but its mode of action was unclear. We found that
quinotrierixin is an inhibitor of protein synthesis, and that the required dose
range of quinotrierixin to inhibit ER stress-induced XBP1 mRNA splicing was
similar to that to inhibit protein synthesis. Furthermore, we also found that
quinotrierixin inhibited the ER stress-induced increases of unfolded protein
response-related genes such as GRP78, CHOP, EDEM, ERdj4, and p58(IPK). Thus, we
showed that quinotrierixin inhibited the ER stress-induced unfolded protein
response, possibly due to its inhibitory activity of protein synthesis.

PMID: 21307594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2010 Aug 1;2(2):235-243.

Estrogen regulation of X-box binding protein-1 and its role in estrogen induced
growth of breast and endometrial cancer cells.

Sengupta S(1), Sharma CG, Jordan VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical 
Center, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a transcription factor involved in
unfolded protein response, is also an estrogen-regulated gene and strongly
correlates with estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) expression in breast cancers. We
investigated the functional role of XBP1 in estrogen responsive breast and
endometrial cancer cells as its functions are not fully understood. MATERIALS AND
METHODS: ERa positive breast (MCF7) and endometrial (ECC1) cancer cells were used
to study XBP1 gene regulation by 17-ß-estradiol (E2) and to investigate the role 
of XBP1 in E2-mediated growth using short interfering RNA. Quantitative real-time
PCR and Western blot were used to assess RNA and protein levels. Recruitment of
ERa and other cofactors at the promoter and enhancer region of the XBP1 gene was 
investigated by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Estrogen responsive element
(ERE)-mediated transcriptional activity was evaluated by a luciferase reporter
assay. RESULTS: E2 induced the transcription of XBP1 in both MCF7 and ECC1 cells.
E2-dependent recruitment of ERa, steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 and SRC-3, 
and RNA polymerase II were observed at the promoter and/or enhancer region of the
XBP1 gene. Depletion of XBP1 markedly inhibited the E2-induced growth in MCF7 and
ECC1 cells. However, ERE-mediated transcription was not altered in
XBP1-overexpressing or XBP1-depleted MCF7 cells. CONCLUSION: Our results confirm 
E2-induced transcription of XBP1 and demonstrate the crucial role of XBP1 in
E2-induced growth of ERa positive breast and endometrial cancer cells without
modulating the classical ERE-mediated transcription by ER. This knowledge creates
new opportunities for therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3032413
PMID: 21297881  [PubMed]


165. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 26;6(1):e14591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014591.

Proteasome inhibition represses unfolded protein response and Nox4, sensitizing
vascular cells to endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced death.

Amanso AM(1), Debbas V, Laurindo FR.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Laboratory, Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo 
School of Medicine, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has pathophysiological relevance in
vascular diseases and merges with proteasome function. Proteasome inhibition
induces cell stress and may have therapeutic implications. However, whether
proteasome inhibition potentiates ER stress-induced apoptosis and the possible
mechanisms involved in this process are unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that proteasome inhibition with
MG132, per se at non-lethal levels, sensitized vascular smooth muscle cells to
caspase-3 activation and cell death during ER stress induced by tunicamycin (Tn).
This effect was accompanied by suppression of both proadaptive (KDEL chaperones) 
and proapoptotic (CHOP/GADD153) unfolded protein response markers, although,
intriguingly, the splicing of XBP1 was markedly enhanced and sustained. In
parallel, proteasome inhibition completely prevented ER stress-induced increase
in NADPH oxidase activity, as well as increases in Nox4 isoform and protein
disulfide isomerase mRNA expression. Increased Akt phosphorylation due to
proteasome inhibition partially offset the proapoptotic effect of Tn or MG132.
Although proteasome inhibition enhanced oxidative stress, reactive oxygen species
scavenging had no net effect on sensitization to Tn or MG132-induced cell death.
CONCLUSION/RELEVANCE: These data indicate unfolded protein response-independent
pathways whereby proteasome inhibition sensitizes vascular smooth muscle to ER
stress-mediated cell death. This may be relevant to understand the therapeutic
potential of such compounds in vascular disease associated with increased
neointimal hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3027620
PMID: 21297867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Int J Exp Pathol. 2011 Aug;92(4):232-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2010.00758.x.
Epub 2011 Feb 5.

Enhanced apoptotic and reduced protective response in chondrocytes following
endoplasmic reticulum stress in osteoarthritic cartilage.

Takada K(1), Hirose J, Senba K, Yamabe S, Oike Y, Gotoh T, Mizuta H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic and Neuro-Musculoskeletal Surgery, Faculty of Life
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been shown to participate in many disease
pathologies. Although recent reports have demonstrated that ER stress in
chondrocytes is present in human osteoarthritis (OA), its role in the pathology
of cartilage degeneration, such as chondrocyte apoptosis, remains unclear. In the
present study, we investigated the expression of phosphorylated PERK (pPERK),
ubiquitin (Ub), GRP78, CHOP, phosphorylated JNK (pJNK) and cleaved caspase-3
(C-CASP3) and the mRNA splicing of XBP1 (XBP1 splicing) in human OA cartilage by 
immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Additionally, human chondrocytes were treated
with several concentrations of tunicamycin, an ER stress inducer, to assess the
impact of ER stress on the mRNA expression of CHOP, XBP1 splicing and apoptosis, 
as determined by real-time PCR, RT-PCR and ELISA analyses respectively. In human 
OA cartilage, the number of chondrocytes expressing pPERK, Ub, CHOP and pJNK
positively correlated with cartilage degeneration and the number of
C-CASP3-positive chondrocytes. XBP1 splicing and GRP78 expression in severe OA
containing the greatest number of C-CASP3-positive chondrocytes were similar to
the levels in mild OA, however, XBP1 splicing was higher in moderate OA than in
mild and severe OA. Tunicamycin dose dependently increased CHOP expression and
apoptosis of cultured chondrocytes. Although tunicamycin upregulated XBP1
splicing in cultured chondrocytes, its impact on XBP1 splicing was weakened at
higher concentrations. In conclusion, the present results indicate that ER stress
may contribute to chondrocyte apoptosis along with OA progression, which was
closely associated with an enhanced apoptotic response and a reduced protective
response by the cells.

© 2011 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2011
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC3144511
PMID: 21294793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011;2011:865435. doi: 10.1155/2011/865435.
Epub 2011 Jan 13.

15,16-Dihydrotanshinone I, a Compound of Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge, Induces
Apoptosis through Inducing Endoplasmic Reticular Stress in Human Prostate
Carcinoma Cells.

Chuang MT(1), Ho FM, Wu CC, Zhuang SY, Lin SY, Suk FM, Liang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, St. Martin De Porres Hospital, Chia-Yi City 60069,
Taiwan.

5,16-dihydrotanshinone I (DHTS) is extracted from Salvia miltiorrhiza Bunge
(tanshen root) and was found to be the most effective compound of tanshen
extracts against breast cancer cells in our previous studies. However, whether
DHTS can induce apoptosis through an endoplasmic reticular (ER) stress pathway
was examined herein. In this study, we found that DHTS significantly inhibited
the proliferation of human prostate DU145 carcinoma cells and induced apoptosis. 
DHTS was able to induce ER stress as evidenced by the upregulation of glucose
regulation protein 78 (GRP78/Bip) and CAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous
protein/growth arrest- and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (CHOP/GADD153), as well 
as increases in phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation factor 2a (eIF2a), c-jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), and X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA splicing forms. 
DHTS treatment also caused significant accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins
and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a, indicating that DHTS might be a proteasome
inhibitor that is known to induce ER stress or enhance apoptosis caused by the
classic ER stress-dependent mechanism. Moreover, DHTS-induced apoptosis was
reversed by salubrinal, an ER stress inhibitor. Results suggest that DHTS can
induce apoptosis of prostate carcinoma cells via induction of ER stress and/or
inhibition of proteasome activity, and may have therapeutic potential for
prostate cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3026991
PMID: 21274285  [PubMed]


168. Methods Enzymol. 2011;490:271-94. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385114-7.00016-7.

Principles of IRE1 modulation using chemical tools.

Lee KP(1), Sicheri F.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Systems Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Perturbations that derail the proper folding and assembly of proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lead to misfolded protein accrual in the ER-a toxic
condition known as ER stress. The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a signaling 
system evolved to detect and rectify ER stress. IRE1 is the most ancient member
of the ER stress transducers and is conserved in all eukaryotes. In response to
ER stress, IRE1 activates a UPR-dedicated transcription factor called X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) in metazoans (or HAC1 in yeast) to bolster the
productive capacity of the ER and purge misfolded proteins from the ER. To
activate XBP1/HAC1, IRE1 cleaves XBP1/HAC1 mRNA twice to eliminate an inhibitory 
intron using a dormant nuclease function in its cytoplasmic effector region
(IRE1(cyto)). Recent structural, molecular, and chemical biological approaches
have greatly advanced our molecular understanding of how IRE1 transduces ER
stress. Here we highlight a sampling of these advances with a bias toward
structure and the insights they provide. We also propose a set of principles for 
IRE1 chemical modulation that may assist in the development of tools to better
understand how IRE1 function contributes to health and disease and perhaps
ultimately the development of new methods of therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21266256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Methods Enzymol. 2011;490:147-58. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-385114-7.00009-X.

PI 3-kinase regulatory subunits as regulators of the unfolded protein response.

Winnay JN(1), Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) consists of an interconnected, membranous network 
that is the major site for the synthesis and folding of integral membrane and
secretory proteins. Within the ER lumen, protein folding is facilitated by
molecular chaperones and a variety of enzymes that ensure that polypeptides
obtain their appropriate, tertiary conformation (Dobson, C. M. (2004). Principles
of protein folding, misfolding and aggregation. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 15, 3-16; 
Ni, M., and Lee, A. S. (2007). ER chaperones in mammalian development and human
diseases. FEBS Lett. 581, 3641-3651.). Physiological conditions that increase
protein synthesis or stimuli that disturb the processes by which proteins obtain 
their native conformation, create an imbalance between the protein-folding demand
and capacity of the ER. This results in the accumulation of unfolded or
improperly folded proteins in the ER lumen and a state of ER stress. The cellular
response, referred to as the unfolded protein response (UPR), results in
activation of three linked signal transduction pathways: PKR-like kinase (PERK), 
inositol requiring 1 a (IRE1a), and activating transcription factor 6a (ATF6a)
(Ron, D., and Walter, P. (2007). Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum 
unfolded protein response. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 519-529; Schroder, M.,
and Kaufman, R. (2005). ER stress and the unfolded protein response. Mutat.
Res./Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. 569, 29-63.). Collectively, the combined actions
of these signaling cascades serve to reduce ER stress through attenuation of
translation to reduce protein synthesis and through activation of transcriptional
programs that ultimately serve to increase ER protein-folding capacity. Recently,
we and Park et al. have characterized a novel function for the p85a and p85ß
subunits as modulators of the UPR by virtue of their ability to facilitate the
nuclear entry of XBP-1s following induction of ER stress (Park, S. W., Zhou, Y., 
Lee, J., Lu, A., Sun, C., Chung, J., Ueki, K., and Ozcan, U. (2010). Regulatory
subunits of PI3K, p85alpha and p85 beta, interact with XBP1 and increase its
nuclear translocation. Nat. Med. 16, 429-437; Winnay, J. N., Boucher, J., Mori,
M. A., Ueki, K., and Kahn, C. R. (2010). A regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide
3-kinase increases the nuclear accumulation of X-box-binding protein-1 to
modulate the unfolded protein response. Nat. Med. 16, 438-445.). This chapter
describes the recently elucidated role for the regulatory subunits of PI 3-kinase
as modulators of the UPR and provides methods to measure UPR pathway activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4371597
PMID: 21266249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Apr;25(3):692-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.01.010. Epub 2011
Jan 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress mediates withaferin A-induced apoptosis in human
renal carcinoma cells.

Choi MJ(1), Park EJ, Min KJ, Park JW, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 2800
Dalgubeoldaero, Dalseo-Gu, Daegu 704-701, South Korea.

The accumulation of misfolded proteins in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) results in cellular stress that initiates a specialized response designated 
as the unfolded protein response. ER stress has been implicated in a variety of
common diseases, such as diabetes, ischemia and neurodegenerative disorders.
Withaferin A, a major chemical constituent of Withania somnifera, has been
reported to inhibit tumor cell growth. We show that withaferin A induced a
dose-dependent apoptotic cell death in several types of human cancer cells, as
measured by FACS analysis and PARP cleavage. Treatment of Caki cells with
withaferin A induced a number of signature ER stress markers, including
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor-2a (eIF-2 a), ER stress-specific 
XBP1 splicing, and up-regulation of glucose-regulated protein (GRP)-78. In
addition, withaferin A caused up-regulation of CAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-homologous protein (CHOP), suggesting the induction of ER stress.
Pretreatment with N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) significantly inhibited withaferin
A-mediated ER stress proteins and cell death, suggesting that reactive oxygen
species (ROS) mediate withaferin A-induced ER stress. Furthermore, CHOP siRNA or 
inhibition of caspase-4 activity attenuated withaferin A-induced apoptosis. Taken
together, the present study provides strong evidence supporting an important role
of the ER stress response in mediating withaferin A-induced apoptosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21266191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Gut. 2011 Nov;60(11):1580-8. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.206466. Epub 2011 Jan 19.

Crohn's disease: NOD2, autophagy and ER stress converge.

Fritz T(1), Niederreiter L, Adolph T, Blumberg RS, Kaser A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Anichstr 35, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Polymorphisms in NOD2, encoding an intracellular pattern recognition receptor,
contribute the largest fraction of genetic risk for Crohn's disease among the >40
risk loci identified so far. Autophagy plays a prominent role in the innate
immune response towards intracellular bacteria. The discovery of the autophagy
genes ATG16L1 and IRGM as risk factors for Crohn's disease turned autophagy into 
the spotlight in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Remarkably, NOD2 has recently 
been identified as a potent autophagy inducer. A physical interaction of NOD2 and
ATG16L1 appears to be required for autophagic clearance of intracellular
pathogens. Moreover, Crohn's disease-associated NOD2 and ATG16L1 variants exhibit
a defect in the induction of an autophagic response and hence predict autophagy
as a key converging mechanism that leads to Crohn's disease. Another pathway that
is closely intertwined with autophagy and mutually cross-regulated is the
unfolded protein response (UPR), which is induced by endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. Genes involved in the UPR (XBP1, ORMDL3) have also been genetically
associated with Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. Moreover, the intestinal 
epithelium at the interface between host and microbe appears particularly
affected by IBD-associated hypomorphic function of autophagy and the UPR. The
functional convergence of main genetic risk factors for IBD on these innate
immune pathways has hence important implications for the host's interaction with 
the microbiota. Moreover, the genetic convergence on these molecular mechanisms
may open novel therapeutic options for IBD that deserve further exploration.

PMCID: PMC3897479
PMID: 21252204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Respir Res. 2011 Jan 7;12:4. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-4.

Some ABCA3 mutations elevate ER stress and initiate apoptosis of lung epithelial 
cells.

Weichert N(1), Kaltenborn E, Hector A, Woischnik M, Schams A, Holzinger A, Kern
S, Griese M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Pneumology, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians
University, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: ABCA3 transporter (ATP-binding cassette transporter of the A
subfamily) is localized to the limiting membrane of lamellar bodies, organelles
for assembly and storage of pulmonary surfactant in alveolar epithelial type II
cells (AECII). It transports surfactant phospholipids into lamellar bodies and
absence of ABCA3 function disrupts lamellar body biogenesis. Mutations of the
ABCA3 gene lead to fatal neonatal surfactant deficiency and chronic interstitial 
lung disease (ILD) of children. ABCA3 mutations can result in either functional
defects of the correctly localized ABCA3 or trafficking/folding defects where
mutated ABCA3 remains in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
METHODS: Human alveolar epithelial A549 cells were transfected with vectors
expressing wild-type ABCA3 or one of the three ABCA3 mutant forms, R43L, R280C
and L101P, C-terminally tagged with YFP or hemagglutinin-tag.
Localization/trafficking properties were analyzed by immunofluorescence and ABCA3
deglycosylation. Uptake of fluorescent NBD-labeled lipids into lamellar bodies
was used as a functional assay. ER stress and apoptotic signaling were examined
through RT-PCR based analyses of XBP1 splicing, immunoblotting or FACS analyses
of stress/apoptosis proteins, Annexin V surface staining and determination of the
intracellular glutathion level.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that two ABCA3 mutations, which affect ABCA3 protein
trafficking/folding and lead to partial (R280C) or complete (L101P) retention of 
ABCA3 in the ER compartment, can elevate ER stress and susceptibility to it and
induce apoptotic markers in the cultured lung epithelial A549 cells. R43L
mutation, resulting in a functional defect of the properly localized ABCA3, had
no effect on intracellular stress and apoptotic signaling.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that expression of partially or completely ER
localized ABCA3 mutant proteins can increase the apoptotic cell death of the
affected cells, which are factors that might contribute to the pathogenesis of
genetic ILD.

PMCID: PMC3024939
PMID: 21214890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Physiol Biochem. 2011 Jun;67(2):153-63. doi: 10.1007/s13105-010-0058-y. Epub
2010 Dec 22.

Oleic acid decreases the expression of a cholesterol transport-related protein
(NPC1L1) by the induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress in CaCo-2 cells.

Chen J(1), Li Q, Zhang Y, Yang P, Zong Y, Qu S, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

The reported data indicate that oleic acid (OA) decreases cholesterol absorption.
To explore the underlying mechanisms, the effects of OA on the expression of
cholesterol transport-related proteins (NPC1L1, ABCG5/8, ACAT2, MTP) and the
unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway were studied in CaCo-2 enterocytes by
incubating CaCo-2 cells with taurocholate micelles or taurocholate micelles
containing different concentrations of OA (0.25-1.0 mM). We show that OA
effectively induces XBP1 mRNA splicing, a key component of the UPR signaling, and
the expression of BiP and mature ATF6 proteins in a concentration-dependent
manner, leading to the induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and
activation of the UPR. Interestingly, OA decreases NPC1L1 expression in a
dose-dependent manner while it has no effects on ABCG5 and MTP mRNA level or
SREBP-2, ABCG8, and ACAT2 protein level. In CaCo-2 cells treated with 1.0 mM OA, 
both the NPC1L1 mRNA level and the NPC1L1 protein expression in brush-border
membrane fractions were decreased by 39% and 37%, respectively (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). A dose
of 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), a positive control for ER stress induction, also
decreases NPC1L1 mRNA and protein expression by 27% and 23%, respectively
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Furthermore, 4-phenyl-butyric acid, an UPR inhibitor, blocks OA- and 
DTT-induced reduction on NPC1L1 mRNA and protein levels. The results suggest that
OA down-regulates NPC1L1 mRNA and protein expression via the induction of the
UPR, which may play an important role in reducing intestinal cholesterol
absorption.

PMID: 21181463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 16;5(12):e14363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014363.

Inhibition of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 expression induces CHOP-dependent cell
death in human cancer cells.

Minville-Walz M(1), Pierre AS, Pichon L, Bellenger S, Fèvre C, Bellenger J,
Tessier C, Narce M, Rialland M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bourgogne, Centre de Recherche INSERM Lipides, Nutrition, Cancer
UMR866, Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells present a sustained de novo fatty acid synthesis with an
increase of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) production. This
change in fatty acid metabolism is associated with overexpression of stearoyl-CoA
desaturase 1 (Scd1), which catalyses the transformation of saturated fatty acids 
into monounsaturated fatty acids (e.g., oleic acid). Several reports demonstrated
that inhibition of Scd1 led to the blocking of proliferation and induction of
apoptosis in cancer cells. Nevertheless, mechanisms of cell death activation
remain to be better understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we demonstrated that Scd1 extinction by siRNA 
triggered abolition of de novo MUFA synthesis in cancer and non-cancer cells.
Scd1 inhibition-activated cell death was only observed in cancer cells with
induction of caspase 3 activity and PARP-cleavage. Exogenous supplementation with
oleic acid did not reverse the Scd1 ablation-mediated cell death. In addition,
Scd1 depletion induced unfolded protein response (UPR) hallmarks such as Xbp1
mRNA splicing, phosphorylation of eIF2a and increase of CHOP expression. However,
the chaperone GRP78 expression, another UPR hallmark, was not affected by Scd1
knockdown in these cancer cells indicating a peculiar UPR activation. Finally, we
showed that CHOP induction participated to cell death activation by Scd1
extinction. Indeed, overexpression of dominant negative CHOP construct and
extinction of CHOP partially restored viability in Scd1-depleted cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that inhibition of de novo MUFA synthesis by
Scd1 extinction could be a promising anti-cancer target by inducing cell death
through UPR and CHOP activation.

PMCID: PMC3002938
PMID: 21179554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Hepatol. 2011 Apr;54(4):795-809. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.11.005. Epub 2010 Nov
13.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in liver disease.

Malhi H(1), Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated upon the accumulation of
misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that are sensed by the
binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP)/glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78). The
accumulation of unfolded proteins sequesters BiP so it dissociates from three
ER-transmembrane transducers leading to their activation. These transducers are
inositol requiring (IRE) 1a, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), and activating
transcription factor (ATF) 6a. PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic initiation factor 2
alpha (eIF2a) resulting in global mRNA translation attenuation, and concurrently 
selectively increases the translation of several mRNAs, including the
transcription factor ATF4, and its downstream target CHOP. IRE1a has kinase and
endoribonuclease (RNase) activities. IRE1a autophosphorylation activates the
RNase activity to splice XBP1 mRNA, to produce the active transcription factor
sXBP1. IRE1a activation also recruits and activates the stress kinase JNK. ATF6a 
transits to the Golgi compartment where it is cleaved by intramembrane
proteolysis to generate a soluble active transcription factor. These UPR pathways
act in concert to increase ER content, expand the ER protein folding capacity,
degrade misfolded proteins, and reduce the load of new proteins entering the ER. 
All of these are geared toward adaptation to resolve the protein folding defect. 
Faced with persistent ER stress, adaptation starts to fail and apoptosis occurs, 
possibly mediated through calcium perturbations, reactive oxygen species, and the
proapoptotic transcription factor CHOP. The UPR is activated in several liver
diseases; including obesity associated fatty liver disease, viral hepatitis, and 
alcohol-induced liver injury, all of which are associated with steatosis, raising
the possibility that ER stress-dependent alteration in lipid homeostasis is the
mechanism that underlies the steatosis. Hepatocyte apoptosis is a pathogenic
event in several liver diseases, and may be linked to unresolved ER stress. If
this is true, restoration of ER homeostasis prior to ER stress-induced cell death
may provide a therapeutic rationale in these diseases. Herein we discuss each
branch of the UPR and how they may impact hepatocyte function in different
pathologic states.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3375108
PMID: 21145844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Feb 25;201(1):15-26. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.11.019. Epub
2010 Dec 8.

Arsenic induces pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis via the oxidative stress-regulated
mitochondria-dependent and endoplasmic reticulum stress-triggered signaling
pathways.

Lu TH(1), Su CC, Chen YW, Yang CY, Wu CC, Hung DZ, Chen CH, Cheng PW, Liu SH,
Huang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Drug Safety, College of Pharmacy, China Medical
University, Taichung 404, Taiwan.

Arsenic (As), a ubiquitous toxic metal, is an important environmental and
industrial pollutant throughout the world. Inorganic As (iAs) is usually more
harmful than organic ones and with a high risk of diabetes incidence by exposure.
However, the toxicological effects of iAs on growth and function of pancreatic
ß-cells still remain unclear. Here, we found that iAs significantly decreased
insulin secretion and cell viability, and increased ROS and MDA formation in
pancreatic ß-cell-derived RIN-m5F cells. iAs also induced the increases in sub-G1
hypodiploids, annexin V-Cy3 binding, and caspase-3 activity in RIN-m5F cells,
indicating that iAs could induce ß-cell apoptosis. Moreover, iAs induced MAPKs
activation, mitochondria dysfunction, p53 up-regulation, Bcl-2 and Mdm-2
down-regulation, PARP, and caspase cascades, which displayed features of
mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signals. In addition, exposure of RIN-m5F cells 
to iAs, could trigger ER stress as indicated by the enhancement in ER
stress-related molecules induction (such as GRP78, GRP94, CHOP, and XBP1),
procaspase-12 cleavage, and calpain activation. The iAs-induced apoptosis and
its-related signalings could be effectively reversed by antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine. We next observed that exposure of mice to iAs in drinking water
for 6 consecutive weeks significantly decreased decreased the plasma insulin,
elevated glucose intolerance and plasma lipid peroxidation, and induced islet
cells apoptosis, which accompanied with arsenic accumulation in the whole blood
and pancreas. N-acetylcysteine effectively antagonized the iAs-induced responses 
in mice. Taken together, these results suggest that iAs-induced oxidative stress 
causes pancreatic ß-cells apoptosis via the mitochondria-dependent and ER
stress-triggered signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Toxicol Sci. 2010 Dec;35(6):871-9.

Changes of cell-surface thiols and intracellular signaling in human monocytic
cell line THP-1 treated with diphenylcyclopropenone.

Hirota M(1), Motoyama A, Suzuki M, Yanagi M, Kitagaki M, Kouzuki H, Hagino S,
Itagaki H, Sasa H, Kagatani S, Aiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Shiseido Research Center, Kanagawa, Japan. morihiko.hirota@to.shiseido.co.jp

Changes of cell-surface thiols induced by chemical treatment may affect the
conformations of membrane proteins and intracellular signaling mechanisms. In our
previous study, we found that a non-toxic dose of diphenylcyclopropene (DPCP),
which is a potent skin sensitizer, induced an increase of cell-surface thiols in 
cells of a human monocytic cell line, THP-1. Here, we examined the influence of
DPCP on intracellular signaling. First, we confirmed that DPCP induced an
increase of cell-surface thiols not only in THP-1 cells, but also in primary
monocytes. The intracellular reduced-form glutathione/oxidized-form glutathione
ratio (GSH/GSSG ratio) was not affected by DPCP treatment. By means of labeling
with a membrane-impermeable thiol-reactive compound, Alexa Fluor 488 C5 maleimide
(AFM), followed by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and analysis by liquid
chromatography coupled with electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS), we 
identified several proteins whose thiol contents were modified in response to
DPCP. These proteins included cell membrane components, such as actin and
ß-tubulin, molecular chaperones, such as heat shock protein 27A and 70, and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-inducible proteins. Next, we confirmed the
expression in DPCP-treated cells of spliced XBP1, a known marker of ER stress. We
also detected the phosphorylation of SAPK/JNK and p38 MAPK, which are downstream 
signaling molecules in the IRE1a-ASK1 pathway, which is activated by ER stress.
These data suggested that increase of cell-surface thiols might be associated
with activation of ER stress-mediated signaling.

PMID: 21139337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4912-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.199729. Epub 2010 
Dec 7.

Preconditioning with endoplasmic reticulum stress mitigates retinal endothelial
inflammation via activation of X-box binding protein 1.

Li J(1), Wang JJ, Zhang SX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is widely implicated in various pathological
conditions such as diabetes. Previously, we reported that enhanced ER stress
contributes to inflammation and vascular damage in diabetic and ischemia-induced 
retinopathy. However, the exact role of the signaling pathways activated by ER
stress in vascular inflammation remains poorly understood. In the present study, 
we investigated the role of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) in retinal adhesion
molecule expression, leukostasis, and vascular leakage. Exposure of human retinal
endothelial cells to low dose ER stress inducers resulted in a robust activation 
of XBP1 but did not affect inflammatory gene expression. However, ER stress
preconditioning almost completely abolished TNF-a-elicited NF-<U+03BA>B activation and
adhesion molecule ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. Pharmaceutical inhibition of XBP1
activation or knockdown of XBP1 by siRNA markedly attenuated the effects of
preconditioning on inflammation. Moreover, loss of XBP1 led to an increase in
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression. Conversely, overexpression of spliced XBP1
attenuated TNF-a-induced phosphorylation of IKK, I<U+03BA>Ba, and NF-<U+03BA>B p65, accompanied
by decreased NF-<U+03BA>B activity and reduced adhesion molecule expression. Finally, in
vivo studies show that activation of XBP1 by ER stress preconditioning prevents
TNF-a-induced ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression, leukostasis, and vascular leakage in 
mouse retinas. These results collectively indicate a protective effect of ER
stress preconditioning against retinal endothelial inflammation, which is likely 
through activation of XBP1-mediated unfolded protein response (UPR) and
inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

PMCID: PMC3039327
PMID: 21138840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2011 Jun;37(4):395-405. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01155.x.

Targeting X box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) enhances sensitivity of glioma cells to 
oxidative stress.

Liu Y(1), Zhang X, Liang Y, Yu H, Chen X, Zheng T, Zheng B, Wang L, Zhao L, Shi
C, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.

AIMS: Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress are tightly linked with 
cancers including gliomas. We previously reported the protective role of X
box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) against oxidative stress in both mouse
embryofibroblasts and human Hela cells. This study was to investigate
XBP1-mediated protection against oxidative stress in the treatment of gliomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: XBP1 expression levels were knocked down by siRNA
transfection in the U251MG cell line. After exposure to hydrogen peroxide
(H(2)O(2)) or the ROS inducer arsenic trioxide (As(2)O(3)), cell death,
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) loss, ROS levels and the expression of
several antioxidant molecules were examined. Expression of XBP1 and antioxidant
molecules was also detected in surgically excised specimens from 30 patients with
glioma, and 10 normal brain control specimens obtained at autopsy.
RESULTS: XBP1 knockdown significantly enhanced the cell death fraction, MMP loss 
and ROS levels in H(2)O(2)- or As(2)O(3)-treated glioma cells, concomitant with a
decrease of several antioxidant molecules including catalase. Moreover, the
abundant expression of XBP1 and antioxidant molecules was also observed in human 
glioma specimens, as compared with normal brain tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: XBP1 confers an important role in protection against oxidative
stress in gliomas, potentially via up-regulation of antioxidant molecules such as
catalase. Targeting XBP1 may have synergistic effects with ROS inducers on glioma
treatment.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British
Neuropathological Society.

PMID: 21138464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Crohns Colitis. 2010 Nov;4(5):523-31. doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2010.05.010. Epub
2010 Jul 6.

Paneth's disease.

Wehkamp J(1), Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus Stuttgart, Auerbachstr 110, 7076 Stuttgart, Germany. 
jan.wehkamp@ikp-stuttgart.de

In about 70% of patients Crohn's disease (CD) affects the small intestine. This
disease location is stable over time and associated with a genetic background
different from isolated colonic disease. A characteristic feature of small
intestinal host defense is the presence of Paneth cells at the bottom of the
crypts of Lieberkühn. These cells produce different broad spectrum antimicrobial 
peptides (AMPs) most abundantly the a-defensins HD-5 and -6 (DEFA5 und DEFA6). In
small intestinal Crohn's disease both these PC products are specifically reduced.
As a functional consequence, ileal extracts from Crohn's disease patients are
compromised in clearing bacteria and enteroadherent E. coli colonize the mucosa. 
Mechanisms for defective antimicrobial Paneth cell function are complex and
include an association with a NOD2 loss of function mutation, a disturbance of
the Wnt pathway transcription factor TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4), the autophagy
factor ATG16L1, the endosomal stress protein XBP1, the toll-like receptor TLR9,
the calcium mediated potassium channel KCNN4 as well as mutations or inactivation
of HD5. Thus we conclude that small intestinal Crohn's disease is most likely a
complex disease of the Paneth cell: Paneth's disease.

Copyright © 2010 European Crohn's and Colitis Organisation. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21122555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Gastroenterology. 2011 Mar;140(3):987-97. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.11.038. Epub
2010 Nov 25.

Adaptive unfolded protein response attenuates alcohol-induced pancreatic damage.

Lugea A(1), Tischler D, Nguyen J, Gong J, Gukovsky I, French SW, Gorelick FS,
Pandol SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Southern California Research Center for ALPD & Cirrhosis, Veterans
Administration Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System/University of California,
Los Angeles, California 90073, USA. alugea@ucla.edu

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress responses (collectively
known the unfolded protein response [UPR]) have important roles in several human 
disorders, but their contribution to alcoholic pancreatitis is not known. We
investigated the role of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a UPR regulator, in
prevention of alcohol-induced ER stress in the exocrine pancreas.
METHODS: Wild-type and Xbp1(+/-) mice were fed control or ethanol diets for 4
weeks. Pancreatic tissue samples were then examined by light and electron
microscopy to determine pancreatic alterations; UPR regulators were analyzed
biochemically.
RESULTS: In wild-type mice, ethanol activated a UPR, increasing pancreatic levels
of XBP1 and XBP1 targets such as protein disulfide isomerase (PDI). In these
mice, pancreatic damage was minor. In ethanol-fed Xbp1(+/-) mice, XBP1 and PDI
levels were significantly lower than in ethanol-fed wild-type mice. The
combination of XBP1 deficiency and ethanol feeding reduced expression of
regulators of ER function and the up-regulation of proapoptotic signals.
Moreover, ethanol feeding induced oxidation of PDI, which might compromise
PDI-mediated disulfide bond formation during ER protein folding. In ethanol-fed
Xbp1(+/-) mice, ER stress was associated with disorganized and dilated ER, loss
of zymogen granules, accumulation of autophagic vacuoles, and increased acinar
cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term ethanol feeding causes oxidative ER stress, which
activates a UPR and increases XBP1 levels and activity. A defective UPR due to
XBP1 deficiency results in ER dysfunction and acinar cell pathology.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3057335
PMID: 21111739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Brain Res. 2011 Jan 25;1370:64-79. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.11.013. Epub 2010
Nov 23.

Hyperglycemia magnifies Schwann cell dysfunction and cell death triggered by
PA-induced lipotoxicity.

Padilla A(1), Descorbeth M, Almeyda AL, Payne K, De Leon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma
Linda, CA 92350, USA.

Lipid overload resulting in lipotoxicity is prominent in a number of chronic
diseases and has been associated with cellular dysfunction and cell death. This
study characterizes palmitic acid-induced lipotoxicity (PA-LTx) in Schwann cell
cultures grown in normal and high glucose concentrations. The study shows for the
first time that Schwann cell (SC) cultures exposed to elevated levels of PA
exhibit a dose- and time-dependent loss in cell viability. Hoescht and Annexin
V/7AAD staining confirmed cell death through apoptosis and the lipotoxic effect
was more dramatic in SC cultures grown under high glucose conditions. The first
indication of cellular dysfunction in treated SC cultures was a decrease in
Ca(++) levels in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER, [Ca(++)](ER)) observed five
minutes following the initial challenge with PA. This decrease in [Ca(++) ](ER)
was followed by a significant increase in the expression of ER stress signature
genes CHOP, Xbp1 and GRP78. The early ER stress response induced by PA-LTx was
followed by a strong mitochondrial membrane depolarization. Flow cytometry using 
2', 7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (H(2)DCFDA) showed an increase in
oxidative stress within three to six hours after PA treatment. Treatment of
cultures undergoing PA-LTx with the calcium chelator BAPTA-AM and the
anti-oxidant MCI-186 significantly reversed the lipotoxic effect by decreasing
the generation of ROS and significantly increasing cell viability. We conclude
that lipotoxicity in Schwann cells results in cellular dysfunction and cell death
that involves a robust ER stress response, mitochondrial dysfunction and an
augmented state of cellular oxidative stress (ASCOS).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3018544
PMID: 21108938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Physiol Genomics. 2011 Feb 11;43(3):174-86. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00084.2010. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Transcription factor MIST1 in terminal differentiation of mouse and human plasma 
cells.

Capoccia BJ(1), Lennerz JK, Bredemeyer AJ, Klco JM, Frater JL, Mills JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Despite their divergent developmental ancestry, plasma cells and gastric
zymogenic (chief) cells share a common function: high-capacity secretion of
protein. Here we show that both cell lineages share increased expression of a
cassette of 269 genes, most of which regulate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
Golgi function, and they both induce expression of the transcription factors
X-box binding protein 1 (Xbp1) and Mist1 during terminal differentiation. XBP1 is
known to augment plasma cell function by establishing rough ER, and MIST1
regulates secretory vesicle trafficking in zymogenic cells. We examined
morphology and function of plasma cells in wild-type and Mist1(-/-) mice and
found subtle differences in ER structure but no overall defect in plasma cell
function, suggesting that Mist1 may function redundantly in plasma cells. We next
reasoned that MIST1 might be useful as a novel and reliable marker of plasma
cells. We found that MIST1 specifically labeled normal plasma cells in mouse and 
human tissues, and, moreover, its expression was also characteristic of plasma
cell differentiation in a cohort of 12 human plasma cell neoplasms. Overall, our 
results show that MIST1 is enriched upon plasma cell differentiation as a part of
a genetic program facilitating secretory cell function and also that MIST1 is a
novel marker of normal and neoplastic plasma cells in mouse and human tissues.

PMCID: PMC3055710
PMID: 21098683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Curr Opin Immunol. 2011 Feb;23(1):35-40. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.10.016. Epub
2010 Nov 18.

Regulation of innate immunity by signaling pathways emerging from the endoplasmic
reticulum.

Martinon F(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, 155 Ch. Des Boveresses,
Epalinges 1066, Switzerland.

The innate immune system has evolved the capacity to detect specific pathogens
and to interrogate cell and tissue integrity in order to mount an appropriate
immune response. Loss of homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers
the ER-stress response, a hallmark of many inflammatory and infectious diseases. 
The IRE1/XBP1 branch of the ER-stress signaling pathway has been recently shown
to regulate and be regulated by innate immune signaling pathways in both the
presence and absence of ER-stress. By contrast, innate immune pathways negatively
affect the activation of two other branches of the ER-stress response as
evidenced by reduced expression of the pro-apoptotic transcription factor CHOP.
Here we will discuss how innate immune pathways and ER-signaling intersect to
regulate the intensity and duration of innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3042531
PMID: 21094031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Feb;131(2):371-81. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.337. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Comprehensive association analysis of candidate genes for generalized vitiligo
supports XBP1, FOXP3, and TSLP.

Birlea SA(1), Jin Y, Bennett DC, Herbstman DM, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Kemp EH,
Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, Picardo M, Leone G, Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine K, van
Geel N, Lambert J, Overbeck A, Fain PR, Spritz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

We previously carried out a genome-wide association study of generalized vitiligo
(GV) in non-Hispanic whites, identifying 13 confirmed susceptibility loci. In
this study, we re-analyzed the genome-wide data set (comprising 1,392 cases and
2,629 controls) to specifically test association of all 33 GV candidate genes
that have previously been suggested for GV, followed by meta-analysis
incorporating both current and previously published data. We detected association
of three of the candidate genes tested: TSLP (rs764916, P=3.0E-04, odds ratio
(OR)=1.60; meta-P for rs3806933=3.1E-03), XBP1 (rs6005863, P=3.6E-04, OR=1.17;
meta-P for rs2269577=9.5E-09), and FOXP3 (rs11798415, P=5.8E-04, OR=1.19).
Association of GV with CTLA4 (rs12992492, P=5.9E-05, OR=1.20; meta-P for
rs231775=1.0E-04) seems to be secondary to epidemiological association with other
concomitant autoimmune diseases. Within the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC), at 6p21.33, association with TAP1-PSMB8 (rs3819721, P=5.2E-06) seems to
derive from linkage disequilibrium with major primary signals in the MHC class I 
and class II regions.

PMCID: PMC3172683
PMID: 21085187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Blood. 2011 Jan 27;117(4):1311-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-303099. Epub 2010
Nov 16.

Identification of an Ire1alpha endonuclease specific inhibitor with cytotoxic
activity against human multiple myeloma.

Papandreou I(1), Denko NC, Olson M, Van Melckebeke H, Lust S, Tam A,
Solow-Cordero DE, Bouley DM, Offner F, Niwa M, Koong AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 269 
Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Activation of the adaptive Ire1-XBP1 pathway has been identified in many solid
tumors and hematologic malignancies, including multiple myeloma (MM). Here, we
report the identification of STF-083010, a novel small-molecule inhibitor of
Ire1. STF-083010 inhibited Ire1 endonuclease activity, without affecting its
kinase activity, after endoplasmic reticulum stress both in vitro and in vivo.
Treatment with STF-083010 showed significant antimyeloma activity in model human 
MM xenografts. Similarly, STF-083010 was preferentially toxic to freshly isolated
human CD138(+) MM cells compared with other similarly isolated cell populations. 
The identification of this novel Ire1 inhibitor supports the hypothesis that the 
Ire1-XBP1 axis is a promising target for anticancer therapy, especially in the
context of MM.

PMCID: PMC3056474
PMID: 21081713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Hepatology. 2010 Dec;52(6):1968-79. doi: 10.1002/hep.23935. Epub 2010 Nov 9.

A protective role for CD154 in hepatic steatosis in mice.

Villeneuve J(1), Lepreux S, Mulot A, Bérard AM, Higa-Nishiyama A, Costet P, De
Ledinghen V, Bioulac-Sage P, Balabaud C, Nurden AT, Rosenbaum J, Chevet E,
Ripoche J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U889, National Institute for Health and Medical Research U889, Bordeaux
University, F-33076 Bordeaux, France.

Inflammation and lipid metabolism pathways are linked, and deregulation of this
interface may be critical in hepatic steatosis. The importance of the dialog
between inflammatory signaling pathways and the unfolded protein response (UPR)
in metabolism has been underlined. Herein, we studied the role of CD154, a key
mediator of inflammation, in hepatic steatosis. To this end, Balb/c mice,
wild-type or deficient in CD154 (CD154KO), were fed a diet rich in olive oil. In 
vitro, the effect of CD154 was studied on primary hepatocyte cultures and
hepatocyte-derived cell lines. Results showed that CD154KO mice fed a diet rich
in olive oil developed hepatic steatosis associated with reduced apolipoprotein
B100 (apoB100) expression and decreased secretion of very low-density
lipoproteins. This phenotype correlated with an altered UPR as assessed by
reduced X-Box binding protein-1 (XBP1) messenger RNA (mRNA) splicing and reduced 
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2a. Altered UPR signaling in
livers of CD154KO mice was confirmed in tunicamycin (TM) challenge experiments.
Treatment of primary hepatocyte cultures and hepatocyte-derived cell lines with
soluble CD154 increased XBP1 mRNA splicing in cells subjected to either oleic
acid (OA) or TM treatment. Moreover, CD154 reduced the inhibition of apoB100
secretion by HepG2 cells grown in the presence of high concentrations of OA, an
effect suppressed by XBP1 mRNA silencing and in HepG2 cells expressing a dominant
negative form of inositol requiring ER-to-nucleus signaling protein-1. The
control of the UPR by CD154 may represent one of the mechanisms involved in the
pathophysiology of hepatic steatosis.CONCLUSION: Our study identifies CD154 as a 
new mediator of hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21064031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jan;102(1):275-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01765.x. Epub
2010 Nov 10.

Dominant expression of survival signals of endoplasmic reticulum stress response 
in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Chang KC(1), Chen PC, Chen YP, Chang Y, Su IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Cheng Kung University and Hospital, Tainan, 
Taiwan.

The accumulation of viral proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) may cause ER
stress responses and lead to either apoptosis or survival depending on the
driving signals. The strong expression of latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1) in
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cells raises the question
whether LMP1-induced ER stress response is associated with the characteristic
tumor biology in HL. In this study, we investigated the expression of ER stress
signals (glucose-regulated protein 78 [GRP78], X-box binding protein 1 [XBP1],
activating transcription factor 6 [ATF6], CCAAT enhance-binding protein
homologous protein [CHOP] and phospho-apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
[pASK1]) on 156 cases of HL. Furthermore, LMP1 transfection on EBV-negative HL
cell lines was used to explore the regulation of ER stress signals by EBV-LMP1.
Interestingly, we demonstrated that the survival signals of ER stress response
(GRP78, 62%; XBP1u [unspliced], 55%; XBP1s [spliced], 38%; ATF6, 91%) were
dominantly expressed over the ER death signals (CHOP, 10%; pASK1, 7%) in all
histological subtypes of HL with a similar level in both EBV-positive and
EBV-negative cases. However, expression of ER signals did not bear prognostic
significance. In vitro, LMP1 transfection increased the expression of GRP78 and
XBP1, but attenuated the expression of death signals, CHOP and pASK1. These data 
indicate that EBV-LMP1 may play a role in shifting EBV-infected cells towards the
survival pathway in the presence of ER stress in EBV-positive HL cases.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21062387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Gene Expr. 2010;15(1):13-25.

Emerging roles for XBP1, a sUPeR transcription factor.

He Y(1), Sun S, Sha H, Liu Z, Yang L, Xue Z, Chen H, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics and Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a unique basic region leucine zipper (bZIP)
transcription factor whose active form is generated by a nonconventional splicing
reaction upon disruption of homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR). XBP1, first identified as a
key regulator of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II gene expression 
in B cells, represents the most conserved signaling component of UPR and is
critical for cell fate determination in response to ER stress. Here we review
recent advances in our understanding of this multifaceted transcription factor in
health and diseases.

PMCID: PMC3374844
PMID: 21061914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Endocrine. 2010 Oct;38(2):167-73. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9362-0. Epub 2010 Jul
11.

Atypical induction of the unfolded protein response by mifepristone.

Dioufa N(1), Kassi E, Papavassiliou AG, Kiaris H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Athens Medical School, M. Asias 75, 
115 27, Athens, Greece.

Mifepristone is a synthetic progesterone antagonist that is being used widely for
the treatment of various conditions such as endometriosis, glaucoma, meningiomas,
breast, ovarian and prostate cancer, as well as for research purposes, in the
conditional induction of gene expression by using artificial plasmid-based
systems. Here, we report that exposure of A549 human lung cancer cells to
mifepristone caused an atypical induction of the cellular unfolded protein
response, as evidenced by the time-dependent stimulation of RNA levels of the
chaperone Grp94 and PDIa, as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress-associated 
receptors ATF6, PERK and eIF2 but not of their downstream target, transcription
factor ATF4. This profile was very different from that of progesterone, which at 
the same dose as mifepristone, failed to induce all of the ER-stress-related
genes examined, apart from PERK. Furthermore, XBP1, a transcription factor that
is regulated predominantly by alternative splicing by the IRE1 receptor, remains 
unspliced and therefore inactive either by mifepristone or progesterone
treatment. Finally, the pro-apoptotic molecules CHOP and BIM are only induced in 
the presence of tunicamycin in the culture medium. Tunicamycin, the most commonly
used pharmacologic inducer of ER stress that triggers the canonical ER stress
response, was used for comparison purposes. Our results suggest that mifepristone
can elicit an atypical ER stress response when used at different doses and for
different time points. The subsequent induction of UPR should be taken into
consideration when this agent is being used either for therapeutic or for
experimental uses.

PMID: 21046477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Gene Expr Patterns. 2011 Jan-Feb;11(1-2):135-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2010.10.005. 
Epub 2010 Oct 31.

Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is activated during normal lens development.

Firtina Z(1), Duncan MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA.

The lens of the eye is a transparent structure responsible for focusing light
onto the retina. It is composed of two morphologically different cell types,
epithelial cells found on the anterior surface and the fiber cells that are
continuously formed by the differentiation of epithelial cells at the lens
equator. The differentiation of an epithelial precursor cell into a fiber cell is
associated with a dramatic increase in membrane protein synthesis. How the
terminally differentiating fiber cells cope with the increased demand on the
endoplasmic reticulum for this membrane protein synthesis is not known. In the
present study, we have found evidence of Unfolded Protein Response (UPR)
activation during normal lens development and differentiation in the mouse. The
ER-resident chaperones, immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP) and
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), were expressed at high levels in the newly
forming fiber cells of embryonic lenses. These fiber cells also expressed the
UPR-associated molecules; XBP1, ATF6, phospho-PERK and ATF4 during embryogenesis.
Moreover, spliced XBP1, cleaved ATF6, and phospho-eIF2a were detected in
embryonic mouse lenses suggesting that UPR pathways are active in this tissue.
These results propose a role for UPR activation in lens fiber cell
differentiation during embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039068
PMID: 21044701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Brain Res Bull. 2011 Jan 15;84(1):94-102. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.10.004. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Involvement of IRE1a signaling in the hippocampus in patients with mesial
temporal lobe epilepsy.

Liu G(1), Guo H, Guo C, Zhao S, Gong D, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Hongkou District, PR China.

Cumulative evidence suggests that programmed cell death (apoptosis) may
contribute to the progressive hippocampal sclerosis seen in patients with
refractory mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE). The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-mediated cell apoptotic pathway has recently emerged as a vital intrinsic 
pathway, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this process in the epileptic
brain remain unclear. We investigated inositol-requiring protein 1a
(IRE1a)-mediated ER stress pro-and anti-apoptotic signaling pathways in resected 
hippocampi from 32 patients with intractable MTLE. Immunoreactivity for the ER
stress markers glucose-regulated proteins 78 and 94 was significantly higher in
MTLE hippocampi than in controls. The levels of IRE1a, tumor necrosis factor
receptor associated factor 2 (TRAF2), apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1)
and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), which together constitute the
IRE1a/TRAF2/ASK1/JNK pro-apoptotic signaling pathway, were significantly
upregulated in patients with MTLE. Immunoreactivity for caspase-4, a homologue of
caspase-12 that is possibly activated by IRE1a via TRAF2 following ER stress, and
caspase-3 which was a downstream effector of caspase-4, were both detected in
MTLE tissue samples. In contrast, immunoreactivity for caspase-4 and caspase-3
were low or absent in control samples. Simultaneously, the X-box binding protein 
1 (XBP1), a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) family transcription factor downstream of
IRE1a which can promote cell survival by upregulation of multiple ER-targeted
genes, was also overexpressed and activated in MTLE hippocampi. Our data suggest 
that chronic epilepsy is associated with ER stress, as well as induction of both 
IRE1a-mediated pro- and anti-apoptotic signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20965234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):529-539.e3. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.10.040. 
Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Level of activation of the unfolded protein response correlates with Paneth cell 
apoptosis in human small intestine exposed to ischemia/reperfusion.

Grootjans J(1), Hodin CM, de Haan JJ, Derikx JP, Rouschop KM, Verheyen FK, van
Dam RM, Dejong CH, Buurman WA, Lenaerts K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism,
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):393-6.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In the intestine, Paneth cells participate in the innate
immune response. Their highly secretory function makes them susceptible to
environmental conditions that cause endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We
investigated whether intestinal ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) induces ER stress,
thereby activating the unfolded protein response (UPR), and whether excessive UPR
activation affects Paneth cells. In addition, we investigated the consequences of
Paneth cell compromise during physical barrier damage.
METHODS: Jejunal I/R was studied using a human experimental model (n = 30
patients). Activation of the UPR was assessed using immunofluorescence for
binding protein and quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses for C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP), growth arrest and DNA-damage inducible protein 34
(GADD34), and X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing. Paneth cell apoptosis was 
assessed by double staining for lysozyme and M30. Male Sprague-Dawley rats
underwent either intestinal I/R to investigate UPR activation and Paneth cell
apoptosis, or hemorrhagic shock with or without intraperitoneal administration of
dithizone, to study consequences of Paneth cell compromise during physical
intestinal damage. In these animals, bacterial translocation and circulating
tumor necrosis factor-a and interleukin-6 levels were assessed.
RESULTS: In jejunum samples from humans and rats, I/R activated the UPR and
resulted in Paneth cell apoptosis. Apoptotic Paneth cells showed signs of ER
stress, and Paneth cell apoptosis correlated with the extent of ER stress.
Apoptotic Paneth cells were shed into the crypt lumen, significantly lowering
their numbers. In rats, Paneth cell compromise increased bacterial translocation 
and inflammation during physical intestinal damage.
CONCLUSIONS: ER stress-induced Paneth cell apoptosis contributes to intestinal
I/R-induced bacterial translocation and systemic inflammation.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20965186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Blood. 2011 Jan 13;117(2):500-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-284737. Epub 2010 Oct
18.

Bortezomib suppresses function and survival of plasmacytoid dendritic cells by
targeting intracellular trafficking of Toll-like receptors and endoplasmic
reticulum homeostasis.

Hirai M(1), Kadowaki N, Kitawaki T, Fujita H, Takaori-Kondo A, Fukui R, Miyake K,
Maeda T, Kamihira S, Miyachi Y, Uchiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Jan 13;117(2):376-7.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory
disorders, so suppressing the activity of DCs is instrumental in treating such
diseases. In the present study, we show that a proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, 
suppresses the survival and immunostimulatory function of human plasmacytoid DCs 
(pDCs) by targeting 2 critical points, intracellular trafficking of nucleic
acid-sensingToll-like receptors (TLRs) and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
homeostasis. Among the immune cells in blood, pDCs were the most susceptible to
the killing effect of bortezomib. This correlates with a decrease in the spliced 
form of a transcription factor XBP1, which rescues cells from apoptosis by
maintaining ER homeostasis. Bortezomib suppressed the production of interferon-a 
and interleukin-6 by pDCs activated with a TLR9-stimulating CpG DNA and a
TLR7-stimulating influenza virus, which appears to be partially independent of
apoptosis. Bortezomib inhibited translocation of TLR9 from the ER to
endolysosomes but not of an ER membrane protein, Unc93B1, that delivers TLR9 to
endolysosomes. Thus, bortezomib suppresses the activity of pDCs by inhibiting
intracellular trafficking of TLRs through disrupting the coordinated
translocation of TLRs and Unc93B1 and by disturbing ER homeostasis. This study
suggests that proteasome inhibitors may alleviate inflammatory disorders such as 
lupus and psoriasis that involve pDCs.

PMID: 20956804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochem J. 2011 Jan 1;433(1):245-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101293.

Regulation of unfolded protein response modulator XBP1s by acetylation and
deacetylation.

Wang FM(1), Chen YJ, Ouyang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA 15240, USA.

XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1) is a key modulator of the UPR (unfolded protein
response), which is involved in a wide range of pathological and physiological
processes. The mRNA encoding the active spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s) is generated
from the unspliced form by IRE1 (inositol-requiring enzyme 1) during the UPR.
However, the post-translational modulation of XBP1s remains largely unknown. In
the present study, we demonstrate that XBP1s is a target of acetylation and
deacetylation mediated by p300 and SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) respectively. p300 increases
the acetylation and protein stability of XBP1s, and enhances its transcriptional 
activity, whereas SIRT1 deacetylates XBP1s and inhibits its transcriptional
activity. Deficiency of SIRT1 enhances XBP1s-mediated luciferase reporter
activity in HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293 cells and the up-regulation of XBP1s
target gene expression under ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress in MEFs (mouse
embryonic fibroblasts). Consistent with XBP1s favouring cell survival under ER
stress, Sirt1-/- MEFs display a greater resistance to ER-stress-induced apoptotic
cell death compared with Sirt1+/+ MEFs. Taken together, these results suggest
that acetylation/deacetylation constitutes an important post-translational
mechanism in controlling protein levels, as well as the transcriptional activity,
of XBP1s. The present study provides a novel insight into the molecular
mechanisms by which SIRT1 regulates UPR signalling.

PMCID: PMC3477812
PMID: 20955178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2010 Oct 25;62(5):433-40.

[Oxidized low density lipoprotein induces macrophage endoplasmic reticulum stress
via CD36.].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao ST(1), Sang H, Yang NN, Kang L, Tian H, Zhang Y, Song GH, Qin SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Atherosclerosis; Institute of Preclinical Medicine, Taishan
Medical College, Taian 271000, China.

The purpose of the present study is to explore the effect of oxidized low density
lipoprotein (ox-LDL) on the induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and
the underlying mechanisms in ox-LDL-induced macrophage foam-forming process.
RAW264.7 macrophages were cultured in DMEM medium containing 10% fetal bovine
serum, and then treated with ox-LDL (25, 50 and 100 mg/L), anti-CD36 monoclonal
antibody+ox-LDL and tunicamycin (TM), respectively. After incubation for 24 h,
the cells were collected. The cellular lipid accumulation was showed by oil red O
staining and the content of cellular total cholesterol was quantified by
enzymatic colorimetry. The expression of glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94), a 
molecular marker of ERS, was determined by immunocytochemistry assay. The levels 
of GRP94 protein, phosphorylated inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (p-IRE1) and X box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) in RAW264.7 cells were detected by Western blotting. The
results indicated that after incubation with ox-LDL (25, 50 and 100 mg/L) for 24 
h, a large amount of lipid droplets were found in the cytoplasm, and the contents
of cellular total cholesterol were increased by 2.1, 2.8 and 3.1 folds compared
with the control, respectively. Anti-CD36 antibody decreased markedly the
cellular lipid accumulation induced by ox-LDL at 100 mg/L. Both ox-LDL and TM, a 
specific ERS inducer, could up-regulate the protein expression of GRP94 in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, p-IRE1 and XBP1, two key components of the
unfolded protein response, were also significantly induced by the treatment with 
ox-LDL. The up-regulations of the three proteins induced by ox-LDL were inhibited
significantly when the macrophages were pre-incubated with anti-CD36 antibody.
These results suggest that ox-LDL may induce ERS in a dose-dependent way and
subsequently activate the unfolded protein response signaling pathway in RAW264.7
macrophages, which is potentially mediated by scavenger receptor CD36.

PMID: 20945046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 27;5(9):e13052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013052.

IRE1a disruption causes histological abnormality of exocrine tissues, increase of
blood glucose level, and decrease of serum immunoglobulin level.

Iwawaki T(1), Akai R, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Initiative Research Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan.
iwawaki@riken.jp

Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causes ER
stress. As a cellular adaptive response to ER stress, unfolded protein response
(UPR) activates molecules for the quality control of ER proteins. One enzyme that
plays an important role in UPR is Inositol Requiring Enzyme-1 (IRE1), which is
highly conserved from yeast to humans. In particular, mammalian IRE1a activates
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) by unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA during ER 
stress. From analysis of knockout mice, both IRE1a and XBP1 have been shown to be
essential for development and that XBP1 is necessary for the secretory machinery 
of exocrine glands, plasma cell differentiation, and hepatic lipogenesis.
However, the essentiality of IRE1a in specific organs and tissues remains
incompletely understood. Here, we analyzed the phenotype of IRE1a conditional
knockout mice and found that IRE1a-deficient mice exhibit mild hypoinsulinemia,
hyperglycemia, and a low-weight trend. Moreover, IRE1a disruption causes
histological abnormality of the pancreatic acinar and salivary serous tissues and
decrease of serum level of immunoglobulin produced in the plasma cells, but not
dysfunction of liver. Comparison of this report with previous reports regarding
XBP1 conditional knockout mice might provide some clues for the discovery of the 
novel functions of IRE1a and XBP1.

PMCID: PMC2946364
PMID: 20885949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4081-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.134106. Epub 2010
Sep 27.

Adenylate kinase 2 links mitochondrial energy metabolism to the induction of the 
unfolded protein response.

Burkart A(1), Shi X, Chouinard M, Corvera S.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a homeostatic signaling mechanism that
balances the protein folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) with the 
secretory protein load of the cell. ER protein folding capacity is dependent on
the abundance of chaperones, which is increased in response to UPR signaling, and
on a sufficient ATP supply for their activity. An essential branch of the UPR
entails the splicing of XBP1 mRNA to form the XBP1 transcription factor. XBP1 has
been shown to be required during adipocyte differentiation, enabling mature
adipocytes to secrete adiponectin, and during differentiation of B cells into
antibody-secreting plasma cells. Here we find that adenylate kinase 2 (AK2), a
mitochondrial enzyme that regulates adenine nucleotide interconversion within the
intermembrane space, is markedly induced during adipocyte and B cell
differentiation. Depletion of AK2 by RNAi impairs adiponectin secretion in 3T3-L1
adipocytes, IgM secretion in BCL1 cells, and the induction of the UPR during
differentiation of both cell types. These results reveal a new mechanism by which
mitochondria support ER function and suggest that specific mitochondrial defects 
may give rise to impaired UPR signaling. The requirement for AK2 for UPR
induction may explain the pathogenesis of the profound hematopoietic defects of
reticular dysgenesis, a disease associated with mutations of the AK2 gene in
humans.

PMCID: PMC3039340
PMID: 20876536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):5348-59. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903792. Epub 2010
Sep 27.

Valosin-containing protein cleavage by granzyme K accelerates an endoplasmic
reticulum stress leading to caspase-independent cytotoxicity of target tumor
cells.

Guo Y(1), Chen J, Shi L, Fan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Granzyme K (GzmK) highly expressed in NK and NKT cells. We recently demonstrated 
that GzmK induces rapid caspase-independent cell death with ssDNA nicks. Little
is known about its molecular mechanisms to mediate caspase-independent cell
death. In this study, we found the valosin-containing protein (VCP) is a
physiological substrate of GzmK. GzmK cleaves VCP at residue Arg(713) in the D2
domain and abrogates its ATPase activity. GzmK can also target other endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation complex components Ufd1 and Npl4. Disruption of 
the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway after GzmK treatment
initiates ubiquitinated protein accumulation leading to xbp1 splicing. These
indicate that ubiquitinated protein accumulation triggers endoplasmic reticulum
stress in target cells. In support of this, target tumor cells with silenced VCP 
expression are more sensitive, whereas cells overexpressing VCP are more
resistant to GzmK-mediated cytotoxicity.

PMID: 20876349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS Genet. 2010 Aug 26;6(8). pii: e1001075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001075.

Inactivation of VCP/ter94 suppresses retinal pathology caused by misfolded
rhodopsin in Drosophila.

Griciuc A(1), Aron L, Roux MJ, Klein R, Giangrande A, Ueffing M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen-German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

The most common Rhodopsin (Rh) mutation associated with autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP) in North America is the substitution of proline 23 by
histidine (Rh(P23H)). Unlike the wild-type Rh, mutant Rh(P23H) exhibits folding
defects and forms intracellular aggregates. The mechanisms responsible for the
recognition and clearance of misfolded Rh(P23H) and their relevance to
photoreceptor neuron (PN) degeneration are poorly understood. Folding-deficient
membrane proteins are subjected to Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) quality control,
and we have recently shown that Rh(P23H) is a substrate of the ER-associated
degradation (ERAD) effector VCP/ter94, a chaperone that extracts misfolded
proteins from the ER (a process called retrotranslocation) and facilitates their 
proteasomal degradation. Here, we used Drosophila, in which Rh1(P37H) (the
equivalent of mammalian Rh(P23H)) is expressed in PNs, and found that the
endogenous Rh1 is required for Rh1(P37H) toxicity. Genetic inactivation of VCP
increased the levels of misfolded Rh1(P37H) and further activated the Ire1/Xbp1
ER stress pathway in the Rh1(P37H) retina. Despite this, Rh1(P37H) flies with
decreased VCP function displayed a potent suppression of retinal degeneration and
blindness, indicating that VCP activity promotes neurodegeneration in the
Rh1(P37H) retina. Pharmacological treatment of Rh1(P37H) flies with the VCP/ERAD 
inhibitor Eeyarestatin I or with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 also led to a
strong suppression of retinal degeneration. Collectively, our findings raise the 
possibility that excessive retrotranslocation and/or degradation of visual
pigment is a primary cause of PN degeneration.

PMCID: PMC2928793
PMID: 20865169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2011 Feb;9(1):79-87. doi: 10.1089/adt.2010.0300. Epub
2010 Sep 21.

A predictive nuclear translocation assay for spliced x-box-binding protein 1
identifies compounds with known organ toxicities.

Hahmann C(1), Weiser A, Duckett D, Schroeter T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics and Translational Research Institute, The
Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida, USA.

Compound toxicity is still the main cause of attrition, emphasizing the need for 
novel predictive assays to identify toxic compounds early during drug
development. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has recently been discovered as a 
molecular event that links cellular dysfunction to drug-induced organ toxicity in
humans. Among higher organisms the inositol-requiring transmembrane
kinase/endoribonuclease pathway plays a major role in mediating the ER stress
response. Inositol-requiring transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease achieves this 
through its endoribonuclease activity causing a frameshift in the translation of 
the X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) to produce spliced XBP1 (XBP1s), which
translocates into the nucleus, where it initiates transcription of ER stress
response genes. Based on this biology, we have designed a novel
ß-galactosidase-based XBP1s-enzyme fragment complementation assay, which enables 
identification of compound-induced ER stress in human U2OS cells. The
XBP1s-enzyme fragment complementation assay was established in a 384-well format 
and validated using a library of 1280 pharmacologically active compounds.
Importantly, the library of pharmacologically active compounds screen identified 
both well-established ER stress inducers and several compounds that are known
organ toxicants but not previously reported to induce ER stress. Implementation
of this assay to assess compound-induced ER stress will facilitate decision
making for compound selection and we believe that it will significantly increase 
the ability to reduce toxicity of preclinical drug candidates.

PMID: 20858054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Jan;164(1):16-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10046.x. Epub
2010 Nov 29.

Endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ depletion activates XBP1 and controls terminal
differentiation in keratinocytes and epidermis.

Celli A(1), Mackenzie DS, Crumrine DS, Tu CL, Hupe M, Bikle DD, Elias PM, Mauro
TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, 4150
Clement Street, San Francisco, CA 94121-1545, USA. celli.anna@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca(2+) depletion, previously shown to
signal pathological stress responses, has more recently been found also to
trigger homeostatic physiological processes such as differentiation. In
keratinocytes and epidermis, terminal differentiation and barrier repair require 
physiological apoptosis and differentiation, as evidenced by protein synthesis,
caspase 14 expression, lipid secretion and stratum corneum (SC) formation.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the role of Ca(2+) depletion-induced ER stress in
keratinocyte differentiation and barrier repair in vivo and in cell culture.
METHODS: The SERCA2 Ca(2+) pump inhibitor thapsigargin (TG) was used to deplete
ER calcium both in cultured keratinocytes and in mice. Levels of the ER stress
factor XBP1, loricrin, caspase 14, lipid synthesis and intracellular Ca(2+) were 
compared after both TG treatment and barrier abrogation.
RESULTS: We showed that these components of terminal differentiation and barrier 
repair were signalled by physiological ER stress, via release of stratum
granulosum (SG) ER Ca(2+) stores. We first found that keratinocyte and epidermal 
ER Ca(2+) depletion activated the ER-stress-induced transcription factor XBP1.
Next, we demonstrated that external barrier perturbation resulted in both
intracellular Ca(2+) emptying and XBP1 activation. Finally, we showed that TG
treatment of intact skin did not perturb the permeability barrier, yet stimulated
and mimicked the physiological processes of barrier recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: This report is the first to quantify and localize ER Ca(2+) loss
after barrier perturbation and show that homeostatic processes that restore
barrier function in vivo can be reproduced solely by releasing ER Ca(2+), via
induction of physiological ER stress.

© 2010 No claim to original US government works. BJD © 2010 British Association
of Dermatologists 2010.

PMCID: PMC3010253
PMID: 20846312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Gastroenterology. 2010 Dec;139(6):2038-49. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.08.050.
Epub 2010 Oct 14.

XBP1 controls maturation of gastric zymogenic cells by induction of MIST1 and
expansion of the rough endoplasmic reticulum.

Huh WJ(1), Esen E, Geahlen JH, Bredemeyer AJ, Lee AH, Shi G, Konieczny SF,
Glimcher LH, Mills JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The transition of gastric epithelial mucous neck cells (NCs)
to digestive enzyme-secreting zymogenic cells (ZCs) involves an increase in rough
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and formation of many large secretory vesicles. The
transcription factor MIST1 is required for granulogenesis of ZCs. The
transcription factor XBP1 binds the Mist1 promoter and induces its expression in 
vitro and expands the ER in other cell types. We investigated whether XBP1
activates Mist1 to regulate ZC differentiation.
METHODS: Xbp1 was inducibly deleted in mice using a tamoxifen/Cre-loxP system;
effects on ZC size and structure (ER and granule formation) and gastric
differentiation were studied and quantified for up to 13 months after deletion
using morphologic, immunofluorescence, quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblot analyses. Interactions between XBP1 and
the Mist1 promoter were studied by chromatin immunoprecipitation from mouse
stomach and in XBP1-transfected gastric cell lines.
RESULTS: Tamoxifen-induced deletion of Xbp1 (Xbp1<U+0394>) did not affect survival of
ZCs but prevented formation of their structure. Xbp1<U+0394> ZCs shrank 4-fold, compared
with those of wild-type mice, with granulogenesis and cell shape abnormalities
and disrupted rough ER. XBP1 was required and sufficient for transcriptional
activation of MIST1. ZCs that developed in the absence of XBP1 induced ZC markers
(intrinsic factor, pepsinogen C) but showed abnormal retention of progenitor NC
markers.
CONCLUSIONS: XBP1 controls the transcriptional regulation of ZC structural
development; it expands the lamellar rough ER and induces MIST1 expression to
regulate formation of large granules. XBP1 is also required for loss of mucous NC
markers as ZCs form.

Copyright © 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2997137
PMID: 20816838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS Genet. 2010 Aug 12;6(8):e1001063. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001063.

Transcriptional regulation by CHIP/LDB complexes.

Bronstein R(1), Levkovitz L, Yosef N, Yanku M, Ruppin E, Sharan R, Westphal H,
Oliver B, Segal D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2011 Feb;7(2). doi:
10.1371/annotation/0bac4872-2fa2-416e-ac45-4b0ac79f8ddd.

It is increasingly clear that transcription factors play versatile roles in
turning genes "on" or "off" depending on cellular context via the various
transcription complexes they form. This poses a major challenge in unraveling
combinatorial transcription complex codes. Here we use the powerful genetics of
Drosophila combined with microarray and bioinformatics analyses to tackle this
challenge. The nuclear adaptor CHIP/LDB is a major developmental regulator
capable of forming tissue-specific transcription complexes with various types of 
transcription factors and cofactors, making it a valuable model to study the
intricacies of gene regulation. To date only few CHIP/LDB complexes target genes 
have been identified, and possible tissue-dependent crosstalk between these
complexes has not been rigorously explored. SSDP proteins protect CHIP/LDB
complexes from proteasome dependent degradation and are rate-limiting cofactors
for these complexes. By using mutations in SSDP, we identified 189 down-stream
targets of CHIP/LDB and show that these genes are enriched for the binding sites 
of APTEROUS (AP) and PANNIER (PNR), two well studied transcription factors
associated with CHIP/LDB complexes. We performed extensive genetic screens and
identified target genes that genetically interact with components of CHIP/LDB
complexes in directing the development of the wings (28 genes) and thoracic
bristles (23 genes). Moreover, by in vivo RNAi silencing we uncovered novel roles
for two of the target genes, xbp1 and Gs-alpha, in early development of these
structures. Taken together, our results suggest that loss of SSDP disrupts the
normal balance between the CHIP-AP and the CHIP-PNR transcription complexes,
resulting in down-regulation of CHIP-AP target genes and the concomitant
up-regulation of CHIP-PNR target genes. Understanding the combinatorial nature of
transcription complexes as presented here is crucial to the study of
transcription regulation of gene batteries required for development.

PMCID: PMC2921152
PMID: 20730086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Neuroscience. 2010 Nov 10;170(4):1035-44. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.08.013. Epub 2010 Aug 13.

TNF-a transiently induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and an incomplete unfolded
protein response in the hypothalamus.

Denis RG(1), Arruda AP, Romanatto T, Milanski M, Coope A, Solon C, Razolli DS,
Velloso LA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, University of Campinas, Brazil.

In diet-induced obesity, hypothalamic inflammation is triggered as an outcome of 
prolonged exposure to dietary fats. Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) activation plays 
a central role in this process, inducing endoplasmic reticulum stress and
activating inflammatory cytokine gene transcription. Although saturated fatty
acids can induce endoplasmic reticulum stress in the hypothalamus, it is unknown 
whether inflammatory cytokines alone can activate this mechanism. Here, rats were
treated with TNF-a or lyposaccharide (LPS) and endoplasmic reticulum stress and
unfolded protein response were evaluated by immunoblot and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). Activation of TLR4 by LPS was capable of inducing a complete
endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response through the PERK/eIF2a
and IRE1a/XBP1 pathways. Conversely, TNF-a, injected either locally or
systemically, was unable to induce a complete program of unfolded protein
response, although the activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress was achieved to
a certain degree. Thus, in the hypothalamus, the isolated action of TNF-a is
insufficient to produce the activation of a complete program of unfolded protein 
response.

Copyright © 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20709159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neurosci Res. 2010 Nov;68(3):250-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2010.07.2042. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

Behavioral and gene expression analyses in heterozygous XBP1 knockout mice:
Possible contribution of chromosome 11qA1 locus to prepulse inhibition.

Takata A(1), Kakiuchi C, Ishiwata M, Kanba S, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako City, Saitama, Japan.

The Xbp1 gene, located on chromosome 11qA1 in Mus musculus, encodes a key
transcription factor in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway. XBP1
play a role in brain development and implicated in pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases. To evaluate the role of Xbp1 in
behavioral phenotypes, we subjected heterozygous Xbp1 knockout (Xbp1+/-) mice to 
a battery of behavioral tests. Xbp1+/- mice showed enhanced prepulse inhibition
(PPI). We also examined gene expression profiles in frontal cortex and
hippocampus of Xbp1+/- mice to investigate the molecular basis that could
underlie behavioral phenotypes. Gene expression analysis showed that several
genes located on chromosome 11qA1 were differentially expressed. Among them,
Uqcr10 and Nipsnap1 were strongly up-regulated. Significant up-regulation of
these genes in 129S compared with BALB/c as well as higher PPI in 129S than
BALB/c was previously reported. The ES cells used to generation of XBP1 knockout 
mice were derived from 129S and the founder was backcrossed with BALB/c. Thus,
these findings would be accounted for by 129S-derived chromosomal region flanking
Xbp1. These results support the contribution of chromosome 11qA1 locus to the
amount of PPI. Uqcr10 and Nipsnap1 are good candidate genes that could impact
PPI.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20692302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cell Signal. 2010 Dec;22(12):1818-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.07.006. Epub
2010 Jul 15.

XBP1U inhibits the XBP1S-mediated upregulation of the iNOS gene expression in
mammalian ER stress response.

Guo F(1), Lin EA, Liu P, Lin J, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, ChongQing Medical University,
ChongQing 400016, P.R. China. guo.fengjin@gmail.com

Upregulation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene is associated
with many pathological conditions such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is critical in mediating ER-stress responsive
genes, including iNOS. Nonetheless, the mechanism by which XBP1 regulates iNOS
during ER stress remains unexplored. Here we show that the active/spliced form of
XBP1 protein, XBP1S, directly binds to the AABS (A-activator-binding site) in the
iNOS promoter in vitro and in living cells. XBP1S exhibits dose-dependent
activation of iNOS-specific reporter gene activity and endogenous iNOS
expression. XBP1S is elevated whereas the unspliced form of XBP1, XBP1U, reduced 
in ER stress in HepG2 cells. In addition, XBP1U binds to XBP1S and this complex
is associated with the iNOS promoter in response to ER stress. Furthermore, XBP1U
acts as a negative mediator and suppresses XBP1S-mediated induction of iNOS.
Collectively, we present the first evidence demonstrating the regulation of iNOS 
gene induction by the interaction between the spliced and unspliced forms of XBP1
in response to ER stress.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jul 6;8(7):e1000410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000410.

HSP72 protects cells from ER stress-induced apoptosis via enhancement of
IRE1alpha-XBP1 signaling through a physical interaction.

Gupta S(1), Deepti A, Deegan S, Lisbona F, Hetz C, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, School of Natural Sciences, NUI Galway, Galway,
Ireland.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is a feature of secretory cells and of many
diseases including cancer, neurodegeneration, and diabetes. Adaptation to ER
stress depends on the activation of a signal transduction pathway known as the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Enhanced expression of Hsp72 has been shown to
reduce tissue injury in response to stress stimuli and improve cell survival in
experimental models of stroke, sepsis, renal failure, and myocardial ischemia.
Hsp72 inhibits several features of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. However, the 
molecular mechanisms by which Hsp72 expression inhibits ER stress-induced
apoptosis are not clearly understood. Here we show that Hsp72 enhances cell
survival under ER stress conditions. The UPR signals through the sensor
IRE1alpha, which controls the splicing of the mRNA encoding the transcription
factor XBP1. We show that Hsp72 enhances XBP1 mRNA splicing and expression of its
target genes, associated with attenuated apoptosis under ER stress conditions.
Inhibition of XBP1 mRNA splicing either by dominant negative IRE1alpha or by
knocking down XBP1 specifically abrogated the inhibition of ER stress-induced
apoptosis by Hsp72. Regulation of the UPR was associated with the formation of a 
stable protein complex between Hsp72 and the cytosolic domain of IRE1alpha.
Finally, Hsp72 enhanced the RNase activity of recombinant IRE1alpha in vitro,
suggesting a direct regulation. Our data show that binding of Hsp72 to IRE1alpha 
enhances IRE1alpha/XBP1 signaling at the ER and inhibits ER stress-induced
apoptosis. These results provide a physical connection between cytosolic
chaperones and the ER stress response.

PMCID: PMC2897763
PMID: 20625543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jun 29;11:50. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-50.

Predator-induced defences in Daphnia pulex: selection and evaluation of internal 
reference genes for gene expression studies with real-time PCR.

Spanier KI(1), Leese F, Mayer C, Colbourne JK, Gilbert D, Pfrender ME, Tollrian
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Ecology, Ruhr-University Bochum, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The planktonic microcrustacean Daphnia pulex is among the
best-studied animals in ecological, toxicological and evolutionary research. One 
aspect that has sustained interest in the study system is the ability of D. pulex
to develop inducible defence structures when exposed to predators, such as the
phantom midge larvae Chaoborus. The available draft genome sequence for D. pulex 
is accelerating research to identify genes that confer plastic phenotypes that
are regularly cued by environmental stimuli. Yet for quantifying gene expression 
levels, no experimentally validated set of internal control genes exists for the 
accurate normalization of qRT-PCR data.
RESULTS: In this study, we tested six candidate reference genes for normalizing
transcription levels of D. pulex genes; alpha tubulin (aTub),
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), TATA box binding protein (Tbp) 
syntaxin 16 (Stx16), X-box binding protein 1 (Xbp1) and CAPON, a protein
associated with the neuronal nitric oxide synthase, were selected on the basis of
an earlier study and from microarray studies. One additional gene, a matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP), was tested to validate its transcriptional response to
Chaoborus, which was earlier observed in a microarray study. The transcription
profiles of these seven genes were assessed by qRT-PCR from RNA of juvenile D.
pulex that showed induced defences in comparison to untreated control animals. We
tested the individual suitability of genes for expression normalization using the
programs geNorm, NormFinder and BestKeeper. Intriguingly, Xbp1, Tbp, CAPON and
Stx16 were selected as ideal reference genes. Analyses on the relative expression
level using the software REST showed that both classical housekeeping candidate
genes (aTub and GAPDH) were significantly downregulated, whereas the MMP gene was
shown to be significantly upregulated, as predicted. aTub is a particularly ill
suited reference gene because five copies are found in the D. pulex genome
sequence. When applying aTub for expression normalization Xbp1 and Tbp are
falsely reported as significantly upregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the genes Xbp1, Tbp, CAPON and Stx16 are
suitable reference genes for accurate normalization in qRT-PCR studies using
Chaoborus-induced D. pulex specimens. Furthermore, our study underscores the
importance of verifying the expression stability of putative reference genes for 
normalization of expression levels.

PMCID: PMC3148505
PMID: 20587017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2010 Aug;21(4):329-36. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e32833b7782.

Recent insights into fatty liver, metabolic dyslipidaemia and their links to
insulin resistance.

Savage DB(1), Semple RK.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent research into the mechanisms linking
insulin resistance, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and metabolic dyslipidaemia.
RECENT FINDINGS: Pathologically increased nonesterified fatty acids have widely
been viewed as a key driver of hepatic insulin resistance/nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease/metabolic dyslipidaemia. However, this may have been overestimated,
and growing evidence now also implicates dysregulated hepatic de-novo lipogenesis
in the pathogenesis of these phenomena. This is driven by the action of
hyperinsulinaemia on the liver, mediated by PI3 kinase, though consensus on the
downstream effectors remains to be reached. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and/or
components of the attendant unfolded protein response have also emerged as
players in dysregulated hepatic metabolism due to nutritional overload. Several
points of convergence between metabolic and unfolded protein response pathways
have been described, notably centring on the transcription factor XBP1.
SUMMARY: Insulin resistance, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and metabolic
dyslipidaemia are inextricably linked and need to be considered together.
Modelling and dissecting prevalent forms of the disease is complex, but
unrestrained de-novo lipogenesis driven by hyperinsulinaemia appears to play an
important role. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and the associated unfolded protein 
response may also contribute to cellular mismatch between triglyceride
secretion/metabolism and synthesis, though a complete picture has yet to emerge.

PMID: 20581678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Oct;299(4):C736-49. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00529.2009. Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Airborne particulate matter selectively activates endoplasmic reticulum stress
response in the lung and liver tissues.

Laing S(1), Wang G, Briazova T, Zhang C, Wang A, Zheng Z, Gow A, Chen AF,
Rajagopalan S, Chen LC, Sun Q, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, The Wayne State University School 
of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Oct;299(4):C727-8.

Recent studies have suggested a link between inhaled particulate matter (PM)
exposure and increased mortality and morbidity associated with pulmonary and
cardiovascular diseases. However, a precise understanding of the biological
mechanism underlying PM-associated toxicity and pathogenesis remains elusive.
Here, we investigated the impact of PM exposure in intracellular stress signaling
pathways with animal models and cultured cells. Inhalation exposure of the mice
to environmentally relevant fine particulate matter (aerodynamic diameter < 2.5
µm, PM(2.5)) induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activation of unfolded
protein response (UPR) in the lung and liver tissues as well as in the mouse
macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Ambient PM(2.5) exposure activates double-strand
RNA-activated protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK), leading to phosphorylation of
translation initiation factor eIF2a and induction of C/EBP homologous
transcription factor CHOP/GADD153. Activation of PERK-mediated UPR pathway relies
on the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and is critical for
PM(2.5)-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, PM(2.5) exposure can activate ER stress
sensor IRE1a, but it decreases the activity of IRE1a in splicing the mRNA
encoding the UPR trans-activator X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1). Together, our
study suggests that PM(2.5) exposure differentially activates the UPR branches,
leading to ER stress-induced apoptosis through the PERK-eIF2a-CHOP UPR branch.
This work provides novel insights into the cellular and molecular basis by which 
ambient PM(2.5) exposure elicits its cytotoxic effects that may be related to air
pollution-associated pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2957267
PMID: 20554909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(17):8446-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01416-09. Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Coxsackievirus B3 infection activates the unfolded protein response and induces
apoptosis through downregulation of p58IPK and activation of CHOP and SREBP1.

Zhang HM(1), Ye X, Su Y, Yuan J, Liu Z, Stein DA, Yang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, The Providence Heart and Lung Institute, St Paul's Hospital, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Cardiomyocyte apoptosis is a hallmark of coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3)-induced
myocarditis. We used cardiomyocytes and HeLa cells to explore the cellular
response to CVB3 infection, with a focus on pathways leading to apoptosis. CVB3
infection triggered endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and differentially
regulated the three arms of the unfolded protein response (UPR) initiated by the 
proximal ER stress sensors ATF6a (activating transcription factor 6a), IRE1-XBP1 
(X box binding protein 1), and PERK (PKR-like ER protein kinase). Upon CVB3
infection, glucose-regulated protein 78 expression was upregulated, and in turn
ATF6a and XBP1 were activated via protein cleavage and mRNA splicing,
respectively. UPR activity was further confirmed by the enhanced expression of
UPR target genes ERdj4 and EDEM1. Surprisingly, another UPR-associated gene,
p58(IPK), which often is upregulated during infections with other types of
viruses, was downregulated at both mRNA and protein levels after CVB3 infection. 
These findings were observed similarly for uninfected Tet-On HeLa cells induced
to overexpress ATF6a or XBP1. In exploring potential connections between the
three UPR pathways, we found that the ATF6a-induced downregulation of p58(IPK)
was associated with the activation of PKR (PERK) and the phosphorylation of
eIF2alpha, suggesting that p58(IPK), a negative regulator of PERK and PKR,
mediates cross-talk between the ATF6a/IRE1-XBP1 and PERK arms. Finally, we found 
that CVB3 infection eventually produced the induction of the proapoptoic
transcription factor CHOP and the activation of SREBP1 and caspase-12. Taken
together, these data suggest that CVB3 infection activates UPR pathways and
induces ER stress-mediated apoptosis through the suppression of P58(IPK) and
induction/activation of CHOP, SREBP1, and caspase-12.

PMCID: PMC2918999
PMID: 20554776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Exp Med. 2010 Jul 5;207(7):1525-40. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091928. Epub 2010 Jun
14.

Homeostatic expansion of autoreactive immunoglobulin-secreting cells in the Rag2 
mouse model of Omenn syndrome.

Cassani B(1), Poliani PL, Marrella V, Schena F, Sauer AV, Ravanini M, Strina D,
Busse CE, Regenass S, Wardemann H, Martini A, Facchetti F, van der Burg M, Rolink
AG, Vezzoni P, Grassi F, Traggiai E, Villa A.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Humanitas per la Ricerca, 20089 Rozzano, Italy.

Hypomorphic RAG mutations, leading to limited V(D)J rearrangements, cause Omenn
syndrome (OS), a peculiar severe combined immunodeficiency associated with
autoimmune-like manifestations. Whether B cells play a role in OS pathogenesis is
so far unexplored. Here we report the detection of plasma cells in lymphoid
organs of OS patients, in which circulating B cells are undetectable. Hypomorphic
Rag2(R229Q) knock-in mice, which recapitulate OS, revealed, beyond severe B cell 
developmental arrest, a normal or even enlarged compartment of
immunoglobulin-secreting cells (ISC). The size of this ISC compartment correlated
with increased expression of Blimp1 and Xbp1, and these ISC were sustained by
elevated levels of T cell derived homeostatic and effector cytokines. The
detection of high affinity pathogenic autoantibodies toward target organs
indicated defaults in B cell selection and tolerance induction. We hypothesize
that impaired B cell receptor (BCR) editing and a serum B cell activating factor 
(BAFF) abundance might contribute toward the development of a pathogenic B cell
repertoire in hypomorphic Rag2(R229Q) knock-in mice. BAFF-R blockade reduced
serum levels of nucleic acid-specific autoantibodies and significantly
ameliorated inflammatory tissue damage. These findings highlight a role for B
cells in OS pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2901059
PMID: 20547828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biol Chem. 2010 Sep;391(9):1019-29. doi: 10.1515/BC.2010.101.

Isolation of genes involved in pancreas regeneration by subtractive
hybridization.

Choi JH(1), Lee MY, Kim Y, Shim JY, Han SM, Lee KA, Choi YK, Jeon HM, Baek KH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, CHA University, CHA General Hospital, Seoul 135-081,
Korea.

The deterioration of ß cells in the pancreas is a crucial factor in the
progression of diabetes mellitus; therefore, the recovery of ß cells is of vital 
importance for effective diabetic therapeutic strategies. Partially
pancreatectomized rats have been used for the investigation of pancreatic
regeneration. Because it was determined that tissue extract from the
partially-dissected pancreas induces pancreatic differentiation in embryonic stem
cells, paracrine factors were thought to be involved in the regeneration. In this
study, we screened for genes that had higher mRNA levels 2 days after
60%-pancreatectomy. The genes were isolated using subtractive hybridization and
DNA sequencing. Twelve genes (adipsin, Aplp2, Clu, Col1a2, Glul, Krt8, Lgmn,
LOC299907, LOC502894, Pla2g1b, Reg3a and Xbp1) were identified, and RT-PCR and
real-time PCR analyses were performed to validate their expression levels. Among 
the genes identified, three genes (Glul, Lgmn and Reg3a) were selected for
further analyses. Assays revealed that Glul and Reg3a enhance cell growth. Glul, 
Lgmn and Reg3a change the expression level of islet marker genes, where NEUROD,
NKX2.2, PAX4 and PAX6 are up-regulated and somatostatin is down-regulated. Thus, 
we believe that Glul, Lgmn and Reg3a can serve as novel targets in diabetes
mellitus genetic therapy.

PMID: 20536387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. EMBO Mol Med. 2010 Jun;2(6):189-92. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201000076.

Inositol-requiring 1/X-box-binding protein 1 is a regulatory hub that links
endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis with innate immunity and metabolism.

Kaufman RJ(1), Cao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. kaufmanr@umich.edu

Inositol-requiring 1 (IRE1)/X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1)-mediated signalling
represents the most conserved branch of the unfolded protein response. A series
of recent studies reveal novel and potentially ancient roles for this pathway in 
the coordination of metabolic and immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3042734
PMID: 20533428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Mol Neurosci. 2011 Mar;43(3):225-34. doi: 10.1007/s12031-010-9387-0. Epub 2010 
Jun 5.

Human prion protein mutants with deleted and inserted octarepeats undergo
different pathways to trigger cell apoptosis.

Xu K(1), Wang X, Shi Q, Chen C, Tian C, Li XL, Zhou RM, Chu YL, Dong XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiao-Tong University,
Xi'an, 710061, People's Republic of China.

Octarepeats region sequence is one of the most important characteristics of PrP
topology. To explore the mechanism of deleted and inserted octarepeats mutants
PrP-caused apoptosis, wild-type PrP (PrP-PG5), and PrP with deleted octarepeats
(PrP-PG0) and with four (PrP-PG9) and seven (PrP-PG12) extra octarepeats were
transiently induced into SH-SY5Y cell. The results indicated PrP-PG9 and PrP-PG12
mainly retained in fraction of cytoplasm, while PrP-PG5 and PrP-PG0 presented
both in cell membrane and cytoplasm. Cells expressing PrP-PG9 and PrP-PG12 were
sensitive to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stimuli, tunicamycin, and brefeldin A.
ER-stress-related proteins, Grp94, XBP1, TRAF2, and CHOP, were significantly
increased in cells expressing PrP-PG9 and PrP-PG12, while Grp78 increased
markedly 12 h and pro-caspase-12 decreased sharply 20 h post-transfection. It
indicates that expressions of PrP mutants with inserted octarepeats cause ER
stress and lead to cell apoptosis lately. Meanwhile, cellular Cytochrome C
increased and Bcl-2 decreased obviously in cells expressing PrP-PG0, indicating
triggering a mitochondrial-related apoptosis. These data highlight that PrP
mutants in region of octarepeats may undergo different pathways to trigger cell
apoptosis, in which PrPs with inserted octarepeats via ER stress and PrP mutant
without octarepeats via mitochondrial-related pathway.

PMID: 20526696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Oct;38(18):6265-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq452. Epub 2010
May 27.

Identification of a consensus element recognized and cleaved by IRE1 alpha.

Oikawa D(1), Tokuda M, Hosoda A, Iwawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Initiative Research Unit, Advanced Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

IRE1a is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-located transmembrane RNase that plays a
central role in the ER stress response. Upon ER stress, IRE1a is activated and
cleaves specific exon-intron sites in the mRNA encoding the transcription factor 
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). In addition, previous studies allow us to predict
that IRE1a targets several RNAs other than the XBP1. In fact, we have identified 
CD59 mRNA as a cleavage target of IRE1a. However, it is not yet clear how IRE1a
recognizes and cleaves target RNAs. To address this question, we devised a unique
method that combines an in vitro cleavage assay with an exon microarray analysis,
and performed genome-wide screening for IRE1a cleavage targets. We identified 13 
novel mRNAs as candidate IRE1a cleavage targets. Moreover, an analysis of the
novel cleavage sites revealed a consensus sequence (CUGCAG) which, when
accompanied by a stem-loop structure, is essential for IRE1a-mediated cleavage.
The sequence and structure were also conserved in the known IRE1a cleavage
targets, CD59 and XBP1. These findings provide the important clue to
understanding the molecular mechanisms by which IRE1a recognizes and cleaves
target RNAs.

PMCID: PMC2952871
PMID: 20507909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Nov;299(5):E695-705. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00038.2010. Epub 2010 May 25.

The unfolded protein response is activated in skeletal muscle by high-fat
feeding: potential role in the downregulation of protein synthesis.

Deldicque L(1), Cani PD, Philp A, Raymackers JM, Meakin PJ, Ashford ML, Delzenne 
NM, Francaux M, Baar K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurosciences, UCLouvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

High-fat diets are known to decrease muscle protein synthesis, the adaptation to 
overload, and insulin sensitivity. Conditions that disrupt endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) homeostasis lead to the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR)
that is associated with decreases in protein synthesis, chronic inflammation, and
insulin resistance. The purpose of the present study was to establish whether ER 
stress is induced by a high-fat diet in skeletal muscle and whether ER stress can
decrease mTORC1 activity and protein synthesis in muscle cells. Two independent
protocols of high-fat feeding activated the UPR in mice. In the first study, mice
consuming a high-fat diet containing 70% fat and <1% carbohydrates for 6 wk
showed higher markers of the UPR (BiP, IRE1a, and MBTPS2) in the soleus and in
the tibialis anterior muscles and ATF4 in the tibialis anterior (P < 0.05). In
the second study, a 20-wk high-fat diet containing 46% fat and 36% carbohydrates 
also increased BiP, IRE1a, and phospho-PERK protein and the expression of ATF4,
CHOP, and both the spliced and unspliced forms of XBP1 in the plantar flexors (P 
< 0.05). In C(2)C(12) muscle cells, tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and palmitic acid 
all increased UPR markers and decreased phosphorylation of S6K1 (P < 0.05).
Collectively, these data show that a high-fat diet activates the UPR in mouse
skeletal muscle in vivo. In addition, in vitro studies indicate that palmitic
acid, and other well-known ER stress inducers, triggered the UPR in myogenic
cells and led to a decrease in protein synthesis and mTORC1 activity.

PMID: 20501874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2010 Jul;26(4):318-26. doi:
10.1097/MOG.0b013e32833a9ff1.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress: implications for inflammatory bowel disease
pathogenesis.

Kaser A(1), Martínez-Naves E, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II (Gastroenterology & Hepatology), Innsbruck Medical
University, Innsbruck, Austria.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To provide an overview of the emerging role of cellular stress
responses in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
RECENT FINDINGS: The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a primitive cellular
pathway that is engaged when responding to endoplasmic reticulum stress and
regulates autophagy. Highly secretory cells such as Paneth cells and goblet cells
in the intestines are particularly susceptible to endoplasmic reticulum stress
and are exceedingly dependent upon a properly functioning UPR to maintain
cellular viability and homeostasis. Primary genetic abnormalities within the
components of the UPR (e.g. XBP1, ARG2, ORMDL3), genes that encode proteins
reliant upon a robust secretory pathway (e.g. MUC2, HLAB27) and environmental
factors that create disturbances in the UPR (e.g. microbial products and
inflammatory cytokines) are important factors in the primary development and/or
perpetuation of intestinal inflammation.
SUMMARY: Endoplasmic reticulum stress is an important new pathway involved in the
development of intestinal inflammation associated with IBD and likely other
intestinal inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC4592137
PMID: 20495455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 16;285(29):22027-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126870. Epub
2010 May 20.

Decrease in membrane phospholipid unsaturation induces unfolded protein response.

Ariyama H(1), Kono N, Matsuda S, Inoue T, Arai H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan.

Various kinds of fatty acids are distributed in membrane phospholipids in
mammalian cells and tissues. The degree of fatty acid unsaturation in membrane
phospholipids affects many membrane-associated functions and can be influenced by
diet and by altered activities of lipid-metabolizing enzymes such as fatty acid
desaturases. However, little is known about how mammalian cells respond to
changes in phospholipid fatty acid composition. In this study we showed that
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) knockdown increased the amount of saturated
fatty acids and decreased that of monounsaturated fatty acids in phospholipids
without affecting the amount or the composition of free fatty acid and induced
unfolded protein response (UPR), evidenced by increased expression of C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) and glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) mRNAs and
splicing of Xbox-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA. SCD1 knockdown-induced UPR was
rescued by various unsaturated fatty acids and was enhanced by saturated fatty
acid. Lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 3 (LPCAT3), which incorporates
preferentially polyunsaturated fatty acids into phosphatidylcholine, was
up-regulated in SCD1 knockdown cells. Knockdown of LPCAT3 synergistically
enhanced UPR with SCD1 knockdown. Finally we showed that palmitic acid-induced
UPR was significantly enhanced by LPCAT3 knockdown as well as SCD1 knockdown.
These results suggest that a decrease in membrane phospholipid unsaturation
induces UPR.

PMCID: PMC2903364
PMID: 20489212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Int J Radiat Biol. 2010 Jun;86(6):429-35. doi: 10.3109/09553001003668014.

ER stress induced by ionising radiation in IEC-6 cells.

Zhang B(1), Wang Y, Pang X, Su Y, Ai G, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Combined Injury, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and
Combined Injury, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

PURPOSE: Ionising radiation (IR) can evoke a series of biochemical events inside 
the cell. However, whether IR can directly induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress is not clear. In our previous study, we found that there might be a
causative link between IR and ER stress. In this study, we further characterised 
the type of ER stress induced by IR.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rat intestinal epithelial cells IEC-6 were irradiated at a
dose of 10 Gy, and total RNA and proteins were harvested at indicated time
points. The mRNA and protein expression of immunoglobulin heavy chain binding
protein (BiP) and glucose regulated protein 94 (GRP94) was detected along with
proteins associated with ER stress signal pathways.
RESULTS: Our results indicated that IR induced up-regulation of ER stress marker 
including BiP and GRP94 at protein and mRNA levels in IEC-6 cells. Increased
phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha) and
induced mRNA splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) suggested that PERK
(interferon-induced double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PRKR) -like
endoplasmic reticulum kinase) and IRE1 (inositol requirement 1) signal
transduction pathways were involved in this kind of ER stress. However, the
active form of activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) did not change
significantly in irradiated cells, which suggested that the ATF6 pathway was not 
involved.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we concluded that IR could induce moderate ER stress directly 
in IEC-6 cells.

PMID: 20470193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010 Oct;23(5):627-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2010.00718.x. Epub 2010 Apr 23.

The unfolded protein response in melanocytes: activation in response to chemical 
stressors of the endoplasmic reticulum and tyrosinase misfolding.

Manga P(1), Bis S, Knoll K, Perez B, Orlow SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. prashiela.manga@nyumc.org

Accumulation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) triggers the unfolded 
protein response (UPR), comprising three signaling pathways initiated by Ire1,
Perk and Atf6 respectively. Unfolded protein response activation was compared in 
chemically stressed murine wildtype melanocytes and mutant melanocytes that
retain tyrosinase in the ER. Thapsigargin, an ER stressor, activated all pathways
in wildtype melanocytes, triggering Caspase 12-mediated apoptosis at toxic doses.
Albino melanocytes expressing mutant tyrosinase showed evidence of ER stress with
increased Ire1 expression, but the downstream effector, Xbp1, was not activated
even following thapsigargin treatment. Attenuation of Ire1 signaling was
recapitulated in wildtype melanocytes treated with thapsigargin for 8 days, with 
diminished Xbp1 activation observed after 4 days. Atf6 was also activated in
albino melanocytes, with no response to thapsigargin, while the Perk pathway was 
not activated and thapsigargin treatment elicited robust expression of the
downstream effector CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein. Thus,
melanocytes adapt to ER stress by attenuating two UPR pathways.

PMCID: PMC2939946
PMID: 20444203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell Res. 2010 May;20(5):506-7. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.61.

Survive an innate immune response through XBP1.

Kaser A(1), Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstrasse 35,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. arthur.kaser@i-med.ac.at

Comment on
    Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1092-5.

PMCID: PMC4592167
PMID: 20436510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Lett. 2010 Oct 1;296(1):123-31. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.04.002.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress contributes to vitamin E succinate-induced apoptosis
in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells.

Huang X(1), Zhang Z, Jia L, Zhao Y, Zhang X, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

Vitamin E succinate (RRR-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, VES), an efficient inducer
of apoptosis, acts as a potent agent for cancer therapy. However, the mechanism
by which VES mediates the effects are not yet fully understood. Here we studied
the effect of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and unfolded protein response
(UPR) on VES-induced apoptosis of SGC-7901 human gastric cancer cells. VES caused
cytological changes typical of apoptosis, increased ER dilation and cytosolic
Ca(2+) concentration. And endogenous ER stress markers, GRP78 and GRP94 were
transcriptionally and translationally altered. In response to VES, induction of
CHOP, activation of caspase-4 and JNK were observed. Furthermore, VES also
triggered activation of UPR components, including RNA-dependent protein kinase
(PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6),
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1), and ATF4 in a concentration- and time-dependent
manner. Consequently, our results suggest that VES-induced apoptosis is coupled
to ER stress and UPR activation in SGC-7901 human gastric cancer cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20435408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(14):7369-77. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02310-09. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Semliki forest virus-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress accelerates apoptotic
death of mammalian cells.

Barry G(1), Fragkoudis R, Ferguson MC, Lulla A, Merits A, Kohl A, Fazakerley JK.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, College of Medicine & Veterinary Medicine, University of
Edinburgh, Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1QH, United Kingdom.

The alphavirus Semliki Forest virus (SFV) and its derived vectors induce
apoptosis in mammalian cells. Here, we show that apoptosis is associated with the
loss of mitochondrial membrane potential followed by the activation of caspase-3,
caspase-8, and caspase-9. Cell death can be partially suppressed by treatment
with the pan-caspase inhibitor zVAD-fmk. To determine the role of SFV structural 
proteins in cell death, the temporal course of cell death was compared in cells
infected with SFV and cells infected with SFV virus replicon particles (VRPs)
lacking some or all of the virus structural genes. In the absence of virus
structural proteins, cell death was delayed. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress response, as determined by the splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) 
transcripts and the activation of caspase-12, was activated in virus-infected
cells but not in VRP (SFV lacking structural genes)-infected cells. The
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) was upregulated by both virus and VRP infections.
The virus envelope proteins but not the virus capsid protein triggered ER stress.
These results demonstrate that in NIH 3T3 cells, SFV envelope glycoproteins
trigger the unfolded protein response of the ER and accelerate apoptotic cell
death initiated by virus replicase activity.

PMCID: PMC2898233
PMID: 20427528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Blood. 2010 Jul 15;116(2):250-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-263236. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

XBP1s levels are implicated in the biology and outcome of myeloma mediating
different clinical outcomes to thalidomide-based treatments.

Bagratuni T(1), Wu P, Gonzalez de Castro D, Davenport EL, Dickens NJ, Walker BA, 
Boyd K, Johnson DC, Gregory W, Morgan GJ, Davies FE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haemato-Oncology, The Institute of Cancer Research, 15 Cotswold
Road, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Immunoglobulin production by myeloma plasma cells depends on the unfolded protein
response for protein production and folding. Recent studies have highlighted the 
importance of IRE1alpha and X box binding protein 1 (XBP1), key members of this
pathway, in normal B-plasma cell development. We have determined the gene
expression levels of IRE1alpha, XBP1, XBP1UNSPLICED (XBP1u), and XBP1SPLICED
(XBP1s) in a series of patients with myeloma and correlated findings with
clinical outcome. We show that IRE1alpha and XBP1 are highly expressed and that
patients with low XBP1s/u ratios have a significantly better overall survival.
XBP1s is an independent prognostic marker and can be used with beta2
microglobulin and t(4;14) to identify a group of patients with a poor outcome.
Furthermore, we show the beneficial therapeutic effects of thalidomide in
patients with low XBP1s/u ratios. This study highlights the importance of XBP1 in
myeloma and its significance as an independent prognostic marker and as a
predictor of thalidomide response.

PMID: 20421453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):291-304. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.04.001.

Flavonol activation defines an unanticipated ligand-binding site in the
kinase-RNase domain of IRE1.

Wiseman RL(1), Zhang Y, Lee KP, Harding HP, Haynes CM, Price J, Sicheri F, Ron D.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):161-3.

Signaling in the most conserved branch of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) unfolded
protein response (UPR) is initiated by sequence-specific cleavage of the
HAC1/XBP1 mRNA by the ER stress-induced kinase-endonuclease IRE1. We have
discovered that the flavonol quercetin activates yeast IRE1's RNase and
potentiates activation by ADP, a natural activating ligand that engages the IRE1 
nucleotide-binding cleft. Enzyme kinetics and the structure of a cocrystal of
IRE1 complexed with ADP and quercetin reveal engagement by quercetin of an
unanticipated ligand-binding pocket at the dimer interface of IRE1's kinase
extension nuclease (KEN) domain. Analytical ultracentrifugation and crosslinking 
studies support the preeminence of enhanced dimer formation in quercetin's
mechanism of action. These findings hint at the existence of endogenous
cytoplasmic ligands that may function alongside stress signals from the ER lumen 
to modulate IRE1 activity and at the potential for the development of drugs that 
modify UPR signaling from this unanticipated site.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2864793
PMID: 20417606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biochem J. 2010 Jul 1;429(1):95-102. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100193.

SUMO modification regulates the transcriptional activity of XBP1.

Chen H(1), Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
hc455@cornell.edu

The UPR (unfolded protein response), a cellular defence mechanism against
misfolded protein accumulation in the ER (endoplasmic reticulum), is associated
with many human diseases such as aging, cancer and diabetes. XBP1 (X-box-binding 
protein 1), a key transcription factor of the UPR, is critical in maintaining ER 
homoeostasis. Nevertheless, the mechanism by which XBP1 transcriptional activity 
is regulated remains unexplored. In the present study we show that XBP1s, the
active spliced form of XBP1 protein, is SUMOylated, mainly by PIAS2 [protein
inhibitor of activated STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) 2]
at two lysine residues located in the C-terminal transactivation domain. Ablation
of these SUMOylation events significantly enhances the transcriptional activity
of XBP1s towards UPR target genes. Thus our results reveal an unexpected role for
SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) in the regulation of UPR activation and
ER homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2964647
PMID: 20408817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem J. 2010 Jul 1;429(1):215-24. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100286.

Temporal regulation of Cat-1 (cationic amino acid transporter-1) gene
transcription during endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Huang CC(1), Li Y, Lopez AB, Chiang CM, Kaufman RJ, Snider MD, Hatzoglou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 044106, USA.

Expression of the Cat-1 gene (cationic amino acid transporter-1) is induced in
proliferating cells and in response to a variety of stress conditions. The
expression of the gene is mediated via a TATA-less promoter. In the present study
we show that an Sp1 (specificity protein 1)-binding site within a GC-rich region 
of the Cat-1 gene controls its basal expression and is important for induction of
the gene during the UPR (unfolded protein response). We have shown previously
that induction of Cat-1 gene expression during the UPR requires phosphorylation
of the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha (eukaryotic initiation factor
2alpha) by PERK (protein-kinase-receptor-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase), one 
of the signalling pathways activated during the UPR. This leads to increased
translation of the transcription factor ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4).
We also show that a second signalling pathway is required for sustained
transcriptional induction of the Cat-1 gene during the UPR, namely activation of 
IRE1 (inositol-requiring enzyme 1) leading to alternative splicing of the mRNA
for the transcription factor XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1). The resulting XBP1s 
(spliced XBP1) can bind to an ERSE
(endoplasmic-reticulum-stress-response-element), ERSE-II-like, that was
identified within the Cat-1 promoter. Surprisingly, eIF2alpha phosphorylation is 
required for accumulation of XBP1s. We propose that the signalling via
phosphorylated eIF2alpha is required for maximum induction of Cat-1 transcription
during the UPR by inducing the accumulation of both ATF4 and XBP1s.

PMCID: PMC3684439
PMID: 20408811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):365-7. doi: 10.1038/ni0510-365.

Unfolding new roles for XBP1 in immunity.

Engel A, Barton GM.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):411-8.

PMID: 20404847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cell Tissue Res. 2010 May;340(2):335-46. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-0958-8. Epub
2010 Apr 6.

Endoplasmic reticulum accumulation of Kir6.2 without activation of ER stress
response in islet cells from adult Sur1 knockout mice.

Marhfour I(1), Jonas JC, Marchandise J, Lefevre A, Rahier J, Sempoux C, Guiot Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Tour Rosalind Franklin, 10 Avenue Hippocrate, 1200,
Brussels, Belgium.

Trafficking of pancreatic K(ATP) channels to the plasma membrane critically
depends on masking the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention signals of the SUR1
and Kir6.2 subunits upon their proper assembly into functional hetero-octamers.
When expressed in the absence of the partner protein, each subunit might
accumulate in the ER and trigger beta-cell ER stress and oxidative stress. To
test this hypothesis, Kir6.2 localisation, ER ultra-structure and ER-stress- and 
oxidative-stress-response gene mRNA levels were evaluated in pancreatic endocrine
cells from adult wild-type (WT) and Sur1 knockout (Sur1 ( -/- )) mice. As
previously reported, Kir6.2 was mainly expressed on secretory granules and at the
plasma membrane of WT islet cells. In contrast, like the ER chaperone
calreticulin, Kir6.2 was primarily localised in the rough endoplasmic reticulum
(RER) of Sur1 ( -/- ) islet cells. ER retention of Kir6.2 was demonstrated
(electron microscopy) by a significant increase in the length and Kir6.2 density 
of RER in Sur1 ( -/- ) vs WT islet cells. Despite Kir6.2 retention in RER, Xbp1
mRNA splicing and mRNA levels of preproinsulin and ER-stress-response genes Bip, 
Edem and Gadd153 were similar in WT and Sur1 ( -/- ) islets. However, mRNA levels
of the antioxidant enzymes Sod1, Sod2, Gpx2 and catalase were significantly
up-regulated in Sur1 ( -/- ) islets. Sequestration of Kir6.2 in RER of Sur1 ( -/-
) islet cells is thus associated with an increase in RER length and mild
oxidative stress without activation of the classical ER stress response.

PMID: 20383647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;16(7-8):254-61. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2009.00184. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

Effect of estrogen on mitochondrial function and intracellular stress markers in 
rat liver and kidney following trauma-hemorrhagic shock and prolonged
hypotension.

Kozlov AV(1), Duvigneau JC, Hyatt TC, Raju R, Behling T, Hartl RT, Staniek K,
Miller I, Gregor W, Redl H, Chaudry IH.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Experimental and Clinical Traumatology in the
AUVA, Vienna, Austria.

Trauma-hemorrhage (T-H) is known to impair tissue perfusion, leading to tissue
hypoxia, and thus affecting mitochondria, the organelles with the highest oxygen 
demand. In a model of T-H and prolonged hypotension without fluid resuscitation, 
administration of a small volume of 17beta-estradiol (E2), but not vehicle,
prolonged the survival of rats for 3 h, even in the absence of fluid
resuscitation. The main finding of this study is that T-H followed by prolonged
hypotension significantly affects mitochondrial function, endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress markers and free iron levels, and that E2 ameliorated all these
changes. All of these changes were observed in the liver but not in the kidney.
The sensitivity of mitochondrial respiration to exogenous cytochrome c can
reflect increased permeability of the outer mitochondrial membrane for cytochrome
c. Increased levels of free iron are indicative of oxidative stress, but neither 
oxidative nor nitrosylative stress markers changed. The spliced isoform of XBP1
mRNA (an early marker of ER stress) and the expression of C/EBP homologous
protein (CHOP) (a protein regulating ER stress-induced apoptosis) were elevated
in T-H animals but remained unchanged if T-H rats received E2. Both the
prevention of elevated sensitivity of mitochondrial respiration to cytochrome c
and a decrease in ER stress by E2 maintain functional integrity of the liver and 
may help the organ during prolonged hypotension and following resuscitation. A
decrease in free iron levels by E2 is more relevant for resuscitation, often
accompanied by oxidative stress reaction. Thus, E2 appears to be a novel hormonal
adjunct that prolongs permissive hypotension during lengthy transportation of the
injured patient between the injury site and the hospital in both civilian and
military injuries.

PMCID: PMC2896467
PMID: 20379612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):411-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.1857. Epub 2010 Mar 28.

TLR activation of the transcription factor XBP1 regulates innate immune responses
in macrophages.

Martinon F(1), Chen X, Lee AH, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):365-7.

Sensors of pathogens, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs), detect microbes to
activate transcriptional programs that orchestrate adaptive responses to specific
insults. Here we report that TLR4 and TLR2 specifically activated the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress sensor kinase IRE1alpha and its downstream target, the
transcription factor XBP1. Previously described ER-stress target genes of XBP1
were not induced by TLR signaling. Instead, TLR-activated XBP1 was required for
optimal and sustained production of proinflammatory cytokines in macrophages.
Consistent with that finding, activation of IRE1alpha by ER stress acted in
synergy with TLR activation for cytokine production. Moreover, XBP1 deficiency
resulted in a much greater bacterial burden in mice infected with the
TLR2-activating human intracellular pathogen Francisella tularensis. Our findings
identify an unsuspected critical function for XBP1 in mammalian host defenses.

PMCID: PMC3113706
PMID: 20351694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Diabetologia. 2010 Jun;53(6):1120-30. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1699-7. Epub 2010
Mar 29.

Sustained production of spliced X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) induces pancreatic
beta cell dysfunction and apoptosis.

Allagnat F(1), Christulia F, Ortis F, Pirot P, Lortz S, Lenzen S, Eizirik DL,
Cardozo AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Route de
Lennik, 808, CP 618, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pro-inflammatory cytokines involved in the pathogenesis of type 
1 diabetes deplete endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca2+ stores, leading to ER-stress
and beta cell apoptosis. However, the cytokine-induced ER-stress response in beta
cells is atypical and characterised by induction of the pro-apoptotic PKR-like ER
kinase (PERK)-C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) branch of the unfolded protein
response, but defective X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing and activating
transcription factor 6 activation. The purpose of this study was to overexpress
spliced/active Xbp1 (XBP1s) to increase beta cell resistance to cytokine-induced 
ER-stress and apoptosis.
METHODS: Xbp1s was overexpressed using adenoviruses and knocked down using small 
interference RNA in rat islet cells. In selected experiments, Xbp1 was also
knocked down in FACS-purified rat beta cells and rat fibroblasts. Expression and 
production of XBP1s and key downstream genes and proteins was measured and beta
cell function and viability were evaluated.
RESULTS: Adenoviral-mediated overproduction of Xbp1s resulted in increased XBP1
activity and induction of several XBP1s target genes. Surprisingly, XBP1s
overexpression impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and increased beta
cell apoptosis, whereas it protected fibroblasts against cell death induced by
ER-stress. mRNA expression of Pdx1 and Mafa was inhibited in cells overproducing 
XBP1s, leading to decreased insulin expression. XBP1s knockdown partially
restored cytokine/ER-stress-driven insulin and Pdx1 inhibition but had no effect 
on cytokine-induced ER-stress and apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: XBP1 has a distinct inhibitory role in beta cell as
compared with other cell types. Prolonged XBP1s production hampers beta cell
function via inhibition of insulin, Pdx1 and Mafa expression, eventually leading 
to beta cell apoptosis.

PMID: 20349222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cell Cycle. 2010 Apr 1;9(7):1399-410. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Novel combination of celecoxib and proteasome inhibitor MG132 provides
synergistic antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects in human liver tumor
cells.

Cusimano A(1), Azzolina A, Iovanna JL, Bachvarov D, McCubrey JA, D'Alessandro N, 
Montalto G, Cervello M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology Alberto Monroy, Palermo,
Italy.

Molecular targeted therapy has shown promise as a treatment for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Celecoxib (Celebrex®) exhibits antitumor effects 
in human HCC cells, and its mechanism of action is mediated either by its ability
to inhibit cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) or by a number of various other COX-2
independent effects. Proteasome inhibitors (PIs) can exert cell growth inhibitory
and apoptotic effects in different tumor cell types, including HCC cells. The
present study examined the interaction between celecoxib and the PI MG132 in two 
human liver tumor cell lines HepG2 and HA22T/VGH. Our data showed that each
inhibitor reduced proliferation and induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner 
in both cell lines. Moreover, the combination of celecoxib with MG132
synergistically inhibited cell viability and increased apoptosis, as documented
by caspase 3 and 7 activation, PARP cleavage, and down-regulation of Bcl-2.
Celecoxib and MG132, both alone and synergistically in combination, induced
expression of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress genes ATF4, CHOP, TRB3 and
promoted the splicing of XBP1 mRNA. Knockdown of TRB3 mRNA expression by small
interference RNA significantly decreased combination-induced cell death in
HA22T/VGH cells, whereas it increased combination-induced cell death in HepG2
cells, suggesting that activation of the ER stress response might have either a
detrimental or a protective role in liver tumor cell survival. In conclusion, our
data indicate that combination treatment with celecoxib and MG132 resulted in
synergistic antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects against liver cancer
cells, providing a rational basis for the clinical use of this combination in the
treatment of liver cancer.

PMID: 20305374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Neurosci. 2010 Mar 17;30(11):3924-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2422-09.2010.

Loss of HRD1-mediated protein degradation causes amyloid precursor protein
accumulation and amyloid-beta generation.

Kaneko M(1), Koike H, Saito R, Kitamura Y, Okuma Y, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba
Institute of Science, Choshi, Chiba 288-0025, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) is a system by which proteins
accumulated in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are retrotranslocated to the
cytosol and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. HRD1 is expressed in
brain neurons and acts as an ERAD ubiquitin ligase. Amyloid precursor protein
(APP) is processed into amyloid-beta peptides (Abetas) that form plaque deposits 
in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. We found significantly
decreased HRD1 protein levels in the cerebral cortex of AD patients. HRD1
colocalized with APP in brain neurons and interacted with APP through the
proline-rich region of HRD1. HRD1 promoted APP ubiquitination and degradation,
resulting in decreased generation of Abeta. Furthermore, suppression of HRD1
expression induced APP accumulation that led to increased production of Abeta
associated with ER stress. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that suppression
of HRD1 expression inhibited APP aggresome formation, resulting in apoptosis. In 
addition, we found that the ATF6- and XBP1-induced upregulation of ERAD led to
APP degradation and reduced Abeta production. These results suggest that the
breakdown of HRD1-mediated ERAD causes Abeta generation and ER stress, possibly
linked to AD.

PMID: 20237263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biomol Screen. 2010 Apr;15(4):406-17. doi: 10.1177/1087057110363823. Epub 2010 
Mar 17.

AlphaScreen-based characterization of the bifunctional kinase/RNase IRE1alpha: a 
novel and atypical drug target.

Bouchecareilh M(1), Caruso ME, Roby P, Parent S, Rouleau N, Taouji S, Pluquet O, 
Bossé R, Moenner M, Chevet E.

Author information: 
(1)1Inserm, U889, Avenir, Bordeaux, France.

Assay technologies that were originally developed for high-throughput screening
(HTS) have recently proven useful in drug discovery for activities located
upstream (target identification and validation) and downstream (ADMET) of HTS.
Here the authors investigated and characterized the biological properties of a
novel target, IRE1alpha, a bifunctional kinase/RNase stress sensor of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). They have developed a novel assay platform using the 
HTS technology AlphaScreen to monitor the dimerization/oligomerization and
phosphorylation properties of the cytosolic domain of IRE1alpha. They show in
vitro that dimerization/oligomerization of the cytosolic domain of IRE1
correlated with the autophosphorylation ability of this domain and its
endoribonuclease activity toward XBP1 mRNA. Using orthogonal in vitro and
cell-based approaches, the authors show that the results obtained using
AlphaScreen were biologically relevant. Preliminary characterization of assay
robustness indicates that both AlphaScreen assays should be useful in HTS for the
identification of IRE1 activity modulators.

PMID: 20237204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Nutr. 2010 May;140(5):879-84. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.119883. Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Rapamycin inhibits postprandial-mediated X-box-binding protein-1 splicing in rat 
liver.

Pfaffenbach KT(1), Nivala AM, Reese L, Ellis F, Wang D, Wei Y, Pagliassotti MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

Recent studies have linked the unfolded protein response (UPR), in particular the
inositol-requiring, endoplasmic reticulum-to-nucleus signaling protein 1alpha
(IRE1alpha)-X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) branch of the UPR, to the regulation
of lipogenesis and hepatic steatosis. In this study, we examined the hypothesis
that the postprandial environment can activate the IRE1alpha-XBP1 branch of the
UPR in the liver via a mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)-dependent
mechanism. Toward this end, rats were fed a high-carbohydrate diet (68% of energy
from corn starch) for 3 h in the absence or presence of rapamycin
(intraperitoneal injection of 1 mg/kg) and liver tissue was taken 1 or 7 h
following the feeding period. Feeding activated the mTORC1 pathway and IRE1alpha,
induced XBP1 splicing, and increased the expression of XBP1 target genes and
lipogenic genes in the liver. The presence of rapamycin prevented the activation 
of mTORC1 and IRE1alpha, XBP1 splicing, and the increased expression of XBP1
target genes and lipogenic genes. Rapamycin also prevented the feeding-induced
increase in nuclear sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c. These data
suggest that the postprandial environment promotes activation of the IRE1-XBP1
branch of the UPR in the liver. This activation appears to be mediated in part by
mTORC1.

PMCID: PMC2855259
PMID: 20237065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Comp Neurol. 2010 May 15;518(10):1825-36. doi: 10.1002/cne.22305.

Chemical stress induces the unfolded protein response in olfactory sensory
neurons.

Sammeta N(1), McClintock TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536-0298, USA.

More than any other neuron, olfactory sensory neurons are exposed to
environmental insults. Surprisingly, their only documented response to damaging
stress is apoptosis and subsequent replacement by new neurons. However, they
expressed unfolded protein response genes, a transcriptionally regulated defense 
mechanism activated by many types of insults. The unfolded protein response
transcripts Xbp1, spliced Xbp1, Chop (Ddit3), and BiP (Hspa5) were decreased when
external access of stressors was reduced by blocking a nostril (naris occlusion).
These transcripts and Nrf2 (Nfe2l2) were increased by systemic application of
tunicamycin or the selective olfactotoxic chemical methimazole. Methimazole's
effects overcame naris occlusion, and the unfolded protein response was
independent of odor-evoked neuronal activity. Chemical stress is therefore a
major and chronic activator of the unfolded protein response in olfactory sensory
neurons. Stress-dependent repression of the antiapoptotic gene Bcl2 was absent,
however, suggesting a mechanism for disconnecting the UPR from apoptosis and
tolerating a chronic unfolded protein response. Environmental stressors also
affect both the sustentacular cells that support the neurons and the respiratory 
epithelia, because naris occlusion decreased expression of the xenobiotic
chemical transformation enzyme Cyp2a5 in sustentacular cells, and both naris
occlusion and methimazole altered the abundance of the antibacterial lectin Reg3g
in respiratory epithelia.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2918880
PMID: 20235094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Int J Oncol. 2010 Apr;36(4):1007-13.

Differential effects of resveratrol and novel resveratrol derivative, HS-1793, on
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis and Akt inactivation.

Um HJ(1), Bae JH, Park JW, Suh H, Jeong NY, Yoo YH, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Taegu
700-712, South Korea.

Since resveratrol (3,4',5 tri-hydroxystilbene), which has been shown to inhibit
multistage carcinogenesis, is not a potent cytotoxic compound, several studies
were undertaken to obtain synthetic analogues of resveratrol with potent
activity. We previously reported that a resveratrol derivative HS-1793 exhibits
stronger antitumor effects than resveratrol in several cancer cell types. The
present study was undertaken to reveal precise mechanism by which HS-1793 induces
cell death. The induction of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein
(CHOP) and glucose-regulated protein (GRP)-78, and ER stress-specific XBP1
splicing were found in HT29 human colon carcinoma cells treated with resveratrol.
Conversely, these manifestations were not observed in HT29 cells treated with
HS-1793. Inhibition of caspase-4 activity by z-LEVD-fmk significantly reduced the
induction of apoptosis by resveratrol but not by HS-1793. These findings suggest 
that HS-1793, contrary to resveratrol, does not induce ER stress-mediated
apoptosis. Importantly, we observed that HS-1793 but not resveratrol decreased
phosphorylated Akt level. We also demonstrated that HS-1793, compared to
resveratrol, exerted more effective apoptosis inducing activity in Akt-activated 
cells. Taken together, the stronger antitumor activity of HS-1793 originates, at 
least in part, from its ability for Akt inactivation.

PMID: 20198347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nature. 2010 Feb 25;463(7284):1092-5. doi: 10.1038/nature08762.

An essential role for XBP-1 in host protection against immune activation in C.
elegans.

Richardson CE(1), Kooistra T, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2010 May;20(5):506-7.

The detection and compensatory response to the accumulation of unfolded proteins 
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), termed the unfolded protein response (UPR),
represents a conserved cellular homeostatic mechanism with important roles in
normal development and in the pathogenesis of disease. The IRE1-XBP1/Hac1 pathway
is a major branch of the UPR that has been conserved from yeast to human. X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1) is required for the differentiation of the highly
secretory plasma cells of the mammalian adaptive immune system, but recent work
also points to reciprocal interactions between the UPR and other aspects of
immunity and inflammation. We have been studying innate immunity in the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans, having established a principal role for a conserved PMK-1
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in mediating resistance to
microbial pathogens. Here we show that during C. elegans development, XBP-1 has
an essential role in protecting the host during activation of innate immunity.
Activation of the PMK-1-mediated response to infection with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa induces the XBP-1-dependent UPR. Whereas a loss-of-function xbp-1
mutant develops normally in the presence of relatively non-pathogenic bacteria,
infection of the xbp-1 mutant with P. aeruginosa leads to disruption of ER
morphology and larval lethality. Unexpectedly, the larval lethality phenotype on 
pathogenic P. aeruginosa is suppressed by loss of PMK-1-mediated immunity.
Furthermore, hyperactivation of PMK-1 causes larval lethality in the xbp-1 mutant
even in the absence of pathogenic bacteria. Our data establish innate immunity as
a physiologically relevant inducer of ER stress during C. elegans development and
indicate that an ancient, conserved role for XBP-1 may be to protect the host
organism from the detrimental effects of mounting an innate immune response to
microbes.

PMCID: PMC2834299
PMID: 20182512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Aug 1;88(10):2135-45. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22379.

Modulation of rumpshaker phenotype with wild-type PLP/DM20 suggests several
pathogenic mechanisms.

Barrie JA(1), Montague P, Karim S, Kirkham D, Nave KA, Anderson TJ, Griffiths IR,
McLaughlin M.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Neurobiology Group, Institute of Comparative Medicine, University of
Glasgow, Bearsden, Glasgow, Scotland.

The rumpshaker mutation of the murine myelin proteolipid protein 1 (Plp1) gene
generates misfolded PLP/DM20 protein, resulting in dysmyelination, increased
oligodendrocyte apoptosis, and death prior to P40 when expressed on the C57 BL/6 
background. In this study, we used transgenic complementation to normalize the
levels of PLP/DM20 in myelin with wild-type protein to determine whether loss of 
normal PLP function or gain of toxic function is responsible for dysmyelination
in the rumpshaker. Restoring myelin PLP/DM20 levels extended the survival time to
at least P60, significantly reduced the density of apoptotic cells, increased
myelin volume, and restored normal periodicity of myelin. Biochemical analysis
found that several myelin proteins that are reduced in rumpshaker, including MAG,
CNP, and SirT2, are markedly elevated at peak myelination (P20) in the rumpshaker
transgenic mouse. Myelin basic protein, however, remained low at peak myelination
but was restored at P60 when myelin had matured and entered into a maintenance
phase. Markers of the unfolded protein response (UPR), BiP and XBP1, remained
activated with the introduction of wild-type PLP. These data demonstrate that
restoring wild-type PLP/DM20 levels in rumpshaker improves the phenotype and the 
integrity of myelin, but hypomyelination persists and stress pathways remain
activated. This suggests that both gain- and loss-of-function mechanisms are
involved in the pathogenesis of the rumpshaker.

PMID: 20175203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Jun;48(6):1280-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.02.004. Epub
2010 Feb 17.

X-box binding protein 1 regulates brain natriuretic peptide through a novel
AP1/CRE-like element in cardiomyocytes.

Sawada T(1), Minamino T, Fu HY, Asai M, Okuda K, Isomura T, Yamazaki S, Asano Y, 
Okada K, Tsukamoto O, Sanada S, Asanuma H, Asakura M, Takashima S, Kitakaze M,
Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is triggered to assist protein folding when
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function is impaired. Recent studies demonstrated that
ER stress can also induce cell-specific genes. In this study, we examined whether
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a major UPR-linked transcriptional factor,
regulates the expression of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) in cardiomyocytes. In
samples from failing human hearts, extensive splicing of XBP1 was observed along 
with increased expression of glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa (GRP78), a
target of spliced XBP1 (sXBP1), suggesting that the UPR was induced in heart
failure in humans. Interestingly, quantitative real-time PCR revealed a positive 
correlation between cardiac expression of GRP78 and BNP, leading us to test the
hypothesis that sXBP1 regulates BNP as well as GRP78 in cardiomyocytes. A
pharmacological ER stressor caused a dose-dependent increase in the expression of
sXBP1 and BNP by cultured cardiomyocytes. Short interfering RNA targeting XBP1
suppressed the induction of BNP expression by a pharmacological ER stressor or
norepinephrine, which was rescued by the adenovirus-mediated overexpression of
sXBP1. The promoter assay with overexpression of sXBP1 or norepinephrine showed
that the proximal AP1/CRE-like element in the promoter region of BNP was critical
for transcriptional regulation of BNP by sXBP1. Direct binding of sXBP1 to this
element was confirmed by the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. These findings 
suggest that ER stress observed in failing hearts regulates cardiac BNP
expression through a novel promoter region of the AP1/CRE-like element.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20170659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Diabetologia. 2010 May;53(5):955-65. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1676-1. Epub 2010
Feb 18.

Glucosamine-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress affects GLUT4 expression via
activating transcription factor 6 in rat and human skeletal muscle cells.

Raciti GA(1), Iadicicco C, Ulianich L, Vind BF, Gaster M, Andreozzi F, Longo M,
Teperino R, Ungaro P, Di Jeso B, Formisano P, Beguinot F, Miele C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di
Napoli Federico II, Via Sergio Pansini, 5, Naples 80131, Italy.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Glucosamine, generated during hyperglycaemia, causes insulin
resistance in different cells. Here we sought to evaluate the possible role of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in the induction of insulin resistance by
glucosamine in skeletal muscle cells.
METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR analysis, 2-deoxy-D: -glucose (2-DG) uptake and western
blot analysis were carried out in rat and human muscle cell lines.
RESULTS: In both rat and human myotubes, glucosamine treatment caused a
significant increase in the expression of the ER stress markers immunoglobulin
heavy chain-binding protein/glucose-regulated protein 78 kDa (BIP/GRP78 [also
known as HSPA5]), X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) and activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6). In addition, glucosamine impaired insulin-stimulated 2-DG uptake
in both rat and human myotubes. Interestingly, pretreatment of both rat and human
myotubes with the chemical chaperones 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA) or
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), completely prevented the effect of glucosamine
on both ER stress induction and insulin-induced glucose uptake. In both rat and
human myotubes, glucosamine treatment reduced mRNA and protein levels of the gene
encoding GLUT4 and mRNA levels of the main regulators of the gene encoding GLUT4 
(myocyte enhancer factor 2 a [MEF2A] and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha [PGC1alpha]). Again, PBA or TUDCA pretreatment 
prevented glucosamine-induced inhibition of GLUT4 (also known as SLC2A4), MEF2A
and PGC1alpha (also known as PPARGC1A). Finally, we showed that overproduction of
ATF6 is sufficient to inhibit the expression of genes GLUT4, MEF2A and PGC1alpha 
and that ATF6 silencing with a specific small interfering RNA is sufficient to
completely prevent glucosamine-induced inhibition of GLUT4, MEF2A and PGC1alpha
in skeletal muscle cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In this work we show that glucosamine-induced ER
stress causes insulin resistance in both human and rat myotubes and impairs GLUT4
production and insulin-induced glucose uptake via an ATF6-dependent decrease of
the GLUT4 regulators MEF2A and PGC1alpha.

PMID: 20165829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Yeast. 2010 Jul;27(7):443-52. doi: 10.1002/yea.1762.

Functional characterization of the unconventional splicing of Yarrowia lipolytica
HAC1 mRNA induced by unfolded protein response.

Oh MH(1), Cheon SA, Kang HA, Kim JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea.

In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the unfolded protein response (UPR)
involves the unconventional splicing of HAC1 mRNA, which is mediated by the
activated Ire1p transmembrane kinase/endonuclease. In this study, we isolated and
characterized a Yarrowia lipolytica HAC1 (YlHAC1) encoding a basic-leucine zipper
transcription factor. The null mutant strain of YlHAC1 (DeltaYlhac1) displayed a 
significantly increased sensitivity to dithiothreitol (DTT) and tunicamycin (TM),
along with a defect in hyphal growth, suggesting the essential function of YlHAC1
in UPR. The unconventional splicing of YlHAC1 mRNA occurred under the UPR
conditions induced by DTT or TM treatment. Unlike S. cerevisiae HAC1 mRNA with an
intron of 252 nt, YlHAC1 mRNA was shown to harbour a short intron of length 29
nt. The YlHAC1 mRNA harboured the nucleotides CAG, conserved at the intron
borders in the filamentous fungi hac1/hacA and mammalian XBP1, as well as a
conserved bipartite element within the 3' untranslated region. The expression of 
the spliced form of YlHAC1 mRNA in the wild-type andDeltaYlhac1 strains resulted 
in an increased resistance to DTT, thereby indicating that the spliced form is
translated into a functional YlHac1p.

PMID: 20162530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Acta Orthop. 2010 Apr;81(2):263-7. doi: 10.3109/17453671003587085.

Taurine protects against lung damage following limb ischemia reperfusion in the
rat by attenuating endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis.

Men X(1), Han S, Gao J, Cao G, Zhang L, Yu H, Lu H, Pu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, North China Coal Medical College, Tangshan,
China. xiulimen@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Acta Orthop. 2010 Oct;80(5):647.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: CHOP is a C/EBP family transcription factor involved in
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-mediated apoptosis. Several studies have
demonstrated that ischemia reperfusion results in apoptosis. Oxidative stress is 
central to ischemia reperfusion-induced apoptosis. Taurine protects against lung 
injury after limb ischemia reperfusion (LIR) through antioxidation. The effects
of taurine on ER stress-induced apoptosis have not been well explored, however.
We studied the effects of taurine in ER stress-induced apoptosis following LIR.
METHODS: Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 40) were randomized into 4 groups:
(1) a control group, (2) an LIR group, (3) an LIR group treated with taurine, and
(4) an LIR group treated with saline. Bilateral hindlimb ischemia was induced by 
application of a rubber band proximal to the level of the greater trochanters for
4 h. The treatment groups received either taurine (200 mg/kg as a 4% solution in 
0.9% saline) or saline alone prior to reperfusion. Following 4h of reperfusion,
blood oxygen was analyzed. The animals were killed and plasma and lung tissue
were harvested for evaluation.
RESULTS: Taurine statistically significantly attenuated lung injury following
LIR, as shown by reduced malondialdehyde content, reduced cell apoptosis, and
expression of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1), and transcriptional activators of the CHOP gene. Furthermore, partial
pressure values of oxygen in arterial blood and the activities of superoxide
dismutase and catalase were higher in the taurine pretreatment group than in the 
group of rats that underwent LIR alone.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that taurine attenuates endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced apoptosis in the lungs of rats after limb ischemia reperfusion.

PMCID: PMC2895349
PMID: 20148646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. FEBS Lett. 2010 Mar 5;584(5):1066-70. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.02.012. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Positive contribution of the IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway to placental expression of
CEA family genes.

Oikawa D(1), Akai R, Iwawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Initiative Research Unit, Advanced Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Inositol requiring enzyme-1alpha (IRE1alpha) is an ER-located transmembrane RNase
whose activation leads to the production of the transcription factor X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1). Recently, we showed that the IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway
plays an essential role in the placenta. However, details of its function remain 
unclear. To address this point, we searched for IRE1alpha- or XBP1-regulated
genes in the placenta, and identified the CEA family as a novel target of the
IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway. Moreover, PSG genes, which also belong to the CEA family,
were up-regulated by XBP1. We have therefore identified a new aspect of the
physiological function of the IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway in the placenta.

Copyright (c) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20146926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 17;11:39. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-39.

Gene expression profiles in Atlantic salmon adipose-derived stromo-vascular
fraction during differentiation into adipocytes.

Todorcevic M(1), Skugor S, Krasnov A, Ruyter B.

Author information: 
(1)Nofima, Norwegian Institute of Food, Fisheries and Aquaculture Research, As
NO-1430, Norway. marijana.todorcevic@nofima.no

BACKGROUND: Excessive fat deposition is one of the largest problems faced by
salmon aquaculture industries, leading to production losses due to high volume of
adipose tissue offal. In addition, increased lipid accumulation may impose
considerable stress on adipocytes leading to adipocyte activation and production 
and secretion of inflammatory mediators, as observed in mammals.
RESULTS: Microarray and qPCR analyses were performed to follow transcriptome
changes during adipogenesis in the primary culture of adipose stromo-vascular
fraction (aSVF) of Atlantic salmon. Cellular heterogeneity decreased by
confluence as evidenced by the down-regulation of markers of osteo/chondrogenic, 
myogenic, immune and vasculature lineages. Transgelin (TAGLN), a marker of the
multipotent pericyte, was prominently expressed around confluence while
adipogenic PPARgamma was up-regulated already in subconfluent cells.
Proliferative activity and subsequent cell cycle arrest were reflected in the
fluctuations of pro- and anti-mitotic regulators. Marked regulation of genes
involved in lipid and glucose metabolism and pathways producing NADPH and
glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) was seen during the terminal differentiation, also
characterised by diverse stress responses. Activation of the glutathione and
thioredoxin antioxidant systems and changes in the iron metabolism suggested the 
need for protection against oxidative stress. Signs of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) occured in parallel with the increased
lipid droplet (LD) formation and production of secretory proteins (adipsin,
visfatin). The UPR markers XBP1 and ATF6 were induced together with genes
involved in ubiquitin-proteasome and lysosomal proteolysis. Concurrently,
translation was suppressed as evidenced by the down-regulation of genes encoding 
elongation factors and components of the ribosomal machinery. Notably, expression
changes of a panel of genes that belong to different immune pathways were seen
throughout adipogenesis. The induction of AP1 (Jun, Fos), which is a master
regulator of stress responses, culminated by the end of adipogenesis, concurrent 
with the maximal observed lipid deposition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data point to an intimate relationship between metabolic
regulation and immune responses in white adipocytes of a cold-blooded vertebrate.
Stress imposed on adipocytes by LD formation and expansion is prominently
reflected in the ER compartment and the activated UPR response could have an
important role at visceral obesity in fish.

PMCID: PMC2824722
PMID: 20078893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Surg Res. 2011 Jun 15;168(2):262-71. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.10.002. Epub 2009 
Oct 24.

Exogenous norepinephrine correlates with macrophage endoplasmic reticulum stress 
response in association with XBP-1.

Yang C(1), Zhou JY, Zhong HJ, Wang HY, Yan J, Liu Q, Huang SN, Jiang JX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns, and Combined Injury, Research Institute
of Surgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The regulation of neuroendocrine hormones on the innate immune
responses remains controversial. This report investigated the effects of
exogenous norepinephrine with respect to macrophage function as well as to
elucidate the underlying mechanism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The adherence, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and cytokine
production of macrophages were observed in the presence of increasing
concentrations of norepinephrine. The expression of macrophage glucose response
protein 78 (GRP78), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), activating transcription
factor 6 (ATF6), and C-EBP homologous protein (CHOP) in macrophages was
determined. The lentiviral vector pGCL-GFP-siXBP1 was cloned by inserting the
annealed oligonucleotides encoding shRNAs specific for XBP1.
RESULTS: Norepinephrine exerted immunostimulatory effects on macrophage at low
concentrations, while partial effects were observed at high concentrations.
Low-dose norepinephrine induced an endoplasmic reticulum stress response, which
was correlated with the immunostimulatory activities of norepinephrine. Levels of
mRNA expression of XPB1, but not ATF6 or CHOP, was significantly increased only
by low concentrations of norepinephrine. Inhibition of XBP1 expression with siRNA
treatment significantly inhibited the immunostimulatory effects of low
concentrations of norepinephrine.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data convincingly indicated that norepinephrine exerted
immunostimulatory actions on macrophages at low concentrations, suggesting that
the underlying mechanisms are related to endoplasmic reticulum stress via XBP1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20070977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Microbiol. 2010 Jun;12(6):796-813. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2010.01434.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 11.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is induced and modulated by enterovirus 71.

Jheng JR(1), Lau KS, Tang WF, Wu MS, Horng JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chang Gung University, Kweishan, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Picornavirus infection alters the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane but it is
unclear whether this induces ER stress. Infection of rhabdomyosarcoma cells with 
enterovirus 71 (EV71), a picornavirus, caused overexpression of the ER-resident
chaperone proteins, BiP and calreticulin, and phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, but
infection with UV-inactivated virus did not, indicating that ER stress was
induced by viral replication and not by viral attachment or entry. Silencing
(si)RNA knockdown demonstrated that phosphorylation of eIF2alpha was dependent on
PKR: eIF2alpha phosphorylation was reduced by siPKR but not by siPERK. We
provided evidence showing that PERK is upstream of PKR and is thus able to
negatively regulate the PKR-eIF2alpha pathway. Pulse-chase experiments revealed
that EV71 infection inhibited translation and activation of ATF6. Expression of
BiP at the protein level was activated by a virus-dependent, ATF6-independent
mechanism. EV71 upregulated XBP1 mRNA level, but neither IRE1-mediated XBP1
splicing nor its active spliced protein was detected, and its downstream gene,
EDEM, was not activated. Epigenetic BiP overexpression alleviated EV71-induced ER
stress and reduced viral protein expression and replication. Our results suggest 
that EV71 infection induces ER stress but modifies the outcome to assist viral
replication.

PMID: 20070307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Br J Surg. 2010 Feb;97(2):281-93. doi: 10.1002/bjs.6820.

Corticosterone exerts immunostimulatory effects on macrophages via endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Zhou JY(1), Zhong HJ, Yang C, Yan J, Wang HY, Jiang JX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Research Institute 
of Surgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: : Glucocorticoids are the central effector hormones for the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. However, the effects of endogenous
glucocorticoids on the immune system are not understood completely.
METHODS: : Macrophage function (adherence, chemotaxis and cytokine production)
was assessed in the presence of increasing concentrations of corticosterone. The 
role of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in corticosterone immunoregulation was 
determined with thapsigargin and plasmid pGCL-GFP-siXBP1. Mifepristone was used
to determine the role of glucocorticoid receptor in the corticosterone-induced ER
stress response.
RESULTS: : Corticosterone exerted immunostimulatory effects on macrophage
function at low concentrations. No effects were observed at high concentrations
in the absence of immunological stimulation. Low-dose corticosterone induced ER
stress, which was correlated to the corticosterone immunostimulatory activities. 
Expression of X box-binding protein (XBP) 1, but not activating transcription
factor 6, was significantly increased at both mRNA and protein levels only in the
presence of low-dose corticosterone. Inhibition of XBP1 expression with small
interfering RNA significantly inhibited the corticosterone immunostimulatory
effects. In addition, pretreatment of macrophages with mifepristone significantly
inhibited the expression of glucose response protein 78 and XBP1 in macrophages
by low-dose corticosterone.
CONCLUSION: : At low concentrations, endogenous glucocorticoids exert
immunostimulatory actions on macrophages. The underlying mechanisms may be
correlated to ER stress via the glucocorticoid receptor, in which XBP1 plays an
important role.

Copyright (c) 2010 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20069608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jan;69 Suppl 1:i67-71. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.119388.

XBP1: the last two decades.

Glimcher LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, FXB 205, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
lglimche@hsph.harvard.edu

The transcription factor X box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) was isolated two decades 
ago in a search for regulators of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
gene expression. Many years of research finally revealed a protein with many
functions, none of them related to the MHC. This paper provided an overview of
what this multifunctional transcription factor actually does.

PMID: 19995749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Brain Res. 2010 Mar 4;1317:13-23. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.062. Epub 2010 
Jan 4.

Three weeks voluntary running wheel exercise increases endoplasmic reticulum
stress in the brain of mice.

Kim Y(1), Park M, Boghossian S, York DA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Nutrition and Department of Biology, Utah State
University, 4715 Old Main Hill, Logan, UT 84322, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a dynamic cellular mechanism for reducing 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ER stress occurs from a variety of causes such
as nutritional deprivation or over-nutrition, expression of misfolded or mutant
proteins and increased synthesis of secretory protein. Obesity induced by
over-nutrition has been associated with ER stress. Although exercise has a
beneficial effect in opposing the development of obesity and neurodegenerative
diseases, there have been no studies on the effect of exercise on ER stress in
the brain induced by over-nutrition. We have taken advantage of the substantial
individual differences in voluntary running activity among inbred C57BL/6 mice to
investigate the relation between ER stress within regions of the brain and
voluntary running activity in mice fed on either a low fat or high fat diet while
maintained individually in cages with running wheels. Mice were divided into
three groups depending on their voluntary running level and compared with a
sedentary group. ER stress was assayed by real-time PCR and Western blots of the 
UPR pathway markers Xbp1, PERK, eIF2alpha, Hspa5 and ATF6. Three weeks of HFD had
little effect on ER stress in the brain of the sedentary group compared to
animals fed the LFD. Higher voluntary running activity was associated with
increased ER stress in the hypothalamus, hippocampus and cortex. The responses
were largest in the hypothalamus. The increase in the UPR response in response to
exercise did not induce apoptotic signals and may thus contribute to the
protective effect of exercise in preventing neurodegenerative disease.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Immunol. 2010 Mar;47(6):1356-65. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.12.003. Epub 2009
Dec 30.

CHOP-independent apoptosis and pathway-selective induction of the UPR in
developing plasma cells.

Masciarelli S(1), Fra AM, Pengo N, Bertolotti M, Cenci S, Fagioli C, Ron D,
Hendershot LM, Sitia R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milano, Italy.

Upon antigen stimulation, B lymphocytes differentiate into antibody secreting
cells (ASC), most of which undergo apoptosis after a few days of intense Ig
production. Differentiation entails expansion of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
and requires XBP1 but not other elements of the unfolded protein response, like
PERK. Moreover, normal and malignant ASC are exquisitely sensitive to proteasome 
inhibitors, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here we analyze 
the role of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), a transcription factor mediating
apoptosis in many cell types that experience high levels of ER stress. CHOP is
transiently induced early upon B cell stimulation: covalent IgM aggregates form
more readily and IgM secretion is slower in chop(-/-) cells. Despite these subtle
changes, ASC differentiation and lifespan are normal in chop(-/-) mice. Unlike
fibroblasts and other cell types, chop(-/-) ASC are equally or slightly more
sensitive to proteasome inhibitors and ER stressors, implying tissue-specific
roles for CHOP in differentiation and stress.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2830287
PMID: 20044139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dig Dis. 2010;28(6):776-82. doi: 10.1159/000327212. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Alcohol abuse, endoplasmic reticulum stress and pancreatitis.

Pandol SJ(1), Gorelick FS, Gerloff A, Lugea A.

Author information: 
(1)Southern California Research Center for Alcoholic Liver Pancreatic Diseases
and Cirrhosis, UCLA Center for Excellence in Pancreatic Diseases, University of
California, and VA Greater Los Angeles Health Care System, Los Angeles, Calif.,
USA. Stephen.pandol@va.gov

Alcohol abuse is a common cause of both acute and chronic pancreatitis. There is 
a wide spectrum of pancreatic manifestations in heavy drinkers from no apparent
disease in most individuals to acute inflammatory and necrotizing pancreatitis in
a minority of individuals with some progressing to chronic pancreatitis
characterized by replacement of the gland by fibrosis and chronic inflammation.
Both smoking and African-American ethnicity are associated with increased risk of
alcoholic pancreatitis. In this review we describe how our recent studies
demonstrate that ethanol feeding in rodents causes oxidative stress in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of the digestive enzyme synthesizing acinar cell of
the exocrine pancreas. This ER stress is attenuated by a robust unfolded protein 
response (UPR) involving X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) in the acinar cell. When 
the UPR activation is prevented by genetic reduction in XBP1, ethanol feeding
causes significant pathological responses in the pancreas. These results suggest 
that the reason most individuals who drink alcohol heavily do not get significant
pancreatic disease is because the pancreas mounts an adaptive UPR to attenuate
the ER stress that ethanol causes. We hypothesize that disease in the pancreas
results when the UPR is insufficiently robust to alleviate the ER stress caused
by alcohol abuse.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3211518
PMID: 21525762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Virol J. 2009 Dec 29;6:231. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-231.

EBNA3C interacts with Gadd34 and counteracts the unfolded protein response.

Garrido JL(1), Maruo S, Takada K, Rosendorff A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, One Children's
Hospital Drive, 4401 Penn Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. jlg114@pitt.edu

EBNA3C is an EBV-encoded nuclear protein, essential for proliferation of EBV
infected B-lymphocytes. Using EBNA3C amino acids 365-545 in a yeast two hybrid
screen, we found an interaction with the Growth Arrest and DNA-damage protein,
Gadd34. When both proteins are overexpressed, Gadd34 can interact with EBNA3C in 
both nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. Amino acids 483-610 of Gadd34,
including the two PP1a interaction, and the HSV-1 ICPgamma34.5 homology domains, 
are required for the interaction. Furthermore, interaction is lost with a mutant 
of EBNA3C (509 DVIEVID 515-->AVIAVIA), that abolishes EBNA3C coactivation ability
as well as SUMO interaction1. In B-cells, Gadd34, and EBNA3C are present in a
complex with PP1a using microcystin sepharose affinity purification, Using a
lymphoblastoid cell line in which EBNA3C protein levels are conditional on
hydroxytamoxifen, surprisingly, we found that (i) EBNA3C maintains
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha at serine 51, and (ii) protects against ER stress
induced activation of the unfolded protein response as measured by XBP1 (u)
versus XBP1(s) protein expression and N-terminal ATF6 cleavage. In reporter
assays, overexpression of Gadd34 enhances EBNA3C's ability to co-activate EBNA2
activation of the LMP1 promoter. Collectively the data suggest that EBNA3C
interacts with Gadd34, activating the upstream component of the UPR (eIF2alpha
phosphorylation) while preventing downstream UPR events (XBP1 activation and ATF6
cleavage).

PMCID: PMC2805635
PMID: 20040105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;70(1):78-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2747. Epub 2009
Dec 22.

Imaging the unfolded protein response in primary tumors reveals microenvironments
with metabolic variations that predict tumor growth.

Spiotto MT(1), Banh A, Papandreou I, Cao H, Galvez MG, Gurtner GC, Denko NC, Le
QT, Koong AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305-5152, USA.

Cancer cells exist in harsh microenvironments that are governed by various
factors, including hypoxia and nutrient deprivation. These microenvironmental
stressors activate signaling pathways that affect cancer cell survival. While
others have previously measured microenvironmental stressors in tumors, it
remains difficult to detect the real-time activation of these downstream
signaling pathways in primary tumors. In this study, we developed transgenic mice
expressing an X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1)-luciferase construct that served as 
a reporter for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and as a downstream response for
the tumor microenvironment. Primary mammary tumors arising in these mice
exhibited luciferase activity in vivo. Multiple tumors arising in the same mouse 
had distinct XBP1-luciferase signatures, reflecting either higher or lower levels
of ER stress. Furthermore, variations in ER stress reflected metabolic and
hypoxic differences between tumors. Finally, XBP1-luciferase activity correlated 
with tumor growth rates. Visualizing distinct signaling pathways in primary
tumors reveals unique tumor microenvironments with distinct metabolic signatures 
that can predict for tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC2943832
PMID: 20028872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Neurochem Int. 2010 Jan;56(2):216-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.12.005. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

Homocysteine induces X-box-binding protein 1 splicing in the mice brain.

Hosoi T(1), Ogawa K, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

Increasing evidence has been suggested that hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor
of neurodegenerative diseases, although, the underlying mechanisms have not been 
elucidated. Here, we found peripheral application of homocysteine increases
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing in the several areas of the mice brain,
such as hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex. Time-course experiments indicated
that XBP1 splicing was observed from 2h, which was decreased thereafter. On the
other hand, we did not observe GRP78 or CHOP induction in homocysteine-treated
mice brain. As XBP1 is spliced in response to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
and ER stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CNS diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, homocysteine-induced XBP1 splicing
would be a key mechanism for such diseases.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20018221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Br J Pharmacol. 2010 Jan 1;159(2):428-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2009.00544.x. 
Epub 2009 Dec 15.

A unique modulator of endoplasmic reticulum stress-signalling pathways: the novel
pharmacological properties of amiloride in glial cells.

Hosoi T(1), Kume A, Otani K, Oba T, Ozawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Hiroshima University, Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Stress on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can trigger
rescuer responses such as the unfolded protein response (UPR). However,
pharmacological modulators of these ER-regulated stress responses are not well
understood. In the present study, we found that amiloride, a potassium-sparing
diuretic, has unique properties relating to such stress.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We treated mouse primary cultured glial cells with
amiloride, in the absence and presence of the ER stress-inducing reagents
tunicamycin (Tm) or dithiothreitol, and measured UPR and ER stress-induced cell
death. IRE1alpha phosphorylation, eIF2alpha phosphorylation, X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, glucose regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) expression by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting were used to assess 
UPR and lactate dehydrogenase activity was determined to measure ER
stress-induced cell death.
KEY RESULTS: Amiloride completely inhibited ER stress-induced activation of
IRE1alpha, an ER-localized stress sensor protein, splicing of XBP1, and
subsequent expression of GRP78 at the mRNA and protein levels. ER stress induces 
the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, leading to the expression of CHOP or an
attenuation of translation in cells. Surprisingly, treatment with amiloride alone
markedly promoted the phosphorylation but actually inhibited ER stress-induced
CHOP expression. Finally, we found that amiloride (200 microM) synergistically
enhanced ER stress-induced cell death, which was mediated through caspases. On
the other hand, a low dose of amiloride (20 microM) significantly prevented
Tm-induced cell death.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: These results suggest that amiloride can modulate
UPR. They also suggest amiloride to be an important pharmacological agent and
provide basic information for understanding and preventing ER stress-related
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2825364
PMID: 20015086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Diabetes. 2010 Mar;59(3):653-61. doi: 10.2337/db09-1091. Epub 2009 Dec 10.

Insulin gene mutations resulting in early-onset diabetes: marked differences in
clinical presentation, metabolic status, and pathogenic effect through
endoplasmic reticulum retention.

Meur G(1), Simon A, Harun N, Virally M, Dechaume A, Bonnefond A, Fetita S,
Tarasov AI, Guillausseau PJ, Boesgaard TW, Pedersen O, Hansen T, Polak M, Gautier
JF, Froguel P, Rutter GA, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell Biology, Division of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Heterozygous mutations in the human preproinsulin (INS) gene are a
cause of nonsyndromic neonatal or early-infancy diabetes. Here, we sought to
identify INS mutations associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) or nonautoimmune diabetes in mid-adult life, and to explore the molecular 
mechanisms involved.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The INS gene was sequenced in 16 French probands
with unexplained MODY, 95 patients with nonautoimmune early-onset diabetes
(diagnosed at <35 years) and 292 normoglycemic control subjects of French origin.
Three identified insulin mutants were generated by site-directed mutagenesis of
cDNA encoding a preproinsulin-green fluorescent protein (GFP) (C-peptide)
chimera. Intracellular targeting was assessed in clonal beta-cells by
immunocytochemistry and proinsulin secretion, by radioimmunoassay. Spliced XBP1
and C/EBP homologous protein were quantitated by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: A novel coding mutation, L30M, potentially affecting insulin
multimerization, was identified in five diabetic individuals (diabetes onset
17-36 years) in a single family. L30M preproinsulin-GFP fluorescence largely
associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in MIN6 beta-cells, and ER exit
was inhibited by approximately 50%. Two additional mutants, R55C (at the B/C
junction) and R6H (in the signal peptide), were normally targeted to secretory
granules, but nonetheless caused substantial ER stress.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe three INS mutations cosegregating with early-onset
diabetes whose clinical presentation is compatible with MODY. These led to the
production of (pre)proinsulin molecules with markedly different trafficking
properties and effects on ER stress, demonstrating a range of molecular defects
in the beta-cell.

PMCID: PMC2828668
PMID: 20007936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Feb 15;109(3):468-77. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22423.

All-trans-retinoic acid intensifies endoplasmic reticulum stress in
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V repressed human hepatocarcinoma cells by
perturbing homocysteine metabolism.

Xu YY(1), Guan DY, Yang M, Wang H, Shen ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, 130 Dongan Road, Shanghai 200032, China.

We previously reported that all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) induced apoptosis in
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GnT-V) repressed human hepatocarcinoma 7721
(GnT-V-AS/7721) cells via endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. In addition to
confirming these findings, we further found that ATRA repressed the expression of
betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase (BHMT) and cystathionine-beta-synthase
(CBS), which are key enzymes that are involved in homocysteine metabolism,
increased the level of intracellular homocysteine, and decreased the glutathione 
(GSH) level in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells. To investigate the effect of ATRA on
homocysteine metabolism, cells were challenged with exogenous homocysteine. In
GnT-V-AS/7721 cells with ATRA treatment, a significant elevation of intracellular
homocysteine levels suggests that ATRA perturbs homocysteine metabolism in
GnT-V-AS/7721 cells and, therefore, sensitizes the cells to homocysteine-induced 
ER stress. An obvious increase in the levels of GRP78/Bip protein and spliced
XBP1 mRNA were observed. Furthermore, we observed that ATRA blunted the
homocysteine-induced increase of GSH only in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells. These results
demonstrate that ATRA intensifies ER stress and induces apoptosis in
GnT-V-AS/7721 cells by disturbing homocysteine metabolism through the
down-regulation of CBS and BHMT, depleting the cellular GSH and, in turn,
altering the cellular redox status. In addition, we showed that ATRA did not
trigger ER stress, induce apoptosis, or affect homocysteine metabolism in L02
cells, which is a cell type that is derived from normal liver tissue. These
results provide support for the hypothesis that ATRA is an anticancer agent.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19960509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Gut. 2010 Mar;59(3):365-72. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.198903. Epub 2009 Nov 30.

Pancreatitis-associated chymotrypsinogen C (CTRC) mutant elicits endoplasmic
reticulum stress in pancreatic acinar cells.

Szmola R(1), Sahin-Tóth M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Boston University, Henry M Goldman
School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic pancreatitis is a progressive inflammatory disorder of the
pancreas characterised by permanent destruction of acinar cells. Mutations in the
chymotrypsinogen C (CTRC) gene have been linked to the development of chronic
pancreatitis. The aim of the present study was to explore whether CTRC mutants
induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in pancreatic acinar cells.
DESIGN: Dexamethasone-differentiated AR42J rat acinar cells and freshly isolated 
mouse acini were transfected with recombinant adenovirus carrying wild-type CTRC 
or the p.A73T pancreatitis-associated mutant. ER stress markers were assessed by 
reverse transcription-PCR and western blotting. Apoptosis was characterised by
caspase-3/7 activity and the TUNEL assay.
RESULTS: Acinar cells transfected with the p.A73T mutant, but not those with
wild-type CTRC, developed significant ER stress as judged by elevated mRNA and
protein levels of the ER chaperone immunoglobulin-binding protein (BiP),
increased splicing of the X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA and marked
induction of the transcription factor C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP), a mediator
of ER stress-associated apoptosis. Consistent with higher CHOP expression, AR42J 
cells expressing the p.A73T mutant became detached over time and showed
considerably increased caspase-3/7 activity and TUNEL staining.
CONCLUSIONS: Pancreatitis-associated CTRC mutations can markedly increase the
propensity of chymotrypsinogen C to elicit ER stress in pancreatic acinar cells. 
Thus, carriers of CTRC mutations may be at a higher risk of developing ER stress 
in the exocrine pancreas, which may contribute to parenchymal damage through
acinar cell apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2848392
PMID: 19951900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 4;29(9):1329-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.425. Epub 2009 Nov 30.

Mutant p53 reactivation by PRIMA-1MET induces multiple signaling pathways
converging on apoptosis.

Lambert JM(1), Moshfegh A, Hainaut P, Wiman KG, Bykov VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The low molecular weight compound PRIMA-1(MET) reactivates mutant p53 and
triggers mutant p53-dependent apoptosis in human tumor cells. We investigated the
effect of PRIMA-1(MET) on global gene expression using microarray analysis of
Saos-2 cells expressing His273 mutant p53 and parental p53 null Saos-2 cells.
PRIMA-1(MET) affected transcription of a significantly larger number of genes in 
the mutant p53-expressing cells compared to the p53 null cells. Genes affected by
PRIMA-1(MET) in a mutant p53-dependent manner include the cell-cycle regulators
GADD45B and 14-3-3gamma and the pro-apoptotic Noxa. Several of the affected genes
are known p53 target genes and/or contain p53 DNA-binding motifs. We also found
mutant p53-dependent disruption of the cytoskeleton, as well as transcriptional
activation of the XBP1 gene and cleavage of its mRNA, a marker for endoplasmic
reticulum stress. Our data show that PRIMA-1(MET) induces apoptosis through
multiple transcription-dependent and -independent pathways. Such integral
engagement of multiple pathways leading to apoptosis is consistent with
restoration of wild-type properties to mutant p53 and is likely to reduce the
risk of drug resistance development in clinical applications of PRIMA-1(MET).

PMID: 19946333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 11;4(11):e7719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007719.

Oxidative stress impairs the heat stress response and delays unfolded protein
recovery.

Adachi M(1), Liu Y, Fujii K, Calderwood SK, Nakai A, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology and Molecular Diagnosis, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. adachi@sapmed.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Environmental changes, air pollution and ozone depletion are
increasing oxidative stress, and global warming threatens health by heat stress. 
We now face a high risk of simultaneous exposure to heat and oxidative stress.
However, there have been few studies investigating their combined adverse effects
on cell viability.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Pretreatment of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) specifically and
highly sensitized cells to heat stress, and enhanced loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential. H(2)O(2) exposure impaired the HSP40/HSP70 induction as heat 
shock response (HSR) and the unfolded protein recovery, and enhanced eIF2alpha
phosphorylation and/or XBP1 splicing, land marks of ER stress. These
H(2)O(2)-mediated effects mimicked enhanced heat sensitivity in HSF1 knockdown or
knockout cells. Importantly, thermal preconditioning blocked H(2)O(2)-mediated
inhibitory effects on refolding activity and rescued HSF1 +/+ MEFs, but neither
blocked the effects nor rescued HSF1 -/- MEFs. These data strongly suggest that
inhibition of HSR and refolding activity is crucial for H(2)O(2)-mediated
enhanced heat sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: H(2)O(2) blocks HSR and refolding activity under heat stress,
thereby leading to insufficient quality control and enhancing ER stress. These
uncontrolled stress responses may enhance cell death. Our data thus highlight
oxidative stress as a crucial factor affecting heat tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2777389
PMID: 19936221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 15;183(12):7661-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803783.

B7-1/2 (CD80/CD86) direct signaling to B cells enhances IgG secretion.

Rau FC(1), Dieter J, Luo Z, Priest SO, Baumgarth N.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA
95616, USA.

B cell responses are regulated by Ag recognition, costimulatory signals provided 
by interaction with helper T cells, and by innate signals. We recently provided
evidence for a link between the effects of innate and costimulatory signals on B 
cells during influenza virus infection, by demonstrating that most B cells in the
regional lymph nodes of the respiratory tract enhance surface expression of the
costimulator B7-2 (CD86) within 24-48 h following infection via a type I
IFNR-dependent mechanisms, a finding we are confirming here. While the role of
B7-1/2 for helper T cell activation is well documented, its role in direct B cell
regulation is poorly understood. Here, our in vivo studies with mixed bone marrow
irradiation chimeric mice, lacking B7-1/2 only on B cells, demonstrated that
B7-1/2 expression is crucial for induction of maximal local, but to a lesser
extent systemic, IgG Ab responses following influenza virus infection. In
contrast to mice that completely lack B7-1/2 expression, loss of B7-1/2 on B
cells alone did not significantly affect germinal center formation or the extent 
of CD4(+) T cell activation and IFN-gamma secretion. Instead, our in vitro
studies identify a dramatic effect of B7-2 engagement on IgG, but not IgM
secretion by already class-switched B cells. Concomitantly, B7-2 engagement
induced expression of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1) and spliced XBP1, evidence 
for increased protein synthesis by these cells. Taken together, these results
identify direct signaling through B7-1/2 as a potent regulator of IgG secretion
by previously activated B cells.

PMCID: PMC2795108
PMID: 19933871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. BMC Genomics. 2009 Nov 19;10:543. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-543.

A transcriptome analysis identifies molecular effectors of unconjugated bilirubin
in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.

Calligaris R(1), Bellarosa C, Foti R, Roncaglia P, Giraudi P, Krmac H, Tiribelli 
C, Gustincich S.

Author information: 
(1)International School for Advanced Studies, AREA Science Park, Trieste, Italy. 
calliga@sissa.it

BACKGROUND: The deposition of unconjugated bilirubin (UCB) in selected regions of
the brain results in irreversible neuronal damage, or Bilirubin Encephalopathy
(BE). Although UCB impairs a large number of cellular functions in other tissues,
the basic mechanisms of neurotoxicity have not yet been fully clarified. While
cells can accumulate UCB by passive diffusion, cell protection may involve
multiple mechanisms including the extrusion of the pigment as well as
pro-survival homeostatic responses that are still unknown.
RESULTS: Transcriptome changes induced by UCB exposure in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
cell line were examined by high density oligonucleotide microarrays. Two-hundred 
and thirty genes were induced after 24 hours. A Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
showed that at least 50 genes were directly involved in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response. Validation of selected ER stress genes is shown by
quantitative RT-PCR. Analysis of XBP1 splicing and DDIT3/CHOP subcellular
localization is presented.
CONCLUSION: These results show for the first time that UCB exposure induces ER
stress response as major intracellular homeostasis in surviving neuroblastoma
cells in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2789749
PMID: 19925663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009;9(16):1560-80.

Polyisoprenylated benzophenones from Clusiaceae: potential drugs and lead
compounds.

Acuña UM(1), Jancovski N, Kennelly EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman College and The Graduate Center, The
City University of New York, Bronx, New York 10468, USA.

Many new polyisoprenylated benzophenones with a
bicyclo[3.3.1]-nonane-2,4,9-trione core structure have been isolated from plants 
in the Clusiaceae family, and their potent biological properties have been the
subject of several studies. This review summarizes the biological activities
reported for these secondary metabolites including cytotoxic, antimicrobial,
antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory activities. Our efforts during the past years 
have foremost been directed towards isolating new polyisoprenylated
benzophenones, as well as understanding the possible target and mechanism of
action through which these compounds arrest cancer cells and inhibit the
progression of the cell-cycle. The transcription of genes is affected in cancer
cells treated with polyisoprenylated benzophenones; the oncogene c-Myb is
down-regulated and endoplasmatic stress genes XBP1, ATF4, and DDIT3/CHOP are
turned on. Consequently, the expression of iNOS and cell cycle regulators such as
cyclin D and E are reduced. Evidence presented by independent investigators
suggests that polyisoprenylated benzophenones affect the mediators in the
Akt/mTOR stress pathway, although the specific target remains to be discovered.
In addition, benzophenones isolated from plants display high antioxidant capacity
and protect cells from oxidative stress and the formation of ROS involved during 
the inflammatory process. Since antiviral activity was initially reported for
guttiferone A, potent synthetic analogues have been developed as effective new
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) to treat drug resistant
HIV-1. In addition, benzophenones exert antimicrobial effects particularly
against MRSA. The structure-activity relationships of polyisoprenylated
benzophenones from natural sources and those of synthetic analogues are included 
in this review. Absorption, metabolism, and elimination of benzophenones are also
discussed.

PMID: 19903162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):18-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.141. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Evidence that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and caspase-4 activation occur in
human neutrophils.

Binet F(1), Chiasson S, Girard D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Recherche en Inflammation et Physiologie des Granulocytes,
Université du Québec, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, Laval, QC, Canada.

Apoptosis can result from activation of three major pathways: the extrinsic, the 
intrinsic, and the most recently identified endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress-mediated pathway. While the two former pathways are known to be
operational in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), the existence of the
ER stress-mediated pathway, generally involving caspase-4, has never been
reported in these cells. Recently, we have documented that arsenic trioxide (ATO)
induced apoptosis in human PMNs by a mechanism that needs to be further
investigated. In this study, using immunofluorescence and electron microscopy, we
present evidence of ER alterations in PMNs activated by the ER stress inducer
arsenic trioxide (ATO). Several key players of the unfolded protein response,
including GRP78, GADD153, ATF6, XBP1 and eIF2alpha are expressed and activated in
PMNs treated with ATO or other ER stress inducers. Although caspase-4 is
expressed and activated in neutrophils, treatment with a caspase-4 inhibitor did 
not attenuate the pro-apoptotic effect of ATO at a concentration that reverses
caspase-4 processing and activation. Our results demonstrate for the first time
that the ER stress-mediated apoptotic pathway operates in human neutrophils.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19878647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Br J Cancer. 2009 Nov 17;101(10):1692-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605365. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Activation and clinical significance of the unfolded protein response in breast
cancer.

Scriven P(1), Coulson S, Haines R, Balasubramanian S, Cross S, Wyld L.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Surgical Oncology, Department of Oncology, School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Health, University of Sheffield, Beech Hill Road,
Sheffield S10 2JP, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The tumour microenvironment is hypoglycaemic, hypoxic and acidotic.
This activates a stress signalling pathway: the unfolded protein response (UPR). 
The UPR is cytoprotective if the stressor is mild, but may initiate apoptosis if 
severe.Activation of the UPR in breast carcinoma is induced by microenvironmental
stress such as glucose and oxygen deprivation, but may also be linked to
oestrogen stimulation. It may be clinically significant as it may alter
chemosensitivity to doxorubicin.
METHODS: 395 human breast adenocarcinomas were immunohistochemically stained for 
UPR activation markers (glucose-regulated protein (GRP-78 and XBP-1). A model of 
UPR activation in vitro by glucose deprivation of T47D breast cancer cells was
developed to determine how the UPR affects cellular sensitivity to doxorubicin
and 5-fluorouracil. Cytotoxicity was assessed using a colorimetric cytotoxicity
assay (MTT). The effect of oestrogen stimulation and tamoxifen exposure on UPR
activation by T47D cells was determined by western blotting measurement of the
key UPR protein, GRP-78.
RESULTS: Expression of GRP78 and XBP-1 was demonstrated in 76% and 90% of the
breast cancers, respectively, and correlated with oestrogen receptor positivity
(P=0.045 and 0.017, respectively). In vitro UPR activation induced resistance to 
both doxorubicin and 5-flurouracil, (P<0.05). Oestrogen stimulation induced GRP78
and XBP1 over-expression on western blotting. Tamoxifen did not block this
response and may induce UPR activation in its own right.
CONCLUSIONS: The UPR is activated in the majority of breast cancers and confers
resistance to chemotherapy. In vitro oestrogen stimulates UPR induction. UPR
activation may contribute to breast cancer chemoresistance and interact with
oestrogen response elements.

PMCID: PMC2778547
PMID: 19861963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Anticancer Res. 2009 Oct;29(10):3797-805.

Xanthohumol activates the proapoptotic arm of the unfolded protein response in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Lust S(1), Vanhoecke B, VAN Gele M, Boelens J, VAN Melckebeke H, Kaileh M, Vanden
Berghe W, Haegeman G, Philippé J, Bracke M, Offner F.

Author information: 
(1)Ghent University Hospital, Department of Hematology, De Pintelaan 185, 1P7,
B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. Sofie.Lust@ugent.be

BACKGROUND: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is an incurable disease with a
natural history of increasing resistance to chemotherapy. A novel approach to
overcome chemotherapy resistance may be targeting the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The involvement of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in
the cell killing effect of xanthohumol (X) was examined in 18 patient samples.
RESULTS: X-induced apoptosis of CLL cells was accompanied by the induction of
glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa (GRP78) and heat-shock protein of 70 kDa
(Hsp70) protein levels and by sustained phosphorylation of the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2alpha), suggesting the involvement of the ER
stress transducer, the double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR)-like ER
kinase (PERK). The X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA was spliced but no clear
activation of activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) was observed. The
proapoptotic outcome was further demonstrated by the up-regulation of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) homologous protein (CHOP), down-regulation
of myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1) and B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), cleavage of
poly-(ADP)-ribose polymerase (PARP) and processing of caspase-3, -4 and -9.
Furthermore, X showed proteasome inhibitory activity.
CONCLUSION: X stimulates the proapoptotic arm of the UPR in ex vivo CLL cells,
suggesting that ER stress may play an important role during X-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 19846911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Blood. 2009 Dec 10;114(25):5173-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-235960.

An in vitro model of differentiation of memory B cells into plasmablasts and
plasma cells including detailed phenotypic and molecular characterization.

Jourdan M(1), Caraux A, De Vos J, Fiol G, Larroque M, Cognot C, Bret C, Duperray 
C, Hose D, Klein B.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U847, Montpellier, France.

Human plasma cells (PCs) and their precursors play an essential role in humoral
immune response but are rare and difficult to harvest. We report the generation
of human syndecan-1(+) and immunoglobulin secreting PCs starting from memory B
cells in a 3-step and 10-day (D) culture, including a 6-fold cell amplification. 
We report the detailed phenotypic and Affymetrix gene expression profiles of
these in vitro PCs as well as of intermediate cells (activated B cells and
plasmablasts) compared with memory B cells and bone marrow PCs, which is
accessible through an open web ATLAS (http://amazonia.transcriptome.eu/). We show
this B cell-to-PC differentiation to involve IRF4 and AICDA expressions in D4
activated B cells, decrease of PAX5 and BCL6 expressions, and increase in PRDM1
and XBP1 expressions in D7 plasmablasts and D10 PCs. It involves down-regulation 
of genes controlled by Pax5 and induction of genes controlled by Blimp-1 and XBP1
(unfold protein response). The detailed phenotype of D10 PCs resembles that of
peripheral blood PCs detected after immunization of healthy donors. This in vitro
model will facilitate further studies in PC biology. It will likewise be helpful 
to study PC dyscrasias, including multiple myeloma.

PMCID: PMC2834398
PMID: 19846886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Virology. 2009 Dec 20;395(2):255-67. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.09.026. Epub 2009 
Oct 28.

A human coronavirus OC43 variant harboring persistence-associated mutations in
the S glycoprotein differentially induces the unfolded protein response in human 
neurons as compared to wild-type virus.

Favreau DJ(1), Desforges M, St-Jean JR, Talbot PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroimmunovirology, INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier,531 boulevard
des Prairies, Laval, Québec, Canada H7V 1B7.

We have reported that human respiratory coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43) is
neurotropic and neuroinvasive in humans and mice, and that neurons are the
primary target of infection in mice, leading to neurodegenerative disabilities.
We now report that an HCoV-OC43 mutant harboring two persistence-associated S
glycoprotein point mutations (H183R and Y241H), induced a stronger unfolded
protein response (UPR) and translation attenuation in infected human neurons.
There was a major contribution of the IRE1/XBP1 pathway, followed by caspase-3
activation and nuclear fragmentation, with no significant role of the ATF6 and
eIF2-alpha/ATF4 pathways. Our results show the importance of discrete molecular
viral S determinants in virus-neuronal cell interactions that lead to increased
production of viral proteins and infectious particles, enhanced UPR activation,
and increased cytotoxicity and cell death. As this mutant virus is more
neurovirulent in mice, our results also suggest that two mutations in the S
glycoprotein could eventually modulate viral neuropathogenesis.

PMID: 19846189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Virol. 2009 Dec;83(24):12833-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01003-09. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

The canine papillomavirus e5 protein signals from the endoplasmic reticulum.

Condjella R(1), Liu X, Suprynowicz F, Yuan H, Sudarshan S, Dai Y, Schlegel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University Medical School, 3900 Reservoir 
Road, NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The recently discovered Canis familiaris papillomavirus (PV) type 2 (CfPV2)
provides a unique opportunity to study PV gene functions in vitro and in vivo.
Unlike the previously characterized canine oral PV, CfPV2 contains an E5 open
reading frame and is associated with progression to squamous cell carcinoma. In
the current study, we have expressed and characterized the CfPV2-encoded E5
protein, a small, hydrophobic, 41-amino-acid polypeptide. We demonstrate that,
similar to the E5 protein from high-risk human PV type 16, the CfPV2 E5 protein
is localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and that its expression decreases 
keratinocyte proliferation and cell life span. E5 expression also increases the
percentage of cells in the G(1) phase of the cell cycle, with a concomitant
decrease in the percentage of cells in S phase. To identify a potential mechanism
for E5-mediated growth inhibition from the ER, we developed a real-time PCR
method to quantify the splicing of XBP1 mRNA as a measure of ER stress. We found 
that the CfPV2 E5 protein induced ER stress and that this, as well as the
observed growth inhibition, is tempered significantly by coexpression of the
CfPV2 E6 and E7 genes. It is possible that the spatial/temporal regulation of
E6/E7 gene expression during keratinocyte differentiation might therefore
modulate E5 activity and ER stress.

PMCID: PMC2786831
PMID: 19812158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 6;106(40):17043-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905566106. Epub 2009 Sep 23.

Suppression of retinal degeneration in Drosophila by stimulation of ER-associated
degradation.

Kang MJ(1), Ryoo HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Mutations in the rhodopsin gene that disrupt the encoded protein's folding
properties are a major cause of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP).
This disease is faithfully modeled in Drosophila where similar mutations in the
ninaE gene, encoding rhodopsin-1 (Rh-1), cause ER stress and dominantly trigger
age-related retinal degeneration. In addition, mutant flies bearing certain ninaE
alleles have dramatically reduced Rh-1 protein levels, but the underlying
mechanism for this reduction and significance of its contribution to the ADRP
phenotype remains unclear. To address this question, we specifically analyzed the
role of Drosophila genes homologous to the known yeast and animal regulators of
the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway, a process that reduces levels of
misfolded proteins in the ER through proteasomal degradation. We found that
loss-of-function of these putative ERAD factors resulted in increased levels of
Rh-1 in ninaE mutant flies. Conversely, in an ER stress assay where mutant or
wild-type Rh-1 were overexpressed in developing imaginal discs beyond the ER
protein folding capacity of those cells, co-expression of certain ERAD factors
was sufficient to reduce Rh-1 protein levels and to completely suppress ER stress
reporter activation. Significantly, those ERAD factors that specifically reduced 
misfolded Rh-1 in the imaginal disc assay also delayed age-related retinal
degeneration caused by an endogenous ninaE allele, indicating that ERAD acts as a
protective mechanism against retinal degeneration in the Drosophila model for
ADRP. These results suggest that manipulation of ERAD may serve as a powerful
therapeutic strategy against a number of diseases associated with ER stress.

PMCID: PMC2749843
PMID: 19805114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Development. 2009 Nov;136(21):3543-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.036715. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Coordinated activation of the secretory pathway during notochord formation in the
Xenopus embryo.

Tanegashima K(1), Zhao H, Rebbert ML, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

We compared the transcriptome in the developing notochord of Xenopus laevis
embryos with that of other embryonic regions. A coordinated and intense
activation of a large set of secretory pathway genes was observed in the
notochord, but not in notochord precursors in the axial mesoderm at early
gastrula stage. The genes encoding Xbp1 and Creb3l2 were also activated in the
notochord. These two transcription factors are implicated in the activation of
secretory pathway genes during the unfolded protein response, where cells react
to the stress of a build-up of unfolded proteins in their endoplasmic reticulum. 
Xbp1 and Creb3l2 are differentially expressed but not differentially activated in
the notochord. Reduction of expression of Xbp1 or Creb3l2 by injection of
antisense morpholinos led to strong deficits in notochord but not somitic muscle 
development. In addition, the expression of some, but not all, genes encoding
secretory proteins was inhibited by injection of xbp1 morpholinos. Furthermore,
expression of activated forms of Xbp1 or Creb3l2 in animal explants could
activate a similar subset of secretory pathway genes. We conclude that
coordinated activation of a battery of secretory pathway genes mediated by Xbp1
and Creb/ATF factors is a characteristic and necessary feature of notochord
formation.

PMCID: PMC2761104
PMID: 19793890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Neurosci Res. 2010 Jan;66(1):14-21. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2009.09.003. Epub 2009 
Sep 18.

Nerve growth factor attenuates 2-deoxy-d-glucose-triggered endoplasmic reticulum 
stress-mediated apoptosis via enhanced expression of GRP78.

Kishi S(1), Shimoke K, Nakatani Y, Shimada T, Okumura N, Nagai K, Shin-Ya K,
Ikeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Faculty of Chemistry, Materials and Bioengineering, and Strategic Research Base, 
Kansai University, 3-3-35 Yamatecho, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan.
shimoke@kansai-u.ac.jp

The glucose analog 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2DG) depletes cells of glucose. Inhibition 
of glycosylation caused by glucose depletion induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress with subsequent apoptosis. Glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) is a
molecular chaperone that acts within the ER. During ER stress, GRP78 expression
is induced as part of the unfolded protein response (UPR). We found that nerve
growth factor (NGF) prevented 2DG-triggered ER stress-mediated apoptosis, but not
the induction of GRP78 expression, in PC12 cells. Surprisingly, GRP78 expression 
was further up-regulated when NGF was added to 2DG-treated PC12 cells. When a
specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K), LY294002, was added 
to 2DG plus NGF-treated cells, both the effects of NGF on 2DG-induced apoptosis
and GRP78 expression were significantly diminished. In addition, versipelostatin 
(VST), a specific inhibitor of GRP78 expression, and small interfering RNA
(siRNA) against GRP78 mRNA also decreased both the effects of NGF on 2DG-induced 
apoptosis and GRP78 expression. RT-PCR and Western blot analyses revealed that
enhanced production of nuclear p50 ATF6, but not spliced XBP1, mainly contributed
to the NGF-induced enhancement of GRP78 expression in 2DG-treated cells. These
results suggest that the NGF-activated PI3-K/Akt signaling pathway plays a
protective role against ER stress-mediated apoptosis via enhanced expression of
GRP78 in PC12 cells.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 19766678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Neurotox Res. 2010 Feb;17(2):189-202. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9110-5.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress plays critical role in brain damage after cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion in rats.

Nakka VP(1), Gusain A, Raghubir R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India.

The endoplasmic reticulum(ER) stress plays a vital role in mediating ischemic
neuronal cell death. However, very little is known about the role of ER stress in
mediating pathophysiological reactions to acute brain injuries. An attempt was
therefore made to assess the role of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) induced 
ER stress and its modulation on outcome of ischemic insult. Focal cerebral
ischemia was induced in rats by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h
followed by varying time points of reperfusion. The brain loci specific and
time-dependent alterations were seen in the expression pattern of molecular
markers, i.e., heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) for cytoplasmic dysfunction,
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), Caspase-12, C/EBP homologous protein/growth
arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (CHOP/GADD153), activating transcription
factor 4 (ATF-4), and Processed X-box protein 1 (xbp1) mRNA for ER dysfunction.
Further, histological examinations indicated pronounced brain damage, massive
neuronal loss, and DNA fragmentation predominantly in the striatum and cortex.
The enhanced expression of GRP78, Caspase-12, CHOP/GADD153, ATF4 and processing
of xbp1 mRNA in the affected brain regions clearly indicate the critical
involvement of ER-mediated cell death/survival mechanisms and also collectively
demonstrated the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR). Moreover,
Salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of eIF2alpha dephosphorylation was used to
counteract ER stress, which significantly increased the phosphorylation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 subunit alpha (eIF2alpha), leading to 
reduced brain damage after I/R injury. Therefore, inhibition of ER stress
following I/R injury may be used as key therapeutic target for neuroprotection.

PMID: 19763736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Exp Med. 2009 Sep 28;206(10):2151-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090738. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

XBP1 governs late events in plasma cell differentiation and is not required for
antigen-specific memory B cell development.

Todd DJ(1), McHeyzer-Williams LJ, Kowal C, Lee AH, Volpe BT, Diamond B,
McHeyzer-Williams MG, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a stress response pathway that is driven
by the increased load of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum of highly
secretory cells such as plasma cells (PCs). X box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a
transcription factor that mediates one branch of the UPR and is crucial for the
development of antibody-secreting PCs. PCs represent only one class of terminally
differentiated B cells, however, and little is known about the role for XBP1 in
the other class: memory B cells. We have developed an XBP1(fl/fl) CD19(+/cre)
conditional knockout (XBP1(CD19)) mouse to build upon our current understanding
of the function of XBP1 in PC differentiation as well as to explore the role of
XBP1 in memory cell development. Using this model, we show that XBP1(CD19) mice
are protected from disease in an autoantibody-mediated mouse lupus model. We also
identify a novel developmental stage at which B cells express the traditional PC 
marker CD138 (syndecan-1) but have yet to undergo XBP1-dependent functional and
morphological differentiation into antibody-secreting cells. Finally, we show
that memory B cells develop normally in XBP1(CD19) mice, demonstrating that
XBP1-mediated functions occur independently of any memory cell lineage
commitment.

PMCID: PMC2757870
PMID: 19752183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Sep;1173 Suppl 1:E2-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04956.x.

From sugar to fat: How the transcription factor XBP1 regulates hepatic
lipogenesis.

Glimcher LH(1), Lee AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. lglimche@hsph.harvard.edu

Lipogenesis occurs primarily in the liver, where dietary carbohydrates control
the expression of key enzymes in glycolytic and lipogenic pathways. We have
recently discovered that the transcription factor XBP1, best known as a key
regulator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), is required for de novo fatty
acid synthesis in the liver, a function unrelated to its role in the UPR.(1) XBP1
protein expression is induced in the liver by a high carbohydrate diet and
directly controls the induction of critical genes involved in fatty acid
synthesis. Specific deletion of XBP1 in adult liver using an inducible approach
results in profound hypocholesterolemia and hypotriglyceridemia, which could be
attributed to diminished production of lipids in the liver. Notably, this
phenotype is not associated with fatty liver (hepatic steatosis) or significant
compromise in protein secretion. XBP1 joins an already rich field of
transcriptional regulatory proteins in the control of hepatic lipogenesis. Its
function in lipogenesis appears to be highly significant as evidenced by the
phenotype of the genetic mutant strain. A more complete understanding of the
mechanisms by which XBP1 accelerates de novo fatty acid synthesis in the liver
while preserving normal hepatic lipid composition is highly relevant to the
treatment of diseases such as atherosclerosis and metabolic syndrome that are
associated with dyslipidemia. Since excess fat accumulation in the liver could
result from increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis, compounds that inhibit XBP1
activation may also be useful therapeutics for the treatment of human alcoholic
liver disease (ALD) and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), increasingly
common causes of morbidity and mortality in the United States.

PMCID: PMC3096021
PMID: 19751410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Hum Immunol. 2009 Nov;70(11):950-2. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2009.09.350. Epub 2009 
Sep 6.

Lack of evidence of a role of XBP1 and PRDM1 polymorphisms in Spanish patients
with immunoglobulin A deficiency.

del Pozo N(1), López-Mejías R, Fernández-Arquero M, Ferreira A, García-Rodríguez 
MC, de la Concha EG, Fontán G, Urcelay E, Núñez C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Immunology Department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.

The etiology of selective immunoglobulin A deficiency (IgAD) is not yet
unraveled, but genetics seem to play an important role. Defects in processes
during B-cell differentiation into plasma cells could exist in these patients,
turning the genes controlling these processes into interesting candidate genes
for IgAD predisposition, as PRDM1 (encoding Blimp-1) and XBP1. We studied the
involvement of several polymorphisms located in PRDM1 and XBP1 on IgAD
susceptibility. We performed a case-control study with 331 Spanish IgAD patients 
and 717 healthy controls, by analyzing five single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in these genes. Genetic frequencies of the studied SNPs did not
significantly differ between patients and controls, even after stratifying by the
known human leukocyte antigen risk factors or clinical phenotypes. Interaction
between PRDM1 and XBP1 to confer disease predisposition was not detected either. 
In conclusion, the polymorphisms studied in the PRDM1 and XBP1 genes do not seem 
to be involved in IgAD predisposition in the Spanish population.

PMID: 19735688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Jan;49(1):68-74. doi: 10.1002/mc.20578.

N-acetyl cysteine and penicillamine induce apoptosis via the ER stress
response-signaling pathway.

Guan D(1), Xu Y, Yang M, Wang H, Wang X, Shen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) and penicillamine (PEN) have been shown to induce
apoptosis in multiple types of human cancer cells; however, the molecular
mechanism underlying this activity is unclear. This study was designed to
identify the genes responsible for apoptosis induction by NAC and PEN. We found
that glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) was upregulated in HeLa cells following
treatment with NAC or PEN. GRP78 is a central regulator of endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and has been used as a marker of ER stress. Additionally, both the
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) protein and X box-binding protein 1
(XBP1) mRNA were processed, which facilitates the expression of C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP), a key-signaling component of ER stress-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, the PERK-ATF4 pathway, which also induces the expression of CHOP,
was activated in NAC-treated cells. The role of the ER stress pathway was further
confirmed through the small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of CHOP,
which attenuated NAC and PEN-induced apoptosis. These results demonstrate that
NAC- and PEN-induced apoptosis in HeLa cells is mediated by the ER stress
pathway.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19722195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Blood. 2009 Oct 29;114(18):3890-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-201111. Epub 2009
Aug 28.

C/EBPbeta regulates transcription factors critical for proliferation and survival
of multiple myeloma cells.

Pal R(1), Janz M, Galson DL, Gries M, Li S, Jöhrens K, Anagnostopoulos I, Dörken 
B, Mapara MY, Borghesi L, Kardava L, Roodman GD, Milcarek C, Lentzsch S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta), also known as nuclear
factor-interleukin-6 (NF-IL6), is a transcription factor that plays an important 
role in the regulation of growth and differentiation of myeloid and lymphoid
cells. Mice deficient in C/EBPbeta show impaired generation of B lymphocytes. We 
show that C/EBPbeta regulates transcription factors critical for proliferation
and survival in multiple myeloma. Multiple myeloma cell lines and primary
multiple myeloma cells strongly expressed C/EBPbeta, whereas normal B cells and
plasma cells had little or no detectable levels of C/EBPbeta. Silencing of
C/EBPbeta led to down-regulation of transcription factors such as IRF4, XBP1, and
BLIMP1 accompanied by a strong inhibition of proliferation. Further, silencing of
C/EBPbeta led to a complete down-regulation of antiapoptotic B-cell lymphoma 2
(BCL2) expression. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, C/EBPbeta directly
bound to the promoter region of IRF4, BLIMP1, and BCL2. Our data indicate that
C/EBPbeta is involved in the regulatory network of transcription factors that are
critical for plasma cell differentiation and survival. Targeting C/EBPbeta may
provide a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment of multiple myeloma.

PMCID: PMC2773489
PMID: 19717648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Aug;24(8):1463-71. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.05870.x.

Effect of dietary fat to produce non-alcoholic fatty liver in the rat.

Ahmed U(1), Redgrave TG, Oates PS.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology M311, School of Biomedical, Biomolecular and Chemical Sciences,
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) belongs to a spectrum of
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Oxidative stress is hypothesized to
play an important role in the progression of the disease. We used the
Lieber/DeCarli model for NASH to investigate the mechanisms involved in its
progression.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were fed standard (35% of energy from fat) or
high fat (71% of energy from fat) liquid diets, ad libitum or two-thirds of the
amount consumed ad libitum initially for 3 weeks and then extended to 5 weeks.
RESULTS: Steatosis was absent in rats at 3 weeks feeding, but by 5 weeks, the
high fat/ad lib group showed microvesicular steatosis and foci of macrovesicular 
steatosis without inflammation. Serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were not different. By 5 weeks feeding,
hepatic triglycerides were highest in the high fat ad lib group and the ad lib
groups were higher compared with their restricted groups. The oxidative stress
marker, hydroxyalkenal (HAE) was decreased in the standard ad lib compared with
the high fat ad lib group. Liver mRNA of interleukin-6, haem oxygenase-1, and
markers of endoplasmic stress: C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), glucose
responsive protein-78 (GRP78) and spliced X-box DNA binding protein (spliced
XBP1) were similar in the ad lib groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Extending the feeding period of the high fat/ad lib diet for 5 weeks
placed our rats with Type I to II NAFLD compared to the more progressed Type III 
state previously obtained after 3 weeks feeding. The milder condition obtained
raised the prospect of genetic modifiers present in our rats that resist disease 
progression.

PMID: 19702912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jan;37(1):269-72. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9674-4. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Relationship between functional promoter polymorphism in the XBP1 gene (-116C/G) 
and atherosclerosis, ischemic stroke and hyperhomocysteinemia.

Yilmaz E(1), Akar R, Eker ST, Deda G, Adiguzel Y, Akar N.

Author information: 
(1)Ankara University Biotechnology Institute, Ankara, Turkey.
eyilmaz@medicine.ankara.edu.tr

ER stress is associated with a range of pathological conditions, among which, the
ischemia/reperfusion injury is also found. The mechanistic array of links among
the ER stress and thrombovascular diseases is poorly understood. The XBP1 gene is
a transcription factor which modulates the ER stress response; and the XBP1 (-116
C/G) gene polymorphism causes an impairment of its positive feedback system. In
the present study we investigated the prevalence of XBP1 gene (-116 C/G)
polymorphism, separately among the patients with atherosclerosis, ischemic stroke
and hyperhomocysteinemia. The G allele and the (-116 G/G) genotype of the XBP1
(-116 C/G) gene polymorphism were found to be a significant risk factor for the
patients with Ischemic Stroke. Yet, this allele was seemingly less significant in
case of patients with atherosclerosis and hyperhomocysteinemia. Hence, the XBP1
(-116 C/G) gene polymorphism and especially its involvement in a homozygous state
are suggested to take active role in the ER stress related ischemia/reperfusion
injury.

PMID: 19669932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cell. 2009 Aug 7;138(3):562-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.017.

IRE1alpha kinase activation modes control alternate endoribonuclease outputs to
determine divergent cell fates.

Han D(1), Lerner AG, Vande Walle L, Upton JP, Xu W, Hagen A, Backes BJ, Oakes SA,
Papa FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-2520, USA.

During endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, homeostatic signaling through the
unfolded protein response (UPR) augments ER protein-folding capacity. If
homeostasis is not restored, the UPR triggers apoptosis. We found that the ER
transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease (RNase) IRE1alpha is a key component of
this apoptotic switch. ER stress induces IRE1alpha kinase autophosphorylation,
activating the RNase to splice XBP1 mRNA and produce the homeostatic
transcription factor XBP1s. Under ER stress--or forced
autophosphorylation--IRE1alpha's RNase also causes endonucleolytic decay of many 
ER-localized mRNAs, including those encoding chaperones, as early events
culminating in apoptosis. Using chemical genetics, we show that kinase inhibitors
bypass autophosphorylation to activate the RNase by an alternate mode that
enforces XBP1 splicing and averts mRNA decay and apoptosis. Alternate RNase
activation by kinase-inhibited IRE1alpha can be reconstituted in vitro. We
propose that divergent cell fates during ER stress hinge on a balance between
IRE1alpha RNase outputs that can be tilted with kinase inhibitors to favor
survival.

PMCID: PMC2762408
PMID: 19665977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Virology. 2009 Sep 1;391(2):257-64. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.06.039. Epub 2009
Jul 22.

Hepatitis C virus NS4B induces unfolded protein response and endoplasmic
reticulum overload response-dependent NF-kappaB activation.

Li S(1), Ye L, Yu X, Xu B, Li K, Zhu X, Liu H, Wu X, Kong L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.

Hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein 4B (NS4B) is an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) membrane associated protein and a potent causative factor of ER stress. Here
we reported that unfolded protein response (UPR) can be activated by HCV NS4B
through inducing both XBP1 mRNA splicing and ATF6 cleavage in human hepatic
cells. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that HCV NS4B stimulates the production 
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by perturbing intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis. 
Luciferase assay showed that HCV NS4B also activates the multifunctional
transcription factor, NF-kappaB, in a dose-dependent manner through Ca(2+)
signaling and ROS. Further immunoblot analysis showed that HCV NS4B promotes
NF-kappaB translocation into the nucleus via protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK)
mediated phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of IkappaBalpha. These
studies provide an important insight into the implication of NS4B in HCV life
cycle and HCV-associated liver disease by affecting host intracellular signal
transduction pathways.

PMID: 19628242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Cell Sci. 2009 Aug 15;122(Pt 16):2877-86. doi: 10.1242/jcs.040584. Epub 2009
Jul 21.

Unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA occurs in the cytoplasm during the mammalian
unfolded protein response.

Uemura A(1), Oku M, Mori K, Yoshida H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

XBP1 is a key transcription factor that regulates the mammalian unfolded protein 
response. Its expression is regulated by unconventional mRNA splicing that is
carried out by endonuclease IRE1 and a specific, as yet unknown, RNA ligase in
response to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER. Conventional mRNA
splicing occurs only in the nucleus, but it has remained unclear whether
unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA takes place in the nucleus, cytoplasm or
both. Here, we show that the catalytic domain of IRE1 contains a nuclear
exclusion signal to prevent IRE1 from mislocalizing to the nucleus. In addition, 
RNA ligase, which joins XBP1 exons cleaved by IRE1 was detected in the cytoplasm 
but not in the nucleus. Moreover, the cytoplasm contained large amounts of
unspliced XBP1 mRNA compared with the nucleus. Most unspliced XBP1 mRNA was
converted to spliced mRNA by unconventional splicing even if de novo
transcription was blocked, suggesting that cytoplasmic XBP1 mRNA, not nuclear
XBP1 mRNA, is a major substrate for unconventional splicing. From these
observations, we concluded that unconventional splicing of XBP1 mRNA occurs
predominantly in the cytoplasm.

PMID: 19622636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2010 Sep;62(5):509-17. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2009.06.009. Epub
2009 Jul 16.

The distribution and characterization of skeletal muscle lesions in
dysferlin-deficient SJL and A/J mice.

Kobayashi K(1), Izawa T, Kuwamura M, Yamate J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Division of Veterinary Sciences, Graduate 
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, 1-58,
Rinku-ourai-kita, Izumisano City, Osaka 598-8531, Japan.
kobayashi.kinji@me.mt-pharma.co.jp

The pathogenesis of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B)
dysferlinopathy remains to be investigated. The distribution and characterization
of skeletal muscle lesions were examined in two different LGMD2B mouse models,
SJL and A/J mice (at 10 and 35 weeks old), in association with the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. SJL mice showed an earlier age of onset and a faster
progression of skeletal muscle lesions as compared with those of A/J mice; the
sensitivity difference to muscular dystrophic lesions between SJL and A/J mice
was observed in the lumbar muscles (particularly, lumbar longissimus and
sublumbar muscles); the lesions seen mainly in SJL mice at 35 weeks old consisted
of degeneration, necrosis, fatty infiltration, variation in muscle fiber size and
atrophy in muscle fibers. Enzyme-histochemically, the fast-twitch muscle fiber
was predominant for the degenerative changes seen in the rectus femoris and
lateral longissimus muscles of SJL mice. Immunohistochemically, the main reactive
cell type observed in and around degenerative and/or necrotic muscle fibers was
macrophages, demonstrable with an anti-F4/80 antibody. Because the analyses of
spliced XBP1 mRNA, a marker of ER stress, did not show the increased expression, 
it was considered that ER stress did not affect the progression of skeletal
muscle lesions in SJL mice with the advanced stage of dysferlinopathy.

(c) 2009 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19615872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Psychiatry Res. 2009 Aug 15;168(3):209-12. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2008.05.010.
Epub 2009 Jun 28.

Preliminary evidence on the association between XBP1-116C/G polymorphism and
response to prophylactic treatment with valproate in bipolar disorders.

Kim B(1), Kim CY, Lee MJ, Joo YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Republic of Korea.

The 116C/G polymorphism in the promoter region of XBP1 is known to be associated 
with bipolar disorders. The G allele of the XBP1-116C/G polymorphism has reduced 
XBP1-dependent transcription activity compared with the C allele. Valproate
treatment has been known to rescue the impaired response of cells with the G
allele. We investigated the hypothesis that the G allele of XBP1-116C/G has
better prophylactic treatment response to valproate compared to the C allele.
This study involved 51 patients with bipolar disorder who were treated with
valproate for prophylactic treatment. Prophylactic treatment response to
valproate was retrospectively assessed using a scale described by Grof et al.
[Grof, P., Duffy, A., Cavazzoni, P., Grof, E., Garnham, J., MacDougall, M.,
O'Donovan, C., Alda, M., 2002. Is response to prophylactic lithium a familial
trait? Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 63, 942-947.]. We found that the patients
with the G allele of XBP1-116C/G showed a better prophylactic treatment response 
to valproate compared to the C allele. This result is in agreement with in-vitro 
data showing that valproate ameliorates the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress
response compromised by the G allele.

PMID: 19564049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 15;183(2):1480-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900017. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Activation of the Akt-NF-kappaB pathway by subtilase cytotoxin through the ATF6
branch of the unfolded protein response.

Yamazaki H(1), Hiramatsu N, Hayakawa K, Tagawa Y, Okamura M, Ogata R, Huang T,
Nakajima S, Yao J, Paton AW, Paton JC, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan.

Shiga toxin has the potential to induce expression of inflammation-associated
genes, although the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. We examined
the effects of subtilase cytotoxin (SubAB), an AB(5) toxin produced by some Shiga
toxigenic Escherichia coli, on the activation of NF-kappaB. SubAB is known to be 
a protease which selectively degrades GRP78/Bip. Treatment of NRK-52E cells with 
SubAB caused rapid cleavage of GRP78. Following the degradation of GRP78,
transient activation of NF-kappaB was observed with a peak at 6-12 h; the
activation subsided within 24 h despite the continuous absence of intact GRP78.
The activation of NF-kappaB was preceded by transient phosphorylation of Akt.
Treatment of the cells with a selective inhibitor of Akt1/2 or an inhibitor of
PI3K attenuated SubAB-induced NF-kappaB activation, suggesting that activation of
Akt is an event upstream of NF-kappaB. Degradation of GRP78 caused the unfolded
protein response (UPR), and inducers of the UPR mimicked the stimulatory effects 
of SubAB on Akt and NF-kappaB. SubAB triggered the three major branches of the
UPR including the IRE1-XBP1, PERK, and ATF6 pathways. Dominant-negative
inhibition of IRE1alpha, XBP1, or PERK did not attenuate activation of NF-kappaB 
by SubAB. In contrast, genetic and pharmacological inhibition of ATF6
significantly suppressed SubAB-triggered Akt phosphorylation and NF-kappaB
activation. These results suggested that loss of GRP78 by SubAB leads to
transient phosphorylation of Akt and consequent activation of NF-kappaB through
the ATF6 branch of the UPR.

PMCID: PMC2762936
PMID: 19561103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 4;284(36):24306-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.026583. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

The thioxotriazole copper(II) complex A0 induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and
paraptotic death in human cancer cells.

Tardito S(1), Isella C, Medico E, Marchiò L, Bevilacqua E, Hatzoglou M, Bussolati
O, Franchi-Gazzola R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of General and Clinical Pathology, Department of Experimental Medicine,
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

The copper(II) complex A0 induces a type of non-apoptotic cell death also known
as paraptosis. Paraptosis involves extensive endoplasmic reticulum vacuolization 
in the absence of caspase activation. A wide panel of human cancer cell lines was
used to demonstrate differences in cytotoxicity by the paraptosis-inducing drug
A0 and the metal-based pro-apoptotic drug cisplatin. Gene expression profiling of
the human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells showed that, while cisplatin induced p53
targets, A0 up-regulated genes involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR)
and response to heavy metals. The cytotoxic effects of A0 were associated with
inhibition of the ubiquitin-proteasome system and accumulation of ubiquitinylated
proteins, in a manner dependent on protein synthesis. Cycloheximide inhibited the
accumulation of ubiquitinylated proteins and hampered A0-induced cell death
process. The occurrence of the UPR during A0-induced death process was shown by
the increased abundance of spliced XBP1 mRNA, transient eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, and a series of downstream events, including attenuation of
global protein synthesis and increased expression of ATF4, CHOP, BIP, and GADD34.
Mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing a mutant eIF2alpha, which could not be
phosphorylated, were more resistant to A0 than wild type cells, pointing to a
pro-death role of eIF2alpha phosphorylation. A0 may thus represent the
prototypical member of a new class of compounds that cause paraptotic cell death 
via mechanisms involving eIF2alpha phosphorylation and the UPR.

PMCID: PMC2782024
PMID: 19561079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 1;69(13):5458-66. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4408. Epub
2009 Jun 23.

A ruthenium-containing organometallic compound reduces tumor growth through
induction of the endoplasmic reticulum stress gene CHOP.

Meng X(1), Leyva ML, Jenny M, Gross I, Benosman S, Fricker B, Harlepp S, Hébraud 
P, Boos A, Wlosik P, Bischoff P, Sirlin C, Pfeffer M, Loeffler JP, Gaiddon C.

Author information: 
(1)UMRS692 INSERM, Signalisations Moléculaires et Neurodégénérescence, Université
de Strasbourg, France.

Cisplatin-derived anticancer therapy has been used for three decades despite its 
side effects. Other types of organometallic complexes, namely, some
ruthenium-derived compounds (RDC), which would display cytotoxicity through
different modes of action, might represent alternative therapeutic agents. We
have studied both in vitro and in vivo the biological properties of RDC11, one of
the most active compounds of a new class of RDCs that contain a covalent bond
between the ruthenium atom and a carbon. We showed that RDC11 inhibited the
growth of various tumors implanted in mice more efficiently than cisplatin.
Importantly, in striking contrast with cisplatin, RDC11 did not cause severe side
effects on the liver, kidneys, or the neuronal sensory system. We analyzed the
mode of action of RDC11 and showed that RDC11 interacted poorly with DNA and
induced only limited DNA damages compared with cisplatin, suggesting alternative 
transduction pathways. Indeed, we found that target genes of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress pathway, such as Bip, XBP1, PDI, and CHOP, were activated in
RDC11-treated cells. Induction of the transcription factor CHOP, a crucial
mediator of endoplasmic reticulum stress apoptosis, was also confirmed in tumors 
treated with RDC11. Activation of CHOP led to the expression of several of its
target genes, including proapoptotic genes. In addition, the silencing of CHOP by
RNA interference significantly reduced the cytotoxicity of RDC11. Altogether, our
results led us to conclude that RDC11 acts by an atypical pathway involving CHOP 
and endoplasmic reticulum stress, and thus might provide an interesting
alternative for anticancer therapy.

PMID: 19549908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000523. Epub 2009 
Jun 19.

Genetic variation of promoter sequence modulates XBP1 expression and genetic risk
for vitiligo.

Ren Y(1), Yang S, Xu S, Gao M, Huang W, Gao T, Fang Q, Quan C, Zhang C, Sun L,
Liang Y, Han J, Wang Z, Zhang F, Zhou Y, Liu J, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermatology and Department of Dermatology at No 1 Hospital, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, China.

Our previous genome-wide linkage analysis identified a susceptibility locus for
generalized vitiligo on 22q12. To search for susceptibility genes within the
locus, we investigated a biological candidate gene, X-box binding protein
1(XBP1). First, we sequenced all the exons, exon-intron boundaries as well as
some 5' and 3' flanking sequences of XBP1 in 319 cases and 294 controls of
Chinese Hans. Of the 8 common variants identified, the significant association
was observed at rs2269577 (p_(trend) = 0.007, OR = 1.36, 95% CI = 1.09-1.71), a
putative regulatory polymorphism within the promoter region of XBP1. We then
sequenced the variant in an additional 365 cases and 404 controls and found
supporting evidence for the association (p_(trend) = 0.008, OR = 1.31, 95% CI =
1.07-1.59). To further validate the association, we genotyped the variant in
another independent sample of 1,402 cases and 1,288 controls, including 94
parent-child trios, and confirmed the association by both case-control analysis
(p_(trend) = 0.003, OR = 1.18, 95% CI = 1.06-1.32) and the family-based
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT, p = 0.005, OR = 1.93, 95% CI = 1.21-3.07).
The analysis of the combined 2,086 cases and 1,986 controls provided highly
significant evidence for the association (p_(trend) = 2.94x10(-6), OR = 1.23, 95%
CI = 1.13-1.35). Furthermore, we also found suggestive epistatic effect between
rs2269577 and HLA-DRB1*07 allele on the development of vitiligo (p = 0.033). Our 
subsequent functional study showed that the risk-associated C allele of rs2269577
had a stronger promoter activity than the non-risk G allele, and there was an
elevated expression of XBP1 in the lesional skins of patients carrying the
risk-associated C allele. Therefore, our study has demonstrated that the
transcriptional modulation of XBP1 expression by a germ-line regulatory
polymorphism has an impact on the development of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC2689933
PMID: 19543371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Int J Cancer. 2010 Mar 15;126(6):1316-26. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24655.

B-cell differentiation in EBV-positive Burkitt lymphoma is impaired at
posttranscriptional level by miRNA-altered expression.

Leucci E(1), Onnis A, Cocco M, De Falco G, Imperatore F, Giuseppina A, Costanzo
V, Cerino G, Mannucci S, Cantisani R, Nyagol J, Mwanda W, Iriso R, Owang M,
Schurfeld K, Bellan C, Lazzi S, Leoncini L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, 
Italy. leoncinil@unisi.it

Endemic, sporadic and HIV-associated Burkitt lymphoma (BL) all have a B-cell
phenotype and a MYC translocation, but a variable association with the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). However, there is still no satisfactory explanation of 
how EBV participates in the pathogenesis of BL. A recent investigation suggested 
that EBV-positive and EBV-negative BL have different cells of origin. In
particular, according to immunoglobulin gene mutation analysis, EBV-negative BLs 
may originate from early centroblasts, whereas EBV-positive BLs seem to arise
from postgerminal center B cells or memory B cells. The appearance of a germinal 
center phenotype in EBV-positive cells might thus derive from a block in B-cell
differentiation. The exit from the germinal center involves a complex series of
events, which require the activation of BLIMP-1, and the consequent
downregulation of several target genes. Here, we investigated the expression of
specific miRNAs predicted to be involved in B-cell differentiation and found that
hsa-miR-127 is differentially expressed between EBV-positive and EBV-negative
BLs. In particular, it was strongly upregulated only in EBV-positive BL samples, 
whereas EBV-negative cases showed levels of expression similar to normal
controls, including microdissected germinal centers (GC) cells. In addition, we
found evidence that hsa-miR-127 is involved in B-cell differentiation process
through posttranscriptional regulation of BLIMP1 and XBP1. The overexpression of 
this miRNA may thus represent a key event in the lymphomagenesis of EBV positive 
BL, by blocking the B-cell differentiation process.

PMID: 19530237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cell Metab. 2009 Jun;9(6):556-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.04.009.

The IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway of the unfolded protein response is required for
adipogenesis.

Sha H(1), He Y, Chen H, Wang C, Zenno A, Shi H, Yang X, Zhang X, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Signaling cascades during adipogenesis culminate in the expression of two
essential adipogenic factors, PPARgamma and C/EBPalpha. Here we demonstrate that 
the IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway, the most conserved branch of the unfolded protein
response (UPR), is indispensable for adipogenesis. Indeed, XBP1-deficient mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and 3T3-L1 cells with XBP1 or IRE1alpha knockdown exhibit
profound defects in adipogenesis. Intriguingly, C/EBPbeta, a key early adipogenic
factor, induces Xbp1 expression by directly binding to its proximal promoter
region. Subsequently, XBP1 binds to the promoter of Cebpa and activates its gene 
expression. The posttranscriptional splicing of Xbp1 mRNA by IRE1alpha is
required as only the spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s) rescues the adipogenic defect
exhibited by XBP1-deficient cells. Taken together, our data show that the
IRE1alpha-XBP1 pathway plays a key role in adipocyte differentiation by acting as
a critical regulator of the morphological and functional transformations during
adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2963107
PMID: 19490910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Diabetes. 2009 Aug;58(8):1757-65. doi: 10.2337/db09-0188. Epub 2009 May 28.

Individual stearoyl-coa desaturase 1 expression modulates endoplasmic reticulum
stress and inflammation in human myotubes and is associated with skeletal muscle 
lipid storage and insulin sensitivity in vivo.

Peter A(1), Weigert C, Staiger H, Machicao F, Schick F, Machann J, Stefan N,
Thamer C, Häring HU, Schleicher E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetology,
Vascular Medicine, Nephrology, and Clinical Chemistry, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. andreas.peter@med.uni-tuebingen.de

OBJECTIVE: Increased plasma levels of free fatty acids occur in obesity and type 
2 diabetes and contribute to the development of insulin resistance. Saturated
fatty acids (SFAs) such as palmitate especially have lipotoxic effects leading to
endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress, inflammation, and insulin resistance.
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) plays a key role in preventing lipotoxic
effects, as it converts SFAs to less harmful monounsaturated fatty acids. Here,
we tested the hypothesis that individual differences in the regulation of SCD1
expression by palmitate exist and influence insulin sensitivity and the cellular 
response to palmitate.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Palmitate-induced gene expression was studied in
primary human myotubes of 39 metabolically characterized individuals, as well as 
in an SCD1-overexpressing cell culture model.
RESULTS: SCD1 mRNA expression and inducibility by palmitate in cultured myotubes 
showed a broad interindividual variation, presumably due to inheritable
characteristics of the donors. Overexpression of SCD1 prevented the inflammatory 
and ER stress response to palmitate exposure. In primary human myotubes, high
SCD1 inducibility was associated with a low inflammatory (interleukin [IL]-6,
IL-8, and chemokine [CXC motif] ligand 3 [CXCL3]) and ER stress (CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein [C/EBP] homologous protein, activating transcription factor 3
[ATF3], and X-box binding protein 1 [XBP1]) response to palmitate exposure.
Finally, palmitate-stimulated SCD1 mRNA expression, positively correlated with
intramyocellular lipid (IMCL) content of the donors, was measured by
(1)H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy. After adjustment for IMCL, SCD1 expression 
and inducibility were positively correlated with insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that myocellular SCD1 inducibility by palmitate is an
individual characteristic that modulates lipid storage, palmitate-induced
inflammation, ER stress, and insulin resistance. This may describe individuals
with increased capability of innoxious free fatty acid handling and benign
triglyceride storage.

PMCID: PMC2712792
PMID: 19478146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3834-41. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2870.
Epub 2009 May 26.

Activation of the unfolded protein response is associated with favorable
prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia.

Schardt JA(1), Weber D, Eyholzer M, Mueller BU, Pabst T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Oncology and Clinical Research, University Hospital
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: The unfolded protein response is triggered by the accumulation of
misfolded proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum. Previous studies suggest
that the unfolded protein response is activated in some cancer cell lines and
involved in tumor development. The role of the unfolded protein response during
leukemogenesis is unknown thus far.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Here, we assessed the induction of key effectors of the
unfolded protein response in leukemic cells at diagnosis of 105 acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) patients comprising all subtypes. We determined the formation of
the spliced variant of the X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, as well as
expression levels of calreticulin, GRP78, and CHOP mRNA.
RESULTS: The formation of the spliced variant of XBP1s was detectable in 16.2%
(17 of 105) of AML patients. Consistent with activated unfolded protein response,
this group also had significantly increased expression of calreticulin, GRP78,
and CHOP. AML patients with activated unfolded protein response had lower WBC
counts, lactate dehydrogenase levels, and more frequently, secondary AML. The
incidence of fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) mutations was significantly
lower in patients with activated unfolded protein response. In addition, an
association was observed between activated unfolded protein response and deletion
of chromosome 7. Finally, the clinical course of AML patients with activated
unfolded protein response was more favorable with lower relapse rate (P = 0.0182)
and better overall (P = 0.041) and disease-free survival (P = 0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the unfolded protein response is
activated in a considerable subset of AML patients. AML patients with activated
unfolded protein response present specific clinical characteristics and a more
favorable course of the disease.

PMID: 19470730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009 Sep;66(17):2835-50. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0049-8. Epub 
2009 May 26.

Intersection of the unfolded protein response and hepatic lipid metabolism.

Lee AH(1), Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115-6017, USA. ahlee@hsph.harvard.edu

The liver plays a central role in whole-body lipid metabolism by governing the
synthesis, oxidization, transport and excretion of lipids. The unfolded protein
response (UPR) was identified as a signal transduction system that is activated
by ER stress. Recent studies revealed a critical role of the UPR in hepatic lipid
metabolism. The IRE1/XBP1 branch of the UPR is activated by high dietary
carbohydrates and controls the expression of genes involved in fatty acid and
cholesterol biosynthesis. PERK mediated eIF2alpha phosphorylation is also
required for the expression of lipogenic genes and the development of hepatic
steatosis, likely by activating C/EBP and PPARgamma transcription factors.
Further studies to define the molecular pathways that lead to the activation of
the UPR by nutritional cues in the liver, and their contribution to human
metabolic disorders such as hepatic steatosis, atherosclerosis and type 2
diabetes that are associated with dysregulation of lipid homeostasis, are
warranted.

PMCID: PMC3096022
PMID: 19468685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Lipid Res. 2009 Dec;50(12):2486-501. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900216-JLR200.

The chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate inhibits adipogenesis by modulating the
unfolded protein response.

Basseri S(1), Lhoták S, Sharma AM, Austin RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, St. Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton 
and the Henderson Research Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, L8N 4A6, Canada.

Recent studies have shown a link between obesity and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress. Perturbations in ER homeostasis cause ER stress and activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). Adipocyte differentiation contributes to weight 
gain, and we have shown that markers of ER stress/UPR activation, including
GRP78, phospho-eIF2, and spliced XBP1, are upregulated during adipogenesis. Given
these findings, the objective of this study was to determine whether attenuation 
of UPR activation by the chemical chaperone 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) inhibits
adipogenesis. Exposure of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to 4-PBA in the presence of
differentiation media decreased expression of ER stress markers. Concomitant with
the suppression of UPR activation, 4-PBA resulted in attenuation of adipogenesis 
as measured by lipid accumulation and adiponectin secretion. Consistent with
these in vitro findings, female C57BL/6 mice fed a high-fat diet supplemented
with 4-PBA showed a significant reduction in weight gain and had reduced fat pad 
mass, as compared with the high-fat diet alone group. Furthermore, 4-PBA
supplementation decreased GRP78 expression in the adipose tissue and lowered
plasma triglyceride, glucose, leptin, and adiponectin levels without altering
food intake. Taken together, these results suggest that UPR activation
contributes to adipogenesis and that blocking its activation with 4-PBA prevents 
adipocyte differentiation and weight gain in mice.

PMCID: PMC2781320
PMID: 19461119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Aug;76(2):290-300. doi: 10.1124/mol.109.055418. Epub 2009 May
20.

Antitumor effects of dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin, a novel nuclear
factor-kappaB inhibitor, in human liver cancer cells are mediated through a
reactive oxygen species-dependent mechanism.

Lampiasi N(1), Azzolina A, D'Alessandro N, Umezawa K, McCubrey JA, Montalto G,
Cervello M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Molecular Immunology Alberto Monroy, National
Research Council, Palermo, Italy. lampiasi@ibim.cnr.it

Activation of the nuclear transcription factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) has been
implicated in liver tumorigenesis. We evaluated the effects of a novel NF-kappaB 
inhibitor, dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ), in two human liver cancer cell
lines HA22T/VGH and HuH-6. DHMEQ treatment dose dependently decreased the
DNA-binding capacity of the NF-kappaB p65 subunit, inhibited cell growth and
proliferation, and increased apoptosis as shown by caspase activation, release of
cytochrome c, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage, and down-regulation of
survivin. DHMEQ also induced a dose-dependent activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling, and
inhibition of this pathway significantly reduced cell growth. It is noteworthy
that we observed that DHMEQ stimulated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production
in a dose-dependent manner and that pretreatment of the cells with the
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) significantly reduced DHMEQ-induced ROS
generation. Accordingly, NAC completely reversed the DHMEQ-induced growth
inhibition, caspase activation, and cell death. DHMEQ-treated cells exhibited DNA
damage, as evaluated by accumulation in nuclear foci of phospho-H2AX, which was
completely reversed by NAC. Moreover, DHMEQ induced the expression of genes
involved in the endoplasmic reticulum stress response (GRP78, CHOP, TRB3) and
promoted the splicing of XBP1 mRNA in a dose-dependent fashion in both cell
lines, which was reversed in the presence of NAC. Knockdown of TRB3 mRNA
expression by small interference RNA significantly decreased DHMEQ-induced cell
growth inhibition. These data suggest that DHMEQ antitumor effects are primarily 
mediated through ROS generation. Thereby, considering that cancer cells are under
increased ER stress and oxidative stress conditions, DHMEQ may greatly improve
various anticancer strategies.

PMID: 19461054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2009;10:89-116. doi:
10.1146/annurev-genom-082908-150013.

The genetics of Crohn's disease.

Van Limbergen J(1), Wilson DC, Satsangi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Royal Hospital for
Sick Children, Edinburgh EH9 1LF, United Kingdom. johanvanlimbergen@hotmail.com

From epidemiological data, based on concordance data in family studies, via
linkage analysis to genome-wide association studies, we and others have
accumulated robust evidence implicating more than 30 distinct genomic loci
involved in the genetic susceptibility to Crohn's disease (CD). These loci encode
genes involved in a number of homeostatic mechanisms: innate pattern recognition 
receptors (NOD2/CARD15, TLR4, CARD9), the differentiation of Th17-lymphocytes
(IL-23R, JAK2, STAT3, CCR6, ICOSLG), autophagy (ATG16L1, IRGM, LRRK2),
maintenance of epithelial barrier integrity (IBD5, DLG5, PTGER4, ITLN1, DMBT1,
XBP1), and the orchestration of the secondary immune response (HLA-region,
TNFSF15/TL1A, IRF5, PTPN2, PTPN22, NKX2-3, IL-12B, IL-18RAP, MST1). While many of
these loci also predispose to pediatric CD, an additional number of
childhood-onset loci have been identified recently (e.g., TNFRSF6B). Not only has
the identification of these loci improved our understanding of the
pathophysiology of CD, this knowledge also holds real promise for clinical
practice.

PMID: 19453248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2009 Mar;114(1-2):8-20.

Gene network signaling in hormone responsiveness modifies apoptosis and autophagy
in breast cancer cells.

Clarke R(1), Shajahan AN, Riggins RB, Cho Y, Crawford A, Xuan J, Wang Y, Zwart A,
Nehra R, Liu MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20057, USA. clarker@georgetown.edu

Resistance to endocrine therapies, whether de novo or acquired, remains a major
limitation in the ability to cure many tumors that express detectable levels of
the estrogen receptor alpha protein (ER). While several resistance phenotypes
have been described, endocrine unresponsiveness in the context of therapy-induced
tumor growth appears to be the most prevalent. The signaling that regulates
endocrine resistant phenotypes is poorly understood but it involves a complex
signaling network with a topology that includes redundant and degenerative
features. To be relevant to clinical outcomes, the most pertinent features of
this network are those that ultimately affect the endocrine-regulated components 
of the cell fate and cell proliferation machineries. We show that autophagy, as
supported by the endocrine regulation of monodansylcadaverine staining, increased
LC3 cleavage, and reduced expression of p62/SQSTM1, plays an important role in
breast cancer cells responding to endocrine therapy. We further show that the
cell fate machinery includes both apoptotic and autophagic functions that are
potentially regulated through integrated signaling that flows through key members
of the BCL2 gene family and beclin-1 (BECN1). This signaling links cellular
functions in mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, the latter as a consequence 
of induction of the unfolded protein response. We have taken a seed-gene approach
to begin extracting critical nodes and edges that represent central signaling
events in the endocrine regulation of apoptosis and autophagy. Three seed nodes
were identified from global gene or protein expression analyses and supported by 
subsequent functional studies that established their abilities to affect cell
fate. The seed nodes of nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB), interferon regulatory 
factor-1 (IRF1), and X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1)are linked by directional
edges that support signal flow through a preliminary network that is grown to
include key regulators of their individual function: NEMO/IKKgamma, nucleophosmin
and ER respectively. Signaling proceeds through BCL2 gene family members and
BECN1 ultimately to regulate cell fate.

PMCID: PMC2768542
PMID: 19444933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4225-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2689. Epub 
2009 May 12.

Chemical genomics identifies the unfolded protein response as a target for
selective cancer cell killing during glucose deprivation.

Saito S(1), Furuno A, Sakurai J, Sakamoto A, Park HR, Shin-Ya K, Tsuruo T, Tomida
A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Chemotherapy Center, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo,
Japan.

Glucose deprivation, a cell condition that occurs in solid tumors, activates the 
unfolded protein response (UPR). A key feature of the UPR is the transcription
program activation, which allows the cell to survive under stress conditions.
Here, we show that the UPR transcription program is disrupted by the antidiabetic
biguanides metformin, buformin, and phenformin depending on cellular glucose
availability. These drugs inhibit production of the UPR transcription activators 
XBP1 and ATF4 and induce massive cell death during glucose deprivation as did the
antitumor macrocyclic compound versipelostatin. Gene expression profiling shows
remarkable similarity in the modes of action of biguanides and versipelostatin
determined by the broad range of glucose deprivation-inducible genes.
Importantly, during glucose deprivation, most of the biguanide suppression genes 
overlap with the genes induced by tunicamycin, a chemical UPR inducer. Gene
expression profiling also identifies drug-driven signatures as a tool for
discovering pharmacologic UPR modulators. Our findings show that disrupting the
UPR during glucose deprivation could be an attractive approach for selective
cancer cell killing and could provide a chemical genomic basis for developing
UPR-targeting drugs against solid tumors.

PMID: 19435925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Cell Sci. 2009 May 15;122(Pt 10):1626-36. doi: 10.1242/jcs.045625.

ATF6alpha induces XBP1-independent expansion of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Bommiasamy H(1), Back SH, Fagone P, Lee K, Meshinchi S, Vink E, Sriburi R, Frank 
M, Jackowski S, Kaufman RJ, Brewer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

A link exists between endoplasmic reticulum (ER) biogenesis and the unfolded
protein response (UPR), a complex set of signaling mechanisms triggered by
increased demands on the protein folding capacity of the ER. The UPR
transcriptional activator X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) regulates the expression
of proteins that function throughout the secretory pathway and is necessary for
development of an expansive ER network. We previously demonstrated that
overexpression of XBP1(S), the active form of XBP1 generated by UPR-mediated
splicing of Xbp1 mRNA, augments the activity of the cytidine diphosphocholine
(CDP-choline) pathway for biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) and
induces ER biogenesis. Another UPR transcriptional activator, activating
transcription factor 6alpha (ATF6alpha), primarily regulates expression of ER
resident proteins involved in the maturation and degradation of ER client
proteins. Here, we demonstrate that enforced expression of a constitutively
active form of ATF6alpha drives ER expansion and can do so in the absence of
XBP1(S). Overexpression of active ATF6alpha induces PtdCho biosynthesis and
modulates the CDP-choline pathway differently than does enforced expression of
XBP1(S). These data indicate that ATF6alpha and XBP1(S) have the ability to
regulate lipid biosynthesis and ER expansion by mechanisms that are at least
partially distinct. These studies reveal further complexity in the potential
relationships between UPR pathways, lipid production and ER biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2680102
PMID: 19420237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 19;106(20):8326-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903197106. Epub 2009 May 1.

Sustained activation of XBP1 splicing leads to endothelial apoptosis and
atherosclerosis development in response to disturbed flow.

Zeng L(1), Zampetaki A, Margariti A, Pepe AE, Alam S, Martin D, Xiao Q, Wang W,
Jin ZG, Cockerill G, Mori K, Li YS, Hu Y, Chien S, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London BHF Centre, London, United
Kingdom.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) is a key signal transducer in endoplasmic
reticulum stress response, and its potential role in the atherosclerosis
development is unknown. This study aims to explore the impact of XBP1 on
maintaining endothelial integrity related to atherosclerosis and to delineate the
underlying mechanism. We found that XBP1 was highly expressed at branch points
and areas of atherosclerotic lesions in the arteries of ApoE(-/-) mice, which was
related to the severity of lesion development. In vitro study using human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) indicated that disturbed flow increased
the activation of XBP1 expression and splicing. Overexpression of spliced XBP1
induced apoptosis of HUVECs and endothelial loss from blood vessels during ex
vivo cultures because of caspase activation and down-regulation of VE-cadherin
resulting from transcriptional suppression and matrix metalloproteinase-mediated 
degradation. Reconstitution of VE-cadherin by Ad-VEcad significantly increased
Ad-XBP1s-infected HUVEC survival. Importantly, Ad-XBP1s gene transfer to the
vessel wall of ApoE(-/-) mice resulted in development of atherosclerotic lesions 
after aorta isografting. These results indicate that XBP1 plays an important role
in maintaining endothelial integrity and atherosclerosis development, which
provides a potential therapeutic target to intervene in atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC2676169
PMID: 19416856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Cell. 2009 Apr 24;34(2):191-200. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.02.033.

Cotranslational targeting of XBP1 protein to the membrane promotes cytoplasmic
splicing of its own mRNA.

Yanagitani K(1), Imagawa Y, Iwawaki T, Hosoda A, Saito M, Kimata Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Genetics, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, Japan.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2009 Apr 24;34(2):133-4.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress triggers the cytoplasmic splicing of XBP1 mRNA 
by the transmembrane endoribonuclease IRE1alpha, resulting in activation of the
unfolded protein response, which maintains ER homeostasis. We show that the
unspliced XBP1 (XBP1u) mRNA is localized to the membrane, although its product is
neither a secretory nor a membrane protein and is released to the cytosol after
splicing. Biochemical and mutagenic analyses demonstrated that membrane
localization of XBP1u mRNA required its in-frame translation. An insertional
frame-shift mutation greatly diminished both membrane localization and splicing
of the XBP1u mRNA. Furthermore, membrane localization was compromised by
puromycin treatment and required a hydrophobic region within XBP1u. These data
demonstrate that the nascent XBP1u polypeptide recruits its own mRNA to the
membrane. This system serves to enhance cytoplasmic splicing and could facilitate
a more rapid response to ER stress, and represents a unique way of
cotranslational protein targeting coupled to mRNA maturation.

PMID: 19394296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Apr 15;190(2):131-3. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.01.003.

A novel missense mutation of the XBP1 gene in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Tate G(1), Kishimoto K, Hirayama Y, Suzuki T, Mitsuya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Showa University Fujigaoka Hospital, Yokohama
227-8501, Japan. gentate@yahoo.co.jp

The differentiation of B cells into immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells is
controlled by two transcription factors, B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 
1 (BLIMP1) and X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). XBP1 is a positively acting
transcription factor in the CREB/ATF family that is expressed at a high level in 
plasma cells, and Xbp1-deficient mice were devoid of plasma cells, demonstrating 
that XBP1 is crucial for plasmacytic differentiation. XBP1 acts downstream of
BLIMP1 and regulates a variety of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum-associated
proteins. We have previously reported mutations in the PRDM1 gene (previously
BLIMP1) in 2 of 15 cases of B-cell lymphoma. Here, we describe a novel mutation
in the XBP1 gene in 1 of 5 cases of B-cell lymphoma. A single-base substitution
was found in exon 1 (227G>A) of the XBP1 gene in a patient with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma, resulting in a somatic missense mutation (R76K). To date, no
mutations in the XBP1 gene in B-cell lymphoma have been reported. Taken together 
with previous reports, the present results suggest that two key transcription
factors for the plasmacytic differentiation, XBP1 and BLIMP1, are involved in the
pathogenesis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19380033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Diabetologia. 2009 Jun;52(6):1102-11. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1329-4. Epub 2009
Apr 8.

Amyloid formation in human IAPP transgenic mouse islets and pancreas, and human
pancreas, is not associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Hull RL(1), Zraika S, Udayasankar J, Aston-Mourney K, Subramanian SL, Kahn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Nutrition, VA Puget Sound Health
Care System (151), Seattle, WA 98108, USA. rhull@u.washington.edu

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Supraphysiological levels of the amyloidogenic peptide human
islet amyloid polypeptide have been associated with beta cell endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. However, in human type 2 diabetes, levels of human IAPP
are equivalent or decreased relative to matched controls. Thus, we sought to
investigate whether ER stress is induced during amyloidogenesis at physiological 
levels of human IAPP.
METHODS: Islets from human IAPP transgenic mice that develop amyloid, and
non-transgenic mice that do not, were cultured for up to 7 days in 11.1, 16.7 and
33.3 mmol/l glucose. Pancreases from human IAPP transgenic and non-transgenic
mice and humans with or without type 2 diabetes were also evaluated. Amyloid
formation was determined histologically. ER stress was determined in islets by
quantifying mRNA levels of Bip, Atf4 and Chop (also known as Ddit3) and alternate
splicing of Xbp1 mRNA, or in pancreases by immunostaining for immunoglobulin
heavy chain-binding protein (BIP), C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) and X-box
binding protein 1 (XBP1).
RESULTS: Amyloid formation in human IAPP transgenic islets was associated with
reduced beta cell area in a glucose- and time-dependent manner. However, amyloid 
formation was not associated with significant increases in expression of ER
stress markers under any culture condition. Thapsigargin treatment, a positive
control, did result in significant ER stress. Amyloid formation in vivo in
pancreas samples from human IAPP transgenic mice or humans was not associated
with upregulation of ER stress markers.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data suggest that ER stress is not an obligatory 
pathway mediating the toxic effects of amyloid formation at physiological levels 
of human IAPP.

PMCID: PMC2734275
PMID: 19352619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. EMBO J. 2009 May 6;28(9):1296-307. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.76. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

ER stress protects from retinal degeneration.

Mendes CS(1), Levet C, Chatelain G, Dourlen P, Fouillet A, Dichtel-Danjoy ML,
Gambis A, Ryoo HD, Steller H, Mollereau B.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY,
USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a specific cellular process that allows
the cell to cope with the overload of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). ER stress is commonly associated with degenerative
pathologies, but its role in disease progression is still a matter for debate.
Here, we found that mutations in the ER-resident chaperone, neither inactivation 
nor afterpotential A (NinaA), lead to mild ER stress, protecting photoreceptor
neurons from various death stimuli in adult Drosophila. In addition, Drosophila
S2 cultured cells, when pre-exposed to mild ER stress, are protected from
H(2)O(2), cycloheximide- or ultraviolet-induced cell death. We show that a
specific ER-mediated signal promotes antioxidant defences and inhibits
caspase-dependent cell death. We propose that an immediate consequence of the UPR
not only limits the accumulation of misfolded proteins but also protects tissues 
from harmful exogenous stresses.

PMCID: PMC2683051
PMID: 19339992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Jun;109(2):247-55. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfp060. Epub 2009 Mar
31.

Role of GRP78/BiP degradation and ER stress in deoxynivalenol-induced
interleukin-6 upregulation in the macrophage.

Shi Y(1), Porter K, Parameswaran N, Bae HK, Pestka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Erratum in
    Toxicol Sci. 2009 Jul;110(1):249-50.

The trichothecene mycotoxin deoxynivalenol (DON) induces systemic expression of
the interleukin-6 (IL-6) and other proinflammatory cytokines in the mouse. The
purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that DON triggers an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response in murine macrophages capable of driving IL-6 gene
expression. DON at concentrations up 5000 ng/ml. was not cytotoxic to peritoneal 
cells. However, DON markedly decreased protein levels but not the mRNA levels of 
glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 78 (BiP), a chaperone known to mediate ER stress.
Inhibitor studies suggested that DON-induced GRP78 degradation was cathepsin and 
calpain dependent but was proteosome-independent. RNAi-mediated knockdown of
GRP78 resulted in increased IL-6 gene expression indicating a potential
downregulatory role for this chaperone. GRP78 is critical to the regulation of
the two transcription factors, X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6), which bind to cAMP-response element (CRE) and
drive expression of CRE-dependent genes such as IL-6. DON exposure was found to
increase IRE1alpha protein, its modified products spliced XBP1 mRNA and XBP1
protein as well as ATF6. Knockdown of ATF6 but not XBP1 partially inhibited
DON-induced IL-6 expression in the macrophages. Three other trichothecenes
(satratoxin G, roridin, T-2 toxin) and the ribosome inhibitory protein ricin were
also found to induce GRP78 degradation suggesting that other translation
inhibitors might evoke ER stress. Taken together, these data suggest that in the 
macrophage DON induces GRP78 degradation and evokes an ER stress response that
could contribute, in part, to DON-induced IL-6 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2721661
PMID: 19336499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell. 2009 Mar 27;33(6):679-91. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.02.017.

BAX inhibitor-1 is a negative regulator of the ER stress sensor IRE1alpha.

Lisbona F(1), Rojas-Rivera D, Thielen P, Zamorano S, Todd D, Martinon F, Glavic
A, Kress C, Lin JH, Walter P, Reed JC, Glimcher LH, Hetz C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, FONDAP Center for Molecular Studies of the
Cell, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2009 Mar 27;33(6):669-70.

Adaptation to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress depends on the activation of an
integrated signal transduction pathway known as the unfolded protein response
(UPR). Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) is an evolutionarily conserved ER-resident protein 
that suppresses cell death. Here we have investigated the role of BI-1 in the
UPR. BI-1 expression suppressed IRE1alpha activity in fly and mouse models of ER 
stress. BI-1-deficient cells displayed hyperactivation of the ER stress sensor
IRE1alpha, leading to increased levels of its downstream target X-box-binding
protein-1 (XBP-1) and upregulation of UPR target genes. This phenotype was
associated with the formation of a stable protein complex between BI-1 and
IRE1alpha, decreasing its ribonuclease activity. Finally, BI-1 deficiency
increased the secretory activity of primary B cells, a phenomenon regulated by
XBP-1. Our results suggest a role for BI-1 in early adaptive responses against ER
stress that contrasts with its known downstream function in apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2818874
PMID: 19328063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jun;1792(6):521-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.03.004.
Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Endotoxin causes functional endoplasmic reticulum failure, possibly mediated by
mitochondria.

Kozlov AV(1), Duvigneau JC, Miller I, Nürnberger S, Gesslbauer B, Kungl A,
Ohlinger W, Hartl RT, Gille L, Staniek K, Gregor W, Haindl S, Redl H.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Experimental and Clinical Traumatology in the
AUVA Research Center, Donaueschingenstr. 13, 1200 Vienna, Austria.
andrey.kozlov@lbitrauma.org

Inflammatory response has recently been shown to induce endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and the unfolded protein response (UPR), which either recovers proper
ER function or activates apoptosis. Here we show that endotoxin
(lipopolysaccharide = LPS) can lead to functional ER failure tentatively via a
mitochondrion-dependent pathway in livers of rats. Histological examination did
not reveal significant damage to liver in form of necroses. Electron microscopy
displayed transparent rings appearing around morphologically unchanged
mitochondria, which were identified as dilated ER. The spliced mRNA variant of
X-box protein-1 (XBP1) and also the mRNA of 78 kDa glucose-regulated protein
(GRP78) were up-regulated, both typical markers of ER stress. However, GRP78 was 
down-regulated at the protein level. A pro-apoptotic shift in the bax/bcl-XL mRNA
ratio was not accompanied by translocation of apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) to 
the nucleus, suggesting that the cells entered a pre-apoptotic state, but
apoptosis was not executed. Monooxygenase activity of p450, representing the
detoxification system in ER, was decreased after administration of endotoxin.
Biochemical analysis of proteins important for ER function revealed the
impairment of protein folding, transport, and detoxification suggesting
functional ER failure. We suggest that functional ER failure may be a reason for 
organ dysfunction upon excessive inflammatory response mediated by endotoxin.

PMID: 19327397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Jun 30;41(6):440-52. doi: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.6.049.

Induction of unfolded protein response during neuronal induction of rat bone
marrow stromal cells and mouse embryonic stem cells.

Cho YM(1), Jang YS, Jang YM, Chung SM, Kim HS, Lee JH, Jeong SW, Kim IK, Kim JJ, 
Kim KS, Kwon OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, 2MRC for Cell Death Disease Research Center,
Korea.

When we treated rat bone marrow stromal cells (rBMSCs) with neuronal
differentiation induction media, typical unfolded protein response (UPR) was
observed. BIP/GRP78 protein expression was time-dependently increased, and three 
branches of UPR were all activated. ATF6 increased the transcription of XBP1
which was successfully spliced by IRE1. PERK was phosphorylated and it was
followed by eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Transcription of two downstream targets of
eIF2alpha, ATF4 and CHOP/GADD153, were transiently up-regulated with the peak
level at 24 h. Immunocytochemical study showed clear coexpression of BIP and ATF4
with NeuN and Map2, respectively. UPR was also observed during the neuronal
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells. Finally, chemical
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducers, thapsigargin, tunicamycin, and
brefeldin A, dose-dependently increased both mRNA and protein expressions of
NF-L, and, its expression was specific to BIP-positive rBMSCs. Our results
showing the induction of UPR during neuronal differentiations of rBMSCs and mES
cells as well as NF-L expression by ER stress inducers strongly suggest the
potential role of UPR in neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2705864
PMID: 19322020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Virology. 2009 May 10;387(2):402-13. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.02.021. Epub 2009 
Mar 21.

The 8ab protein of SARS-CoV is a luminal ER membrane-associated protein and
induces the activation of ATF6.

Sung SC(1), Chao CY, Jeng KS, Yang JY, Lai MM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

The 8ab protein of SARS-CoV is a group-specific accessory protein, which is lost 
when the virus was transmitted from animals to humans due to a 29-nucleotide
deletion in the ORF8ab region. Here we found that 8ab protein is associated with 
ER membrane at luminal surface. 8ab protein was found to up-regulate the
synthesis of endogenous ER-resident chaperons involved in protein folding through
the activation of the transcription factor ATF6, while it showed no effect on the
CHOP induction and XBP1 splicing associated with the unfolded protein response
(UPR). When ectopically expressed in mammalian cells, 8ab induced the proteolysis
of ATF6 and the translocation of its cleaved DNA-binding and
transcription-activation domains from the ER to the nucleus. Finally, we showed
that 8ab binds to the luminal domain of ATF6. These findings suggest that 8ab
could modulate the UPR by activating ATF6 to facilitate protein folding and
processing. Thus, the loss of 8ab in SARS-CoV through viral evolution in animals 
may play a role in its pathogenicity.

PMID: 19304306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 Sep;29(6-7):917-25. doi: 10.1007/s10571-009-9376-4. Epub
2009 Mar 13.

Molecular mechanisms leading to neuroprotection/ischemic tolerance: effect of
preconditioning on the stress reaction of endoplasmic reticulum.

Lehotský J(1), Urban P, Pavlíková M, Tatarková Z, Kaminska B, Kaplán P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Comenius
University, 036 01 Martin, Slovak Republic. lehotsky@jfmed.uniba.sk

Ischemic tolerance can be developed by prior ischemic non-injurious stimulus
preconditioning. The molecular mechanisms underlying ischemic tolerance are not
yet fully understood. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effect of
preconditioning/preischemia on ischemic brain injury. We examined the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response (unfolded protein response (UPR)) by measuring the mRNA
and protein levels of specific genes such as ATF6, GRP78, and XBP1 after 15 min
4-VO ischemia and different times of reperfusion (1, 3, and 24 h). The data from 
the group of naïve ischemic rats were compared with data from the group of
preconditioned animals. The results of the experiments showed significant changes
in the gene expression at the mRNA level in the all ischemic/reperfusion phases. 
The influence of preischemia on protein level of XBP was significant in later
ischemic times and at 3 h, the reperfusion reached 230% of the controls. The
protein levels of GRP78 in preischemic animals showed a significant increase in
ischemic and reperfusion times. They exceeded to 50% levels of corresponding
naïve ischemic/reperfusion groups. Preconditioning also induced remarkable
changes in the levels of ATF6 protein in the ischemic phase (about 170%). The
levels of ATF6 remained elevated in earlier reperfusion times (37 and 62%,
respectively) and persisted significantly elevated after 24 h of reperfusion.
This data suggest that preconditioning paradigm (preischemia) underlies its
neuroprotective effect by the attenuation of ER stress response after acute
ischemic/reperfusion insult.

PMID: 19283468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jun;16(6):847-57. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.14. Epub 2009 Feb
27.

Preventing oxidative stress: a new role for XBP1.

Liu Y(1), Adachi M, Zhao S, Hareyama M, Koong AC, Luo D, Rando TA, Imai K,
Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology and Molecular Diagnosis, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Chuo-Ku, Sapporo, Japan.

Antioxidant molecules reduce oxidative stress and protect cells from reactive
oxygen species (ROS)-mediated cellular damage and probably the development of
cancer. We have investigated the contribution of X-box-binding protein (XBP1), a 
major endoplasmic reticulum stress-linked transcriptional factor, to cellular
resistance to oxidative stress. After exposure to hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) or
a strong ROS inducer parthenolide, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP)
and subsequent cell death occurred more extensively in XBP1-deficient cells than 
wild-type mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, whereas two other anticancer agents
induced death similarly in both cells. In XBP1-deficient cells, H(2)O(2) exposure
induced more extensive ROS generation and prolonged p38 phosphorylation, and
expression of several antioxidant molecules including catalase was lower.
Knockdown of XBP1 decreased catalase expression, enhanced ROS generation and MMP 
loss after H(2)O(2) exposure, but extrinsic catalase supply rescued them.
Overexpression of XBP1 recovered catalase expression in XBP1-deficient cells and 
diminished ROS generation after H(2)O(2) exposure. Mutation analysis of the
catalase promoter region suggests a pivotal role of CCAAT boxes, NF-Y-binding
sites, for the XBP1-mediated enhancing effect. Taken together, these results
indicate a protective role of XBP1 against oxidative stress, and its positive
regulation of catalase expression may at least in part account for this function.

PMCID: PMC2826168
PMID: 19247368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Semin Immunol. 2009 Jun;21(3):156-63. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.01.001. Epub 2009 
Feb 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in the intestinal epithelium and inflammatory bowel 
disease.

Kaser A(1), Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II (Gastroenterology and Hepatology), Innsbruck Medical
University, Innsbruck, Austria.

The unfolded protein response as a consequence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress has recently been implicated as a novel mechanism that may lead to
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Impairment of proper ER stress resolution in
highly secretory Paneth and, to a lesser extent, goblet cells within the
epithelium can primarily lead to intestinal inflammation. An inability to manage 
ER stress may not only be a primary originator of intestinal inflammation as
exemplified by genetic polymorphisms in XBP1 that are associated with IBD but
also a perpetuator of inflammation when ER stress is induced secondarily to
inflammatory mediators or microbial factors. Furthermore, ER stress pathways may 
interact with other processes that lead to IBD, notably autophagy.

PMCID: PMC4736746
PMID: 19237300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Leuk Res. 2009 Jul;33(7):924-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.01.027. Epub 2009 Feb
23.

The anti-apoptotic role of the unfolded protein response in Bcr-Abl-positive
leukemia cells.

Tanimura A(1), Yujiri T, Tanaka Y, Hatanaka M, Mitani N, Nakamura Y, Mori K,
Tanizawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bio-Signal Analysis, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

Comment in
    Leuk Res. 2009 Jul;33(7):880-2.

To define the role of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in leukemogenesis, we
investigated UPR activation in the cells expressing the representative oncogene
Bcr-Abl (B-A). The expression of UPR-related proteins and mRNAs, namely,
X-box-binding protein (XBP1) and glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) was
increased in B-A. UPR inhibition using inositol-requiring enzyme 1alpha
(IRE1alpha) or activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) dominant-negative mutants
diminished the ability of Bcr-Abl to protect the cells from etoposide- and
imatinib-induced apoptosis. We also noted that the expression of UPR-related
genes in primary leukemia cells from Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive cells 
was higher than that in the control by quantitative RT-PCR assay. Thus, our
results suggested that UPR is a downstream target of Bcr-Abl and plays an
anti-apoptotic role in Ph-positive leukemia cells.

PMID: 19237191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2009 Feb;13(2):259-63. doi: 10.1517/14728220802682325 .

Inflammatory bowel diseases: highlights from the United European Gastroenterology
Week 2008.

Kaser A(1), Tilg H.

Author information: 
(1)Innsbruck Medical University, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Christian Doppler Research Laboratory for Gut Inflammation, Innsbruck, Austria.

More than 12,000 gastroenterologists attended the United European
Gastroenterology Week 2008 meeting in Vienna. As in recent years, presentations
on inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) were among the hot topics. One of the
plenary lectures presented the first results of the landmark Study of Biologic
and Immunomodulator Naive Patients in Crohn's Disease, a large collaborative
worldwide study assessing the effects of azathioprine or infliximab monotherapy
versus the combination of both drugs in early Crohn's patients. Interestingly,
monotherapy with infliximab was significantly more effective than azathioprine
after a 30-week treatment period; however, highest remission rates were observed 
in combination therapy with infliximab plus azathioprine. This study might affect
the treatment of Crohn's patients in the future. Several studies addressed basic 
immunological aspects in IBDs. It has recently been established that the
epithelial cell is crucial in the pathogenesis of these barrier diseases as
genetic defects, for example, in the X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), lead to
spontaneous enteritis. Besides these cells, intestinal fibroblasts and
microvascular endothelial cells are increasingly recognized as contributing to
various extents to the disease process. Inflammatory bowel disease remains at the
forefront of research in gastroenterology and recent findings will result in new 
treatment strategies.

PMID: 19236243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Br J Haematol. 2009 Apr;145(1):59-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.07592.x. Epub
2009 Feb 6.

Expression of regulatory genes for lymphoplasmacytic cell differentiation in
Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia.

Leleu X(1), Hunter ZR, Xu L, Roccaro AM, Moreau AS, Santos DD, Hatjiharissi E,
Bakthavachalam V, Adamia S, Ho AW, Soumerai J, Patterson CJ, Manning RJ, Hamilton
S, Verselis S, Fox E, Carrasco R, Ghobrial IM, Treon SP.

Author information: 
(1)Bing Center for Waldenstrom's Macroglobulinemia and Harvard Medical School,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia (WM) is a B-cell malignancy characterized by excess
bone marrow (BM) lymphoplasmacytic cells (LPC). The accumulation of LPC in WM may
represent a failure of B-cells to properly differentiate into plasma cells. The
present study investigated transcriptional expression of genes involved in late
B-cell differentiation, including PRDM1, PAX5, XBP1 transcripts and ERN1, in BM
B-cells from 31 patients with WM and six healthy donors. Real time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) determined that approximately
80% of the patients had high XBP1 spliced mRNA expression, 80% of whom had high
mRNA ERN1alpha expression. XBP1, PRDM1 and PAX5 mRNA was present in all patients 
studied. Using relative quantitative RT-PCR we isolated two groups with low and
high expression of XBP1, XBP1 spliced and ERN1alpha. Sequence analysis showed
germline polymorphisms in all genes studied. These data depict for the first time
a heterogeneous expression pattern of the genes involved in late differentiation 
process of plasma cells in patients with WM and propose a role of XBP1-ERN1alpha 
in WM pathogenesis.

PMID: 19220283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Prostate. 2009 Jun 1;69(8):827-37. doi: 10.1002/pros.20931.

Effects of the sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide on prostate tumor-initiating
cells: An integrated molecular profiling approach.

Kawasaki BT(1), Hurt EM, Kalathur M, Duhagon MA, Milner JA, Kim YS, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute at Frederick (NCI-Frederick), National
Institutes of Health,1050Boyles Street, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Recent evidence suggests tumor-initating cells (TICs), also called cancer stem
cells, are responsible for tumor initiation and progression; therefore, they
represent an important cell population for development of future anti-cancer
therapies. In this study, we show that the sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide
(PTL) is cytotoxic to prostate TICs isolated from prostate cancer cell lines:
DU145, PC3, VCAP, and LAPC4, as well as primary prostate TICs. Furthermore, PTL
inhibited TIC-driven tumor formation in mouse xenografts. Using an integrated
molecular profiling approach encompassing proteomics, profiles of activated
transcription factors and genomics we ascertained the effects of PTL on prostate 
cancer cells. In addition to the previously described effects of PTL, we
determined that the non-receptor tyrosine kinase src, and many src signaling
components, including: Csk, FAK, beta1-arrestin, FGFR2, PKC, MEK/MAPK, CaMK,
ELK-1, and ELK-1-dependent genes are novel targets of PTL action. Furthermore,
PTL altered the binding of transcription factors important in prostate cancer
including: C/EBP-alpha, fos related antigen-1 (FRA-1), HOXA-4, c-MYB, SNAIL, SP1,
serum response factor (SRF), STAT3, X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), and p53. In
summary, we show PTL is cytotoxic to prostate TICs and describe the molecular
events of PTL-mediated cytotoxicity. Therefore, PTL represents a promising
therapeutic for prostate cancer treatment.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2700306
PMID: 19204913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Phytomedicine. 2009 May;16(5):416-25. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2008.12.011. Epub
2009 Feb 6.

Hypoglycemic effect of polysaccharide enriched extract of Astragalus membranaceus
in diet induced insulin resistant C57BL/6J mice and its potential mechanism.

Mao XQ(1), Yu F, Wang N, Wu Y, Zou F, Wu K, Liu M, Ouyang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical College of Wuhan University, Hubei
Provincial Key Laboratory of Allergy and Immune-Related Diseases, Wuhan, China.

Our previous studies found that Astragalus polysaccharide (APS) exerts
insulin-sensitizing and hypoglycemic activities in type 2 diabetic (T2DM) rats.
The present study was designed to further confirm the hypoglycemic effect of APS 
and to investigate its possible mechanism underlying the improvement of insulin
resistance in vivo and in vitro. Diet-induced insulin resistant C57BL/6J mice
treated with or without APS (orally, 700 mg/kg/d) for 8 weeks were analyzed and
compared. Simultaneously, an insulin resistant C(2)C(12) cell model and an ER
stressed HepG2 cell model were established and incubated with or without APS (200
microg/ml) for 24h respectively. Systematic insulin sensitivity was measured with
an insulin-tolerance test (ITT) and an homeostasis model assessment (HOMA IR)
index. Metabolic stress variation was analyzed for biochemical parameters and
pathological variations. The expression and activity of protein tyrosine
phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), which plays a very important role in insulin signaling
and in the ER stress response, was measured by immunoprecipitation and Western
blot. The ER stress response was analyzed through XBP1 transcription and splicing
by real-time PCR. APS could alleviate insulin resistance and ER stress induced by
high glucose in vivo and in vitro, respectively. The hyperglycemia, hypolipemia, 
and hyperinsulinemia status were controlled with APS therapy. Insulin action in
the liver of insulin resistant mice was restored significantly with APS
administration. APS enhanced adaptive capacity of the ER and promoted insulin
signaling by the inhibition of the expression and activity of PTP1B. Furthermore,
the anti-obesity effect and hypolipidemia effects of APS were probably due partly
to decreasing the leptin resistance of mice, which would positively couple with
the normalization of plasma insulin levels. We have shown that APS has beneficial
effects on insulin resistance and hyperglycemia. The mechanism is related to the 
alleviation of ER stress and insulin resistance under hyperglycemia conditions.

PMID: 19201177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 15;18(8):1482-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp061. Epub 2009 Feb
3.

No evidence for activation of the unfolded protein response in neuronopathic
models of Gaucher disease.

Farfel-Becker T(1), Vitner E, Dekel H, Leshem N, Enquist IB, Karlsson S, Futerman
AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Gaucher disease (GD), the most common lysosomal storage disorder (LSD), is caused
by defects in the activity of the lysosomal enzyme, glucocerebrosidase, resulting
in intracellular accumulation of glucosylceramide (GlcCer). Neuronopathic forms, 
which comprise only a small percent of GD patients, are characterized by
neurological impairment and neuronal cell death. Little is known about the
pathways leading from GlcCer accumulation to neuronal death or dysfunction but
defective calcium homeostasis appears to be one of the pathways involved.
Recently, endoplasmic reticulum stress together with activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) has been suggested to play a key role in cell death in
neuronopathic forms of GD, and moreover, the UPR was proposed to be a common
mediator of apoptosis in LSDs (Wei et al. (2008) Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, 469-477).
We now systematically examine whether the UPR is activated in neuronal forms of
GD using a selection of neuronal disease models and a combination of western
blotting and semi-quantitative and quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. We do not find any changes in either protein or mRNA levels of a number
of typical UPR markers including BiP, CHOP, XBP1, Herp and GRP58, in either
cultured Gaucher neurons or astrocytes, or in brain regions from mouse models,
even at late symptomatic stages. We conclude that the proposition that the UPR is
a common mediator for apoptosis in all neurodegenerative LSDs needs to be
re-evaluated.

PMID: 19193629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Neurochem. 2009 Feb;108(4):973-985. doi: 10.1111/j.0022-3042.2008.05857.x.

ALS-linked P56S-VAPB, an aggregated loss-of-function mutant of VAPB, predisposes 
motor neurons to ER stress-related death by inducing aggregation of co-expressed 
wild-type VAPB.

Suzuki H(1), Kanekura K, Levine TP, Kohno K, Olkkonen VM, Aiso S, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, KEIO University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

A point mutation (P56S) in the vapb gene encoding an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-integrated membrane protein [vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated 
protein B (VAPB)] causes autosomal-dominant amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In our
earlier study, we showed that VAPB may be involved in the IRE1/XBP1 signaling of 
the unfolded protein response, an ER reaction to inhibit accumulation of
unfolded/ misfolded proteins, while P56S-VAPB formed insoluble aggregates and
lost the ability to mediate the pathway (lossof- function), and suggested that
P56S-VAPB promoted the aggregation of co-expressed wild-type (wt)-VAPB. In this
study, a yeast inositol-auxotrophy assay has confirmed that P56S-VAPB is
functionally a null mutant in vivo. The interaction between P56S-VAPB and wt-VAPB
takes place with a high affinity through the major sperm protein domain in
addition to the interaction through the C-terminal transmembrane domain.
Consequently, wt-VAPB is speculated to preferentially interact with co-expressed 
P56S-VAPB, leading to the recruitment of wt-VAPB into cytosolic aggregates and
the attenuation of its normal function. We have also found that expression of
P56S-VAPB increases the vulnerability of NSC34 motoneuronal cells to ER
stress-induced death. These results lead us to hypothesize that the total loss of
VAPB function in unfolded protein response, induced by one P56S mutant allele,
may contribute to the development of P56SVAPB- induced amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

PMID: 19183264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eukaryot Cell. 2009 Apr;8(4):665-75. doi: 10.1128/EC.00131-08. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

HacA-dependent transcriptional switch releases hacA mRNA from a translational
block upon endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Mulder HJ(1), Nikolaev I.

Author information: 
(1)Genencor, Danisco, Archimedesweg 30, 2333 CN Leiden, The Netherlands.
harm.mulder@danisco.com

Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) in eukaryotes involves the
splicing of an unconventional intron from the mRNA encoding the transcriptional
activator of the pathway. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae a 252-nucleotide (nt)
unconventional intron is spliced out of the transcript of HAC1, changing the 3'
end of the HAC1 open reading frame and relieving the transcript from a
translational block in a single step. The translational block is caused by the
base pairing of part of the unconventional intron with the 5'-untranslated region
(5'UTR). In Aspergillus niger and other aspergilli, the unconventional intron in 
hacA mRNA is only 20 nt long. Since this intron is part of a stable stem-loop
structure, base pairing with the 5'UTR, in contrast to the case with yeast HAC1, 
is not possible. However, analysis of the hacA mRNA revealed a GC-rich inverted
repeat (18 base pairings). Upon the activation of the UPR, the 5'UTR of hacA mRNA
is truncated by 230 nt, removing the left part of this inverted repeat. This
implies a similar release of a translational block as in the case of S.
cerevisiae HAC1 but in two steps. The mechanism behind the 5' truncation, which
does not take place in either yeast HAC1 or mammalian xbp1 mRNA, has been
hitherto unknown. Here we show that during secretion stress in A. niger, hacA
transcription starts from a new start site closer to the ATG, relieving the
transcript from translational attenuation. This transcriptional switch is
mediated by HacA itself and the unfolded protein response element 2 (UPRE2) in
the hacA promoter.

PMCID: PMC2669205
PMID: 19181870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Haematologica. 2009 Mar;94(3):419-22. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.001156. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

Expression pattern of XBP1(S) in human B-cell lymphomas.

Maestre L(1), Tooze R, Cañamero M, Montes-Moreno S, Ramos R, Doody G, Boll M,
Barrans S, Baena S, Piris MA, Roncador G.

Author information: 
(1)Monoclonal Antibodies Unit, Biotechnology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

The transcription factor XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1) is essential for plasma
cell (PC) differentiation and immunoglobulin secretion. XBP1 is widely expressed,
but its activity is precisely controlled by mRNA splicing in response to
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. It is the active form of XBP1, XBP1(S), which 
is required for PC differentiation. The relationship between XBP1(S) expression
and PC differentiation in human tissue and its expression in hematologic
malignancies has eluded assessment. With a novel antibody, we now define XBP1(S) 
expression in a large series of normal and neoplastic lymphoid tissues. We
establish that XBP1(S) provides a specific marker of advanced plasma
differentiation and in lymphoid malignancies is restricted to PC-derived
neoplasms and plasmablastic diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. XBP1(S) expression
delineates heterogeneity amongst plasmablastic diffuse large B-cell lymphomas,
identifying a distinct tumor sub-group. Furthermore, our results establish a
direct and practical means of assessing ER stress in human tumors.

PMCID: PMC2649342
PMID: 19176362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009 Mar;12(2):281-3. doi: 10.1017/S1461145708009863.
Epub 2009 Jan 20.

Association of X-box binding protein 1 ( XBP1) genotype with morning cortisol and
1-year clinical course after a major depressive episode.

Grunebaum MF(1), Galfalvy HC, Huang YY, Cooper TB, Burke AK, Agnello M, Oquendo
MA, Mann JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
mfg14@columbia.edu

Brain diseases including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's involve the cellular
'unfolded protein' (UPR) stress response. Psychiatric illnesses such as
depressive disorders are thought to involve brain stress-response pathways. The
XBP1 gene encodes a key transcription factor in the UPR stress response and
therefore could be involved in the pathophysiology of depressive disorders. A
functional polymorphism (-116C-->G) in the XBP1 promoter was linked in some
studies to bipolar disorder. Among 132 adults (mean age 39 yr) who presented with
a major depressive episode, this polymorphism was found to be associated with a
worse course during 1-yr prospective follow-up. In a subgroup (n=22), the
polymorphism was associated with higher plasma levels of the stress hormone
cortisol. The results suggest that hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical and
cellular stress pathways involving the XBP1 gene may be involved in the
pathophysiology of major depressive disorder. These relationships merit further
study.

PMCID: PMC3773868
PMID: 19154631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004216. Epub 2009 Jan 16.

Overexpression of myocilin in the Drosophila eye activates the unfolded protein
response: implications for glaucoma.

Carbone MA(1), Ayroles JF, Yamamoto A, Morozova TV, West SA, Magwire MM, Mackay
TF, Anholt RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glaucoma is the world's second leading cause of bilateral blindness
with progressive loss of vision due to retinal ganglion cell death. Myocilin has 
been associated with congenital glaucoma and 2-4% of primary open angle glaucoma 
(POAG) cases, but the pathogenic mechanisms remain largely unknown. Among several
hypotheses, activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) has emerged as a
possible disease mechanism.
METHODOLOGY / PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used a transgenic Drosophila model to
analyze whole-genome transcriptional profiles in flies that express human
wild-type or mutant MYOC in their eyes. The transgenic flies display ocular fluid
discharge, reflecting ocular hypertension, and a progressive decline in their
behavioral responses to light. Transcriptional analysis shows that genes
associated with the UPR, ubiquitination, and proteolysis, as well as metabolism
of reactive oxygen species and photoreceptor activity undergo altered
transcriptional regulation. Following up on the results from these
transcriptional analyses, we used immunoblots to demonstrate the formation of
MYOC aggregates and showed that the formation of such aggregates leads to
induction of the UPR, as evident from activation of the fluorescent UPR marker,
xbp1-EGFP. CONCLUSIONS / SIGNIFICANCE: Our results show that aggregation of MYOC 
in the endoplasmic reticulum activates the UPR, an evolutionarily conserved
stress pathway that culminates in apoptosis. We infer from the Drosophila model
that MYOC-associated ocular hypertension in the human eye may result from
aggregation of MYOC and induction of the UPR in trabecular meshwork cells. This
process could occur at a late age with wild-type MYOC, but might be accelerated
by MYOC mutants to account for juvenile onset glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC2615221
PMID: 19148291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Brain Res. 2009 Feb 27;1257:16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.104. Epub 2008
Dec 16.

Protective effect against Parkinson's disease-related insults through the
activation of XBP1.

Sado M(1), Yamasaki Y, Iwanaga T, Onaka Y, Ibuki T, Nishihara S, Mizuguchi H,
Momota H, Kishibuchi R, Hashimoto T, Wada D, Kitagawa H, Watanabe TK.

Author information: 
(1)Second Institute of New Drug Discovery, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
463-10 Kagasuno, Kawauchi-cho, Tokushima 771-0192, Japan.

The accumulation of misfolded and unfolded proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
induces ER stress, activating the unfolded protein response (UPR). Recent
evidence has suggested the relationship between UPR and dopaminergic neuronal
cell death in Parkinson's disease (PD); however, it remains unclear whether it
makes sense to modulate UPR, to mitigate the progression of PD. In this study, we
investigated a role of the IRE1 alpha-XBP1 pathway in the survival of
dopaminergic cells, under stress induced by PD-related insults. The exogenous
expression of the active-form XBP1 (XBP1s) protein had protective effects against
cell death induced by 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) and proteasome
inhibitors. Moreover, adenoviral XBP1s expression significantly suppressed the
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the mouse model of PD, as induced by
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). These results demonstrate
that the enhancement of XBP1 could be a novel PD therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 19135031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004161. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Synergistic apoptosis induction in leukemic cells by the phosphatase inhibitor
salubrinal and proteasome inhibitors.

Drexler HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, Muenster, Germany. hannes.drexler@mpi-muenster.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Cells adapt to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress by arresting global 
protein synthesis while simultaneously activating specific transcription factors 
and their downstream targets. These processes are mediated in part by the
phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha. Following restoration of homeostasis protein synthesis is resumed when
the serine/threonine-protein phosphatase PP1 dephosphorylates and reactivates
eIF2alpha. Proteasome inhibitors, used to treat multiple myeloma patients evoke
ER-stress and apoptosis by blocking the ER-associated degradation of misfolded
proteins (ERAD), however, the role of eIF2alpha phosphorylation in leukemic cells
under conditions of proteasome inhibitor-mediated ER stress is currently unclear.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Bcr-Abl-positive and negative leukemic cell
lines were used to investigate the functional implications of PP1-related
phosphatase activities on eIF2alpha phosphorylation in proteasome
inhibitor-mediated ER stress and apoptosis. Rather unexpectedly, salubrinal, a
recently identified PP1 inhibitor capable to protect against ER stress in various
model systems, strongly synergized with proteasome inhibitors to augment
apoptotic death of different leukemic cell lines. Salubrinal treatment did not
affect the phosphorlyation status of eIF2alpha. Furthermore, the proapoptotic
effect of salubrinal occurred independently from the chemical nature of the
proteasome inhibitor, was recapitulated by a second unrelated phosphatase
inhibitor and was unaffected by overexpression of a dominant negative eIF2alpha
S51A variant that can not be phosphorylated. Salubrinal further aggravated
ER-stress and proteotoxicity inflicted by the proteasome inhibitors on the
leukemic cells since characteristic ER stress responses, such as ATF4 and CHOP
synthesis, XBP1 splicing, activation of MAP kinases and eventually apoptosis were
efficiently abrogated by the translational inhibitor cycloheximide.
CONCLUSIONS: Although PP1 activity does not play a major role in regulating the
ER stress response in leukemic cells, phosphatase signaling nevertheless
significantly limits proteasome inhibitor-mediated ER-stress and apoptosis.
Inclusion of specific phosphatase inhibitors might therefore represent an option 
to improve current proteasome inhibitor-based treatment modalities for
hematological cancers.

PMCID: PMC2613525
PMID: 19129918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cell Struct Funct. 2009;34(1):1-10. Epub 2009 Jan 1.

pXBP1(U), a negative regulator of the unfolded protein response activator
pXBP1(S), targets ATF6 but not ATF4 in proteasome-mediated degradation.

Yoshida H(1), Uemura A, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan. hide@biophysics.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Cells from yeast to humans activate unconventional mRNA splicing when unfolded
proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) under ER stress conditions.
The substrate of this splicing in mammalian cells is XBP1 mRNA, which encodes the
unfolded protein response (UPR)-specific transcription factor XBP1. The
C-terminal region of XBP1 is switched as a result of the splicing. Thus,
unspliced and spliced mRNAs produce pXBP1(U) of 261 aa and pXBP1(S) of 376 aa,
respectively, with the N-terminal region containing the DNA-binding domain
shared. As the pXBP1(S)-specific C-terminal region functions as an activation
domain, pXBP1(S) can activate transcription efficiently. We recently found that
pXBP1(U) shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm, owing to the presence of a
nuclear exclusion signal in the pXBP1(U)-specific C-terminal region, in marked
contrast to the exclusively nuclear localization of pXBP1(S). pXBP1(U) can
associate with pXBP1(S), and pXBP1(U)-pXBP1(S) complex is rapidly degraded by the
proteasome. Two other transcription factors are activated in response to ER
stress, namely ATF6 and ATF4. ATF6 is a UPR-specific transcription factor,
whereas ATF4 is activated by not only ER stress but also various other stimuli.
In this study, we show that pXBP1(U) targets the active form of ATF6 but not ATF4
for destruction by the proteasome via direct association. This enhanced
degradation is mediated by the degradation domain located at the
pXBP1(U)-specific C-terminal end. We conclude that pXBP1(U) functions as a
negative regulator of the UPR-specific transcription factors ATF6 and pXBP1(S).

PMID: 19122331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):466-76.

CHAC1/MGC4504 is a novel proapoptotic component of the unfolded protein response,
downstream of the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP cascade.

Mungrue IN(1), Pagnon J, Kohannim O, Gargalovic PS, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. imungrue@yahoo.com

To understand pathways mediating the inflammatory responses of human aortic
endothelial cells to oxidized phospholipids, we previously used a combination of 
genetics and genomics to model a coexpression network encompassing >1000 genes.
CHAC1 (cation transport regulator-like protein 1), a novel gene regulated by
ox-PAPC (oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-3-glycero-phosphorylcholine), was 
identified in a co-regulated group of genes enriched for components of the ATF4
(activating transcription factor 4) arm of the unfolded protein response pathway.
Herein, we characterize the role of CHAC1 and validate the network model. We
first define the activation of CHAC1 mRNA by chemical unfolded protein
response-inducers, but not other cell stressors. We then define activation of
CHAC1 by the ATF4-ATF3-CHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), and not parallel XBP1 (X 
box-binding protein 1) or ATF6 pathways, using siRNA and/or overexpression
plasmids. To examine the subset of genes downstream of CHAC1, we used expression 
microarray analysis to identify a list of 227 differentially regulated genes. We 
validated the activation of TNFRSF6B (tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,
member 6b), a FASL decoy receptor, in cells treated with CHAC1 small interfering 
RNA. Finally, we showed that CHAC1 overexpression enhanced apoptosis, while CHAC1
small interfering RNA suppressed apoptosis, as determined by TUNEL, PARP
(poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase) cleavage, and AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor)
nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC2846782
PMID: 19109178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Circ Res. 2009 Feb 13;104(3):328-36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.183749. Epub
2008 Dec 23.

Oxidized low-density lipoproteins trigger endoplasmic reticulum stress in
vascular cells: prevention by oxygen-regulated protein 150 expression.

Sanson M(1), Augé N, Vindis C, Muller C, Bando Y, Thiers JC, Marachet MA,
Zarkovic K, Sawa Y, Salvayre R, Nègre-Salvayre A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U-858, Vascular
Biology Department, IFR-31, Toulouse, France.

Oxidized low-density lipoproteins (oxLDLs) trigger various biological responses
potentially involved in atherogenesis. Disturbing endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
function results in ER stress and unfolded protein response, which tends to
restore ER homeostasis but switches to apoptosis when ER stress is prolonged. We 
aimed to investigate whether ER stress is induced by oxLDLs and can be prevented 
by the ER-associated chaperone ORP150 (150-kDa oxygen-regulated protein). oxLDLs 
and the lipid oxidation products 7-ketocholesterol and 4-hydroxynonenal induce ER
stress in human endothelial cells (HMEC-1), characterized by the activation of ER
stress sensors (phosphorylation of Ire1alpha and PERK, nuclear translocation of
ATF6) and of their subsequent pathways (eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha
phosphorylation, expression of XBP1/spliced XBP1, CHOP, and KDEL chaperones
GRP78, GRP94, ORP150). ER stress was inhibited by the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine. In advanced atherosclerotic lesions, phospho-Ire1alpha, KDEL,
and ORP150 staining were localized in lipid-rich areas with 4-hydroxynonenal
adducts and CD68-positive macrophagic cells. By comparison, staining for
4-hydroxynonenal, phospho-Ire1alpha, KDEL, and ORP were faint and more diffuse in
intimal hyperplasia. ER stress takes part in the apoptotic effect of oxLDLs,
through the Ire1alpha/c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway, as assessed by the
protective effect of specific small interfering RNAs and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
inhibitor. Forced expression of the chaperone ORP150 reduced both oxLDL-induced
ER stress and apoptosis. ER stress markers and ORP150 chaperone are expressed in 
areas containing oxLDLs in atherosclerotic lesions and are induced by oxLDLs and 
oxidized lipids in cultured cells. The forced expression of ORP150 highlights its
new protective role against oxLDL-induced ER stress and subsequent apoptosis.

PMID: 19106412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Nature. 2009 Feb 5;457(7230):736-40. doi: 10.1038/nature07641. Epub 2008 Dec 14.

Messenger RNA targeting to endoplasmic reticulum stress signalling sites.

Aragón T(1), van Anken E, Pincus D, Serafimova IM, Korennykh AV, Rubio CA, Walter
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158-2517, USA. Tomas.Aragon@ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Feb 5;457(7230):668-9.

Deficiencies in the protein-folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in
all eukaryotic cells lead to ER stress and trigger the unfolded protein response 
(UPR). ER stress is sensed by Ire1, a transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease,
which initiates the non-conventional splicing of the messenger RNA encoding a key
transcription activator, Hac1 in yeast or XBP1 in metazoans. In the absence of ER
stress, ribosomes are stalled on unspliced HAC1 mRNA. The translational control
is imposed by a base-pairing interaction between the HAC1 intron and the HAC1 5' 
untranslated region. After excision of the intron, transfer RNA ligase joins the 
severed exons, lifting the translational block and allowing synthesis of Hac1
from the spliced HAC1 mRNA to ensue. Hac1 in turn drives the UPR gene expression 
program comprising 7-8% of the yeast genome to counteract ER stress. Here we show
that, on activation, Ire1 molecules cluster in the ER membrane into discrete foci
of higher-order oligomers, to which unspliced HAC1 mRNA is recruited by means of 
a conserved bipartite targeting element contained in the 3' untranslated region. 
Disruption of either Ire1 clustering or HAC1 mRNA recruitment impairs UPR
signalling. The HAC1 3' untranslated region element is sufficient to target other
mRNAs to Ire1 foci, as long as their translation is repressed. Translational
repression afforded by the intron fulfils this requirement for HAC1 mRNA.
Recruitment of mRNA to signalling centres provides a new paradigm for the control
of eukaryotic gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2768538
PMID: 19079237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Nature. 2009 Feb 5;457(7230):687-93. doi: 10.1038/nature07661. Epub 2008 Dec 14.

The unfolded protein response signals through high-order assembly of Ire1.

Korennykh AV(1), Egea PF, Korostelev AA, Finer-Moore J, Zhang C, Shokat KM,
Stroud RM, Walter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, USA. alexei.korennykh@ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Feb 5;457(7230):668-9.

Aberrant folding of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum activates the
bifunctional transmembrane kinase/endoribonuclease Ire1. Ire1 excises an intron
from HAC1 messenger RNA in yeasts and Xbp1 messenger RNA in metozoans encoding
homologous transcription factors. This non-conventional mRNA splicing event
initiates the unfolded protein response, a transcriptional program that relieves 
the endoplasmic reticulum stress. Here we show that oligomerization is central to
Ire1 function and is an intrinsic attribute of its cytosolic domains. We obtained
the 3.2-A crystal structure of the oligomer of the Ire1 cytosolic domains in
complex with a kinase inhibitor that acts as a potent activator of the Ire1
RNase. The structure reveals a rod-shaped assembly that has no known precedence
among kinases. This assembly positions the kinase domain for
trans-autophosphorylation, orders the RNase domain, and creates an interaction
surface for binding of the mRNA substrate. Activation of Ire1 through
oligomerization expands the mechanistic repertoire of kinase-based signalling
receptors.

PMCID: PMC2846394
PMID: 19079236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;23(1):100-12. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0071. Epub 2008 Oct
30.

GNRH induces the unfolded protein response in the LbetaT2 pituitary gonadotrope
cell line.

Do MH(1), Santos SJ, Lawson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Mail Code 0674, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

The neuropeptide GNRH 1 stimulates the secretion of the reproductive hormone LH
in pituitary gonadotropes. Other secretory cell types depend on the unfolded
protein response (UPR) pathway to regulate protein synthesis and protect against 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in response to differentiation or secretory
stimuli. This study investigated the role of the UPR in GNRH action within the
LbetaT2 gonadotrope model. Cells were treated with GNRH, and the activation of
UPR signaling components and general translational status was examined. The
ER-resident stress sensors, Atf6, Eif2ak3, and Ern1, are all present, and GNRH
stimulation results in the phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2A kinase 3 and its downstream effector, eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 2A. Additionally, activation of the UPR was confirmed both in LbetaT2 as
well as mouse primary pituitary cells through identifying GNRH-induced splicing
of Xbp1 mRNA, a transcription factor activated by splicing by the ER stress
sensor, ER to nucleus signaling 1. Ribosome profiling revealed that GNRH
stimulation caused a transient attenuation in translation, a hallmark of the UPR,
remodeling ribosomes from actively translating polysomes to translationally
inefficient ribonucleoprotein complexes and monosomes. The transient attenuation 
of specific mRNAs was also observed. Overall, the results show that GNRH
activates components of the UPR pathway, and this pathway may play an important
physiological role in adapting the ER of gonadotropes to the burden of their
secretory demand.

PMCID: PMC2646596
PMID: 18974261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Dent Res. 2008 Nov;87(11):1058-62.

XBP1 may determine the size of the ameloblast endoplasmic reticulum.

Tsuchiya M(1), Tye CE, Sharma R, Smith CE, Bartlett JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytokine Biology, The Forsyth Institute, and Department of
Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 140 The Fenway, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Ameloblasts progress through defined stages of development as enamel forms on
teeth. Pre-secretory ameloblasts give rise to tall columnar secretory ameloblasts
that direct the enamel to achieve its full thickness. During the maturation
stage, the ameloblasts shorten and direct the enamel to achieve its final
hardened form. Here we ask how the volume of selected ameloblast organelles
changes (percent volume per ameloblast) as ameloblasts progress through six
defined developmental stages. We demonstrate that mitochondria volume peaks
during late maturation, indicating that maturation-stage ameloblasts maintain a
high level of metabolic activity. Also, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) volume
changes significantly as a function of developmental stage. This prompted us to
ask if X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) plays a role in regulating ameloblast ER
volume, as has been previously demonstrated for secretory acinar cells and for
plasma cell differentiation. We demonstrate that Xbp1 expression correlates
positively with percent volume of ameloblast ER.

PMCID: PMC2593005
PMID: 18946015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Oct;7(10):3429-40. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0498.

15-deoxy-Delta12,14-prostaglandin J2 up-regulates death receptor 5 gene
expression in HCT116 cells: involvement of reactive oxygen species and C/EBP
homologous transcription factor gene transcription.

Su RY(1), Chi KH, Huang DY, Tai MH, Lin WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Although 15-deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin J(2) (15dPGJ(2)) was reported to
up-regulate death receptor 5 (DR5) protein expression and sensitize TRAIL-induced
cytotoxicity, its action mechanism remains unclear. Using HCT116 colon cancer
cells, we found that sensitization of TRAIL-induced cytotoxicity by 15dPGJ(2)
resulted from up-regulation of DR5 via gene transcription but was not associated 
with PPAR-gamma activation. Moreover, 15dPGJ(2) induced GRP78, XBP1, and C/EBP
homologous transcription factor (CHOP) expression in HCT116 cells, confirming
that 15dPGJ(2) is an endoplasmic reticulum stress inducer. Knockdown of the CHOP 
gene by siRNA attenuated DR5 up-regulation and the sensitized cytotoxicity in
colon cancer HCT116 and SW480. With deletion plasmids of DR5 promoters, we found 
that the CHOP-binding site was involved in activating the DR5 gene by 15dPGJ(2). 
A mechanistic study showed the contributions of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
intracellular calcium in CHOP and DR5 gene up-regulation. 15dPGJ(2) was also
found to induce DR5 in two prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and PC3. Although in
LNCaP DR5 up-regulation was accompanied by CHOP expression by 15dPGJ(2), no
significant increase in CHOP expression or DR5 promoter activity was observed in 
PC3 cells. Intriguingly, 15dPGJ(2) induced ROS and calcium production in PC3
cells. This inability to induce CHOP was not due to the p53-null in PC3 cells, as
similar extents of increase in CHOP protein were found due to 15dPGJ(2) in both
wild-type and p53-null HCT116 cells. In summary, the effect of up-regulation of
DR5 by 15dPGJ(2) in colon cancer cells is independent of PPAR-gamma and p53 but
relies on CHOP induction through gene transcription involving ROS and calcium.

PMID: 18852146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2010 Feb;16(1):99-102. doi: 10.1177/1076029608323498.
Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Relationship between functional promoter polymorphism in the XBP1 gene (-116C/G) 
and obesity.

Yilmaz E(1), Berberoglu M, Akar N.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Institute, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.
eyilmaz@medicine.ankara.edu.tr

Endoplasmic reticulum stress is a central feature of obesity, insulin resistance,
and type 2 diabetes. A polymorphism of the XBP1 gene (-116C/G), a transcription
factor that modulates the endoplasmic reticulum stress response, causes an
impairment of its positive feedback system. The authors examined a role of the
polymorphism in the development of obesity. The polymorphism was investigated in 
clinically obese children and compared with controls. Significant difference of
genotype distribution was observed, which suggested that the -116C/G genotype may
be a risk factor for at least pediatric obesity.

PMID: 18840627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochem J. 2009 Feb 1;417(3):695-703. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081706.

Transcriptional induction of the human asparagine synthetase gene during the
unfolded protein response does not require the ATF6 and IRE1/XBP1 arms of the
pathway.

Gjymishka A(1), Su N, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genetics Institute, Shands
Cancer Center and Center for Nutritional Sciences, University of Florida College 
of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The UPR (unfolded protein response) pathway comprises three signalling cascades
mediated by the ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress-sensor proteins PERK [PKR
(double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase)-like ER kinase], IRE1
(inositol-requiring kinase 1) and ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6). The
present study shows that ASNS (asparagine synthetase) transcription activity was 
up-regulated in HepG2 cells treated with the UPR activators thapsigargin and
tunicamycin. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) analysis demonstrated that
during ER stress, ATF4, ATF3 and C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) 
bind to the ASNS proximal promoter region that includes the genomic sequences
NSRE (nutrient-sensing response element)-1 and NSRE-2, previously implicated by
mutagenesis in UPR activation. Consistent with increased ASNS transcription, ChIP
analysis also demonstrated that UPR signalling resulted in enhanced recruitment
of general transcription factors, including RNA Pol II (polymerase II), to the
ASNS promoter. The ASNS gene is also activated by the AAR (amino acid response)
pathway following amino acid deprivation of tissue or cells. Immunoblot analysis 
of HepG2 cells demonstrated that simultaneous activation of the AAR and UPR
pathways did not further increase the ASNS or ATF4 protein abundance when
compared with triggering either pathway alone. In addition, siRNA (small
interfering RNA)-mediated knockdown of XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1), ATF6alpha 
or ATF6beta expression did not affect ASNS transcription, whereas siRNA against
ATF4 suppressed ASNS transcription during UPR activation. Collectively, these
results indicate that the PERK/p-eIF2alpha (phosphorylated eukaryotic initiation 
factor 2alpha)/ATF4 signalling cascade is the only arm of the UPR that is
responsible for ASNS transcriptional induction during ER stress. Consequently,
ASNS NSRE-1 and NSRE-2, in addition to ERSE (ER stress response element)-I,
ERSE-II and the mUPRE (mammalian UPR element), function as mammalian
ER-stress-responsive sequences.

PMCID: PMC3595601
PMID: 18840095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Nov 28;376(4):758-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.09.059. Epub 2008 Sep 20.

Attenuated BDNF-induced upregulation of GABAergic markers in neurons lacking
Xbp1.

Hayashi A(1), Kasahara T, Kametani M, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

XBP1 is a transcription factor induced by unconventional splicing associated with
endoplasmic reticulum stress and plays a role in development. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) causes splicing of Xbp1 mRNA in neurites, and Xbp1 is 
required for BDNF-induced neurite extension and branching. To search for the
molecular mechanisms of how Xbp1 plays a role in neural development,
comprehensive gene expression analysis was performed in primary telencephalic
neurons obtained from Xbp1 knockout mice at embryonic day 12.5. By searching for 
the genes induced by BDNF in wild type neurons but not in Xbp1 knockout mice, we 
found that upregulation of three GABAergic markers, somatostatin (Sst),
neuropeptide Y (Npy), and calbindin (Calb1), were compromised in Xbp1 knockout
neurons. Attenuated upregulation of Npy and Calb1 in Xbp1 knockout neurons was
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR. This finding may be relevant to impaired
BDNF-induced neurite extension in Xbp1 knockout neurons.

PMID: 18809377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Apoptosis. 2008 Nov;13(11):1378-85. doi: 10.1007/s10495-008-0264-z.

Rottlerin induces pro-apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum stress through the protein 
kinase C-delta-independent pathway in human colon cancer cells.

Lim JH(1), Park JW, Kim SH, Choi YH, Choi KS, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Chronic Disease Research Center, Institute for
Medical Science, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 194 DongSan-Dong
Jung-Gu, Taegu 700-712, South Korea.

Rottlerin, a compound reported to be a PKC delta-selective inhibitor, has been
shown to induce growth arrest or apoptosis of human cancer cell lines. In our
study, rottlerin dose-dependently induced apoptotic cell death in colon carcinoma
cells. Treatment of HT29 human colon carcinoma cells with rottlerin was found to 
induce a number of signature ER stress markers; phosphorylation of eukaryotic
initiation factor-2alpha (eIF-2alpha), ER stress-specific XBP1 splicing, and
up-regulation of glucose-regulated protein (GRP)-78 and CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-homologous protein (CHOP). However, suppression of PKC delta expression
by siRNA or overexpression of WT-PKC delta and DN-PKC delta did not abrogate the 
rottlerin-mediated induction of CHOP. These results suggest that rottlerin
induces up-regulation of CHOP via PKC delta-independent pathway. Furthermore,
down-regulation of CHOP expression using CHOP siRNA attenuated rottlerin-induced 
apoptosis. Taken together, the present study thus provides strong evidence to
support an important role of ER stress response in mediating the
rottlerin-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 18807195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 Mar;29(2):181-92. doi: 10.1007/s10571-008-9309-7. Epub
2008 Sep 19.

Molecular analysis of endoplasmic reticulum stress response after global
forebrain ischemia/reperfusion in rats: effect of neuroprotectant simvastatin.

Urban P(1), Pavlíková M, Sivonová M, Kaplán P, Tatarková Z, Kaminska B, Lehotský 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Comenius
University, Malá Hora 4, 03601 Martin, Slovak Republic.

Simvastatin is a cholesterol-lowering agent whose functional significance and
neuroprotective mechanism in ischemic brain injury is not yet solved. The purpose
of this study is to evaluate the effect of simvastatin on ischemic brain injury. 
We examined the endoplasmic reticulum stress response (UPR/unfolded protein
response), by measuring the mRNA and protein levels of specific genes such as
ATF6, GRP78, and XBP1 after 15 min 4-VO ischemia and different times of
reperfusion (1, 3, and 24 h). The results from the group of naïve ischemic rats
were compared with results from the group of pre-treated animals with
simvastatin. The results of the experiments showed significant increase in all
genes at the mRNA level in ischemic phase (about 43% for XBP1, 58% for GRP78, and
39% for ATF6 more than control). The protein level of XBP1 was decreased in
pre-treated animals at ischemic phase and first hour of reperfusion (about 15%
less), and did not reach control levels. The protein levels of GRP78 were maximal
at third hour of reperfusion in statin group with a small decrease at 24 h of
reperfusion in both groups. The levels of ATF6 mRNA in statin-treated animals was
higher in comparison to non-statin animals at the ischemic phase and the third
hour of reperfusion (about 35% higher), which was also translated into the higher
protein level. This could indicate that one of the main proteins targeted to
enhance neuroprotective effect to ER during the first two hours of reperfusion
was ATF6 protein, the levels of which were 60% higher than in non-treated
animals. These data suggest that simvastatin, in addition to the proposed
neuroprotective effect, exerts a neuroprotective role in the attenuation of ER
stress response after acute ischemic/reperfusion insult.

PMID: 18807172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Radiat Res. 2008 Nov;49(6):587-96. Epub 2008 Sep 19.

ERp29 is a radiation-responsive gene in IEC-6 cell.

Zhang B(1), Wang M, Yang Y, Wang Y, Pang X, Su Y, Wang J, Ai G, Zou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Combined Injury, State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and
Combined Injury, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

ERp29 is a resident protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen, which is
thought to be involved in the folding of secretory proteins. In our previous
work, it was found that, when treated with ionizing radiation (IR), the ERp29
expression was increased in mouse intestinal epithelia and cultured IEC-6 cells, 
which suggested that ERp29 might be a radiation-induced gene. The current work is
to confirm the induction of ERp29 by IR and to analyze its role in irradiated
IEC-6 cells. Our results showed that ERp29 expression was elevated by IR in IEC-6
cells at mRNA and protein levels in a time-dependent manner. IEC-6 cells with
different exogenous ERp29 expression were obtained by transfection with sense and
antisense expression vectors of ERp29 coding region. As ERp29 expression was
inhibited, these cells exhibited more serious radiation injury and more
sensitivity to IR-induced apoptosis. To further elucidate the induction of ERp29,
we analyzed the XBP1 expression after IR. Results showed that the spliced form of
XBP1 mRNA rapidly reached a peak at 3 hours after irradiation, which indicated
that UPR sensor was involved in radiation and might be a reason to induce ERp29
expression. Our results demonstrate that ERp29 is a radiation associated protein 
and plays an important role in protecting cells from IR.

PMID: 18802324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Nov;19(11):2225-36. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007121313. Epub 2008
Sep 5.

Proteinuria and hyperglycemia induce endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Lindenmeyer MT(1), Rastaldi MP, Ikehata M, Neusser MA, Kretzler M, Cohen CD,
Schlöndorff D.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Center, Medizinische Poliklinik, University of Munich, Munich,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Nov;19(11):2040-2.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an important site for protein folding and
becomes "stressed" when its capacity to fold proteins is overwhelmed. In
response, "unfolded protein response" (UPR) genes are induced, increasing the
capacity to fold proteins; if the response is insufficient, then apoptosis
ensues. For investigation of whether proteinuria and hyperglycemia induce ER
stress in renal epithelial cells, microarray data from biopsies of established
diabetic nephropathy (DN) were analyzed. Expression of UPR genes was
significantly different in these biopsies than in control kidneys or biopsies of 
patients with mild DN, suggesting an association between the degree of DN and UPR
gene expression. Expression of the transcription factor XBP1 and the ER
chaperones HSPA5 and HYOU1 were increased, but the proapoptotic gene DDIT3 was
unchanged. These findings were replicated in an independent cohort of patients
with established DN by real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR. Immunofluorescence of
renal biopsies from patients with DN confirmed the upregulation for HSPA5 and
HYOU1 proteins in tubular epithelia. In biopsies of minimal-change disease, the
mRNA levels of some ER stress molecules were also induced, but protein expression
of HSPA5 and HYOU1 remained significantly lower than that observed in DN.
Exposure of renal tubular epithelial cells to albumin and high glucose in vitro
enhanced expression of genes involved in ER stress. These observations suggest
that in proteinuric diseases, tubular epithelial cells undergo ER stress, which
induces an adaptive, protective UPR. Although this may protect the cells from ER 
stress, persistence of hyperglycemia and proteinuria may eventually lead to
apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2573014
PMID: 18776125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell. 2008 Sep 5;134(5):743-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.021.

XBP1 links ER stress to intestinal inflammation and confers genetic risk for
human inflammatory bowel disease.

Kaser A(1), Lee AH, Franke A, Glickman JN, Zeissig S, Tilg H, Nieuwenhuis EE,
Higgins DE, Schreiber S, Glimcher LH, Blumberg RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2009 Nov;15(11):1765-6.
    Cell. 2008 Sep 5;134(5):724-5.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has been attributed to aberrant mucosal immunity
to the intestinal microbiota. The transcription factor XBP1, a key component of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, is required for development and
maintenance of secretory cells and linked to JNK activation. We hypothesized that
a stressful environmental milieu in a rapidly proliferating tissue might
instigate a proinflammatory response. We report that Xbp1 deletion in intestinal 
epithelial cells (IECs) results in spontaneous enteritis and increased
susceptibility to induced colitis secondary to both Paneth cell dysfunction and
an epithelium that is overly reactive to inducers of IBD such as bacterial
products (flagellin) and TNFalpha. An association of XBP1 variants with both
forms of human IBD (Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis) was identified and
replicated (rs35873774; p value 1.6 x 10(-5)) with novel, private hypomorphic
variants identified as susceptibility factors. Hence, intestinal inflammation can
originate solely from XBP1 abnormalities in IECs, thus linking cell-specific ER
stress to the induction of organ-specific inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2586148
PMID: 18775308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cell. 2008 Sep 5;134(5):724-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.023.

Unresolved ER Stress Inflames the Intestine.

Ma A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0451, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2008 Sep 5;134(5):743-56.

Intestinal epithelial cells interact with both microbes in the gut lumen and host
immune cells. In this issue, Kaser et al. (2008) link a key mediator of
endoplasmic reticulum stress, the protein XBP1, with survival of intestinal
secretory epithelial cells and inflammatory bowel disease.

PMID: 18775305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Chem Biol Interact. 2008 Nov 25;176(2-3):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2008.07.014.
Epub 2008 Aug 19.

La3+ binds to BiP/GRP78 and induces unfolded protein response in HepG2 cells.

Shen C(1), Li Z, Yang X, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratories for Natural and Biomimetic Drugs and Department of
Chemical Biology, School of Pharmaceutical Science, Peking University, Beijing
100191, PR China.

The effects of La3+ on the unfolded protein response signaling pathways were
investigated in human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells. Our data showed that La3+ could
induce unfolded protein response in HepG2 cells, including a significant increase
of BiP/GRP78 level, which is an important ER residential chaperone and an ER
stress hallmark, in a concentration and time-dependent manner, UPR transducer
IRE1 phosphorylation and splicing activation IRE1 downstream substrate XBP1 mRNA.
By using La3+-affinity chromatography, the possible cellular target of La3+
leading to UPR events was shown to be the ER residential chaperone BiP/GRP78.
BiP/GRP78 was shown to be a La3+ binding protein and the interaction of La3+ with
BiP/GRP78 resulted in dissociation of BiP-IRE1 complexes. La3+ induced
dissociation of the BiP/GRP78-IRE1 complex was in a time and concentration
manner. The apparent dissociation constant was estimated to be 4 nM. In addition,
La3+ was observed to slightly stimulate the production of cellular ROS and cause 
alteration of intracellular Ca2+, indicating the possible involvement of ROS and 
Ca2+ alteration in La3+ induced UPR. The present work provides a new perspective 
for understanding the biological and toxicological effects of La3+.

PMID: 18773883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009 Feb;12(1):33-43. doi: 10.1017/S1461145708009358.
Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Aberrant endoplasmic reticulum stress response in lymphoblastoid cells from
patients with bipolar disorder.

Hayashi A(1), Kasahara T, Kametani M, Toyota T, Yoshikawa T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Japan.

Impaired endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response has been suggested as a
possible pathophysiological mechanism of bipolar disorder (BD). The expression of
ER stress-related genes, spliced form or unspliced form of XBP1, GRP78 (HSPA5),
GRP94 (HSP90B1), CHOP (DDIT3), and calreticulin (CALR), were examined in
lymphoblastoid cells derived from 59 patients with BD and 59 age- and sex-matched
control subjects. Basal mRNA levels and induction by 4 h or 12 h of treatment
with two ER stressors, thapsigargin or tunicamycin, were examined using real-time
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Induction of the
spliced form of XBP1 as well as total XBP1 by thapsigargin was significantly
attenuated in patients with BD. Induction of GRP94 by thapsigargin was also
decreased in the BD group. A haplotype of GRP94, protective against BD, exhibited
significantly higher GRP94 expression upon ER stress. This report confirms and
extends earlier observations of impaired ER stress response in larger samples of 
lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from BD patients. Altered ER stress response
may play a role in the pathophysiology of BD by altering neural development and
plasticity.

PMID: 18771604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2009 Oct;25(5):471-8. doi: 10.1007/s10565-008-9101-y. Epub
2008 Aug 7.

Absence of direct effect of low-power millimeter-wave radiation at 60.4 GHz on
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Nicolas Nicolaz C(1), Zhadobov M, Desmots F, Sauleau R, Thouroude D, Michel D, Le
Drean Y.

Author information: 
(1)IFR, UMR CNRS, University of Rennes, France.

Millimeter waves (MMW) at frequencies around 60 GHz will be used in the very near
future in the emerging local wireless communication systems and the potential
health hazards of artificially induced environmental exposures represent a major 
public concern. The main aim of this study was to investigate the potential
effects of low-power MMW radiations on cellular physiology. To this end, the
human glial cell line, U-251 MG, was exposed to 60.4 GHz radiation at a power
density of 0.14 mW/cm(2) and potential effect of MMW radiations on endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress was investigated. ER is very sensitive to environmental
insults and its homeostasis is altered in various pathologies. Through several
assay systems, we found that exposure to 60.4 GHz does not modify ER protein
folding and secretion, nor induces XBP1 or ATF6 transcription factors maturation.
Moreover, expression of ER-stress sensor, BiP/GRP78 was examined by real-time
PCR, in exposed or non-exposed cells to MMW radiations. Our data demonstrated the
absence of significant changes in mRNA levels for BiP/GRP78. Our results showed
that ER homeostasis does not undergo any modification at molecular level after
exposure to low-power MMW radiation at 60.4 GHz. This report is the first study
of ER-stress induction by MMW radiations.

PMID: 18685816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biochem. 2008 Oct;144(4):477-86. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvn091. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Human HRD1 promoter carries a functional unfolded protein response element to
which XBP1 but not ATF6 directly binds.

Yamamoto K(1), Suzuki N, Wada T, Okada T, Yoshida H, Kaufman RJ, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan.

Quality control of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is achieved by two 
mechanisms, the productive folding mechanism, which is assisted by a number of
ER-localized molecular chaperones and folding enzymes (collectively termed ER
chaperones), and the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) mechanism, by which
misfolded proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome system in
the cytosol. Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER activates the unfolded
protein response (UPR), resulting in transcriptional induction of ER chaperones
and ERAD components. In mammals, three signalling pathways operate for the UPR,
namely the IRE1-XBP1, PERK-ATF4 and ATF6 pathways. Analysis of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts deficient in UPR signalling molecule indicates that transcriptional
induction of ERAD components depends on the IRE1-XBP1 pathway. However, the
molecular basis of this finding remains unclear. Here, we analysed the promoter
of human HRD1, which encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase, an important component of
ERAD. We found that induction of HRD1 is mediated by two cis-acting elements, a
canonical ER stress response element and a novel element we designate as UPR
element II. The presence of UPR element II to which XBP1 but not ATF6 directly
binds explains at least in part the dependency of HRD1 induction on the IRE1-XBP1
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2755579
PMID: 18664523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2008 May;61(5):312-7. doi: 10.1038/ja.2008.44.

SAR study of a novel triene-ansamycin group compound, quinotrierixin, and related
compounds, as inhibitors of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation.

Kawamura T(1), Tashiro E, Shindo K, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.

Four novel triene-ansamycin group compounds, quinotrierixin, demethyltrienomycin 
A, demethyltrienomycin B and demethyltrienomycinol, were isolated from the
culture broth of Streptomyces sp. PAE37 as inhibitors of ER stress-induced XBP1
activation. The structures of quinotrierixin, demethyltrienomycin A,
demethyltrienomycin B and demethyltrienomycinol were determined on the basis of
their spectroscopical and chemical properties. All of four possessed 21-membered 
macrocyclic lactams including triene moieties.

PMID: 18653997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2008 May;61(5):303-11. doi: 10.1038/ja.2008.43.

SAR study of a novel triene-ansamycin group compound, quinotrierixin, and related
compounds, as inhibitors of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation.

Kawamura T(1), Tashiro E, Yamamoto K, Shindo K, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.

In the course of screening for an inhibitor of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation,
we isolated a new member of the triene-ansamycin group compound, quinotrierixin, 
from a culture broth of Streptomyces sp. PAE37. Quinotrierixin inhibited
thapsigargin-induced XBP1 activation in HeLa cells with an IC50 of 0.067 microM. 
We found that other triene-ansamycin group compounds such as demethyltrienomycin 
A and mycotrienin I also inhibited ER stress-induced XBP1 activation. Moreover,
we performed SAR study of twelve triene-ansamycin group compounds. The study
showed that OH group at C-13 was crucial, and CH3 group at C-14 would be
important for the XBP1 inhibitory activity.

PMID: 18653996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(12):2865-79. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.003. 
Epub 2008 Jun 20.

Decreased ER-associated degradation of alpha-TCR induced by Grp78 depletion with 
the SubAB cytotoxin.

Lass A(1), Kujawa M, McConnell E, Paton AW, Paton JC, Wójcik C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine-Evansville, Evansville, IN 47712, USA.

HeLa cells stably expressing the alpha chain of T-cell receptor (alphaTCR), a
model substrate of ER-associated degradation (ERAD), were used to analyze the
effects of BiP/Grp78 depletion by the SubAB cytotoxin. SubAB induced XBP1
splicing, followed by JNK phosphorylation, eIF2alpha phosphorylation,
upregulation of ATF3/4 and partial ATF6 cleavage. Other markers of ER stress,
including elements of ERAD pathway, as well as markers of cytoplasmic stress,
were not induced. SubAB treatment decreased absolute levels of alphaTCR, which
was caused by inhibition of protein synthesis. At the same time, the half-life of
alphaTCR was extended almost fourfold from 70 min to 210 min, suggesting that BiP
normally facilitates ERAD. Depletion of p97/VCP partially rescued SubAB-induced
depletion of alphaTCR, confirming the role of VCP in ERAD of alphaTCR. It
therefore appears that ERAD of alphaTCR is driven by at least two different
ATP-ase systems located at two sides of the ER membrane, BiP located on the
lumenal side, while p97/VCP on the cytoplasmic side. While SubAB altered cell
morphology by inducing cytoplasm vacuolization and accumulation of lipid
droplets, caspase activation was partial and subsided after prolonged incubation.
Expression of CHOP/GADD153 occurred only after prolonged incubation and was not
associated with apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2583149
PMID: 18611445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Aug 15;314(14):2715-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.06.008. Epub
2008 Jun 14.

Analysis of Npl4 deletion mutants in mammalian cells unravels new
Ufd1-interacting motifs and suggests a regulatory role of Npl4 in ERAD.

Lass A(1), McConnell E, Fleck K, Palamarchuk A, Wójcik C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
8600 University Boulevard, Evansville, IN 47712, USA.

Npl4 is a 67 kDa protein forming a stable heterodimer with Ufd1, which in turn
binds the ubiquitous p97/VCP ATPase. According to a widely accepted model,
VCP(Ufd1-Npl4) promotes the retrotranslocation of emerging ER proteins, their
ubiquitination by associated ligases, and handling to the 26S proteasome for
degradation in a process known as ERAD (ER-associated degradation). Using a
series of Npl4 deletion mutants we have revealed that the binding of Ufd1 to Npl4
is mediated by two regions: a conserved stretch of amino acids from 113 to 255
within the zf-Npl4 domain and by the Npl4 homology domain between amino acids 263
and 344. Within the first region, we have identified two discrete subdomains: one
involved in Ufd1 binding and one regulating VCP binding. Expression of any one of
the mutants failed to induce any changes in the morphology of the ER or Golgi
compartments. Moreover, we have observed that overexpression of all the analyzed 
mutants induced mild ER stress, as evidenced by increased Grp74/BiP expression
without associated XBP1 splicing or induction of apoptosis. Surprisingly, we have
not observed any accumulation of the typical ERAD substrate alphaTCR. This favors
the model where the Ufd1-Npl4 dimer forms a regulatory gate at the exit from the 
retrotranslocone, rather than actively promoting retrotranslocation like the
p97VCP ATPase.

PMID: 18586029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jul 23;582(17):2521-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.06.019. Epub
2008 Jun 20.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response in murine kidney exposed to acute hypobaric
hypoxia.

Karar J(1), Dolt KS, Qadar Pasha MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mall Road, Delhi, India.

Any perturbation in the normal functioning of endoplasmic reticulum (ER), such as
due to hypoxia, triggers the unfolded protein response (UPR). We studied the
temporal variation in gene expression in murine kidney exposed to acute hypobaric
hypoxia. Molecular chaperones like Grp78, Grp94, Canx and Calr in the ER were
transcriptionally downregulated. Further, the splicing of Xbp1 mRNA decreased,
whereas transcription of the unspliced mRNA increased. This step produces Xbp1
protein, which is negatively regulated by the unspliced protein. Hence, the
decreased splicing of Xbp1 along with decreased transcription of ER chaperones in
kidney is a definite indication of reduced stress.

PMID: 18572019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Science. 2008 Jun 13;320(5882):1492-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1158042.

Regulation of hepatic lipogenesis by the transcription factor XBP1.

Lee AH(1), Scapa EF, Cohen DE, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. ahlee@hsph.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Jun 13;320(5882):1433-4.

Dietary carbohydrates regulate hepatic lipogenesis by controlling the expression 
of critical enzymes in glycolytic and lipogenic pathways. We found that the
transcription factor XBP1, a key regulator of the unfolded protein response, is
required for the unrelated function of normal fatty acid synthesis in the liver. 
XBP1 protein expression in mice was elevated after feeding carbohydrates and
corresponded with the induction of critical genes involved in fatty acid
synthesis. Inducible, selective deletion of XBP1 in the liver resulted in marked 
hypocholesterolemia and hypotriglyceridemia, secondary to a decreased production 
of lipids from the liver. This phenotype was not accompanied by hepatic steatosis
or compromise in protein secretory function. The identification of XBP1 as a
regulator of lipogenesis has important implications for human dyslipidemias.

PMCID: PMC3620093
PMID: 18556558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;295(2):E393-400. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90355.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 10.

Effect of pioglitazone treatment on endoplasmic reticulum stress response in
human adipose and in palmitate-induced stress in human liver and adipose cell
lines.

Das SK(1), Chu WS, Mondal AK, Sharma NK, Kern PA, Rasouli N, Elbein SC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Section, Medicine and Research Services, Central Arkansas
Veterans Healthcare System, John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans Hospital, 4300 W.
7th St., Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. skdas@uams.edu

Obesity and elevated cytokine secretion result in a chronic inflammatory state
and may cause the insulin resistance observed in type 2 diabetes. Recent studies 
suggest a key role for endoplasmic reticulum stress in hepatocytes and adipocytes
from obese mice, resulting in reduced insulin sensitivity. To address the
hypothesis that thiazolidinediones, which improve peripheral insulin sensitivity,
act in part by reducing the endoplasmic reticulum stress response, we tested
subcutaneous adipose tissue from 20 obese volunteers treated with pioglitazone
for 10 wk. We also experimentally induced endoplasmic reticulum stress using
palmitate, tunicamycin, and thapsigargin in the human HepG2 liver cell line with 
or without pioglitazone pretreatment. We quantified endoplasmic reticulum stress 
response by measuring both gene expression and phosphorylation. Pioglitazone
significantly improved insulin sensitivity in human volunteers (P = 0.002) but
did not alter markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress. Differences in pre- and
posttreatment endoplasmic reticulum stress levels were not correlated with
changes in insulin sensitivity or body mass index. In vitro, palmitate,
thapsigargin, and tunicamycin but not oleate induced endoplasmic reticulum stress
in HepG2 cells, including increased transcripts CHOP, ERN1, GADD34, and PERK, and
increased XBP1 splicing along with phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor eIF2alpha, JNK1, and c-jun. Although patterns of endoplasmic reticulum
stress response differed among palmitate, tunicamycin, and thapsigargin,
pioglitazone pretreatment had no significant effect on any measure of endoplasmic
reticulum stress, regardless of the inducer. Together, our data suggest that
improved insulin sensitivity with pioglitazone is not mediated by a reduction in 
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

PMCID: PMC2519758
PMID: 18544642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 4;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-49.

Meta-analysis of human cancer microarrays reveals GATA3 is integral to the
estrogen receptor alpha pathway.

Wilson BJ(1), Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Room H5-45, McGill University Health Centre, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1A1, Canada. brian.wilson2@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA3 has recently been shown to be
necessary for mammary gland morphogenesis and luminal cell differentiation. There
is also an increasing body of data linking GATA3 to the estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) pathway. Among these it was shown that GATA3 associates with the
promoter of the ERalpha gene and ERalpha can reciprocally associate with the
GATA3 gene. GATA3 has also been directly implicated in a differentiated phenotype
in mouse models of mammary tumourigenesis. The purpose of our study was to
compare coexpressed genes, by meta-analysis, of GATA3 and relate these to a
similar analysis for ERalpha to determine the depth of overlap.
RESULTS: We have used a newly described method of meta-analysis of multiple
cancer studies within the Oncomine database, focusing here predominantly upon
breast cancer studies. We demonstrate that ERalpha and GATA3 reciprocally have
the highest overlap with one another. Furthermore, we show that when both
coexpression meta-analysis lists for ERalpha and GATA3 are compared there is a
significant overlap between both and, like ERalpha, GATA3 coexpresses with
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2 (TFF1), TFF3, FOXA1, BCL2, ERBB4, XBP1,
NRIP1, IL6ST, keratin 18(KRT18) and cyclin D1 (CCND1). Moreover, as these data
are derived from human tumour samples this adds credence to previous cell-culture
or murine based studies.
CONCLUSION: GATA3 is hypothesized to be integral to the ERalpha pathway given the
following: (1) The large overlap of coexpressed genes as seen by meta-analysis,
between GATA3 and ERalpha, (2) The highest coexpressing gene for GATA3 was
ERalpha and vice-versa, (3) GATA3, like ERalpha, coexpresses with many well-known
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2.

PMCID: PMC2430971
PMID: 18533032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2008 Dec;13(4):497-507. doi: 10.1007/s12192-008-0049-x.
Epub 2008 Jun 5.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in the absence of calnexin.

Coe H(1), Bedard K, Groenendyk J, Jung J, Michalak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Calnexin is a type I integral endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane chaperone
involved in folding of newly synthesized (glycol)proteins. In this study, we used
beta-galactosidase reporter gene knock-in and reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) to investigate activation of the calnexin gene during
embryonic development. We showed that the calnexin gene was activated in neuronal
tissue at the early stages of embryonic development but remained low in the
heart, intestine, and smooth muscle. At early stages of embryonic development,
large quantities of calnexin messenger RNA (mRNA) were also found in neuronal
tissue and liver. There was no detectable calnexin mRNA in the heart, lung, and
intestine. The absence of calnexin had no significant effect on ER stress
response (unfolded protein response, UPR) at the tissue level as tested by
IRE1-dependent splicing of Xbp1 mRNA. In contrast, non-stimulated
calnexin-deficient cells showed increased activation of IRE1, as measured by
RT-PCR and luciferase reporter gene analysis of splicing of Xbp1 mRNA and
activation of the BiP promoter. This indicates that cnx (-/-) cells have
increased constitutively active UPR. Importantly, cnx (-/-) cells have
significantly increased proteasomal activity, which may play a role in the
adaptive mechanisms addressing the acute ER stress observed in the absence of
calnexin.

PMCID: PMC2673926
PMID: 18528784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Neoplasia. 2008 Jun;10(6):542-8.

A functionally significant cross-talk between androgen receptor and ErbB2
pathways in estrogen receptor negative breast cancer.

Naderi A(1), Hughes-Davies L.

Author information: 
(1)Diamantina Institute for Cancer, Immunology and Metabolic Medicine, Cancer
Biology Program, University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane 
Qld 4102, Australia. a.naderi@uq.edu.au

Recent studies have identified novel subgroups in ER-negative breast cancer based
on the expression pattern of androgen receptor (AR). One subtype (molecular
apocrine) has an over-expression of steroid-response genes and ErbB2. Using
breast cancer cell lines with molecular apocrine features, we demonstrate a
functional cross-talk between AR and ErbB2 pathways. We show that stimulation of 
AR and ErbB2 pathways leads to the cross-regulation of gene expression for AR,
ErbB2, FOXA1, XBP1, TFF3, and KLK3. As opposed to the physiologic transient
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) observed with
the testosterone treatment, we demonstrate that the addition of ErbB2 inhibition 
leads to a persistent phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which negatively regulates the
downstream signaling and cell growth. This suggests a mechanism for the
cross-talk involving the ERK pathway. Moreover, testosterone stimulates the
proliferation of molecular apocrine breast cell lines, and this effect can be
reversed using antiandrogen flutamide and anti-ErbB2 AG825. Conversely, the
growth stimulatory effect of heregulin can also be inhibited with flutamide,
suggesting a cross-talk between the AR and ErbB2 pathways affecting cell
proliferation. Importantly, there is a synergy with the combined use of flutamide
and AG825 on cell proliferation and apoptosis, which indicates a therapeutic
advantage in the combined blockage of AR and ErbB2 pathways.

PMCID: PMC2386539
PMID: 18516291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Eur Surg Res. 2008;41(2):219-25. doi: 10.1159/000135631. Epub 2008 May 29.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis signal pathway is involved in
sepsis-induced abnormal lymphocyte apoptosis.

Ma T(1), Han L, Gao Y, Li L, Shang X, Hu W, Xue C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 
PR China.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The mechanisms of abnormal lymphocyte apoptosis in sepsis are
only partially defined. The present study was designed to investigate whether the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is implicated in the extensive apoptosis of
lymphocytes in sepsis.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were randomized into cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) and 
sham operation groups. Apoptosis was detected by the TUNEL method and flow
cytometry. The expression of glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78) and C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) was detected by RT-PCR and Western blot. The splicing
of X box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) mRNA was detected by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: A high degree of lymphocyte apoptosis was observed in the CLP group.
Marked induction of GRP78 and accumulation of spliced XBP1 mRNA were observed in 
the splenocytes from septic mice, indicating activation of unfolded protein
responses. Furthermore, both CHOP and its mRNA were markedly upregulated in the
CLP group, suggesting that the ER stress response switched to a proapoptotic
response.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate activation of the unfolded protein response in
lymphocytes and that ER stress may contribute to abnormal lymphocyte apoptosis
during sepsis. Accordingly, the ER stress-mediated apoptosis pathway may be a
novel target in clinical prevention and therapy of sepsis-induced lymphocyte
apoptosis.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18509246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Sep 1;79(4):600-10. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn128. Epub 2008 May
28.

Overexpression of endoplasmic reticulum-resident chaperone attenuates
cardiomyocyte death induced by proteasome inhibition.

Fu HY(1), Minamino T, Tsukamoto O, Sawada T, Asai M, Kato H, Asano Y, Fujita M,
Takashima S, Hori M, Kitakaze M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, 
Osaka 565-8565, Japan.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Sep 1;79(4):547-8.

AIMS: Proteasome inhibitors are a novel class of anticancer agents that induce
tumour cell death via endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Since ER stress is
involved in the development of heart failure, we investigated the role of
ER-initiated cardiomyocyte death by proteasome inhibition.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat neonatal cardiomyocytes were used in this study.
Proteasome activity was assayed using proteasome peptidase substrates. Cell
viability and apoptosis were measured by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenol tetrazolium bromide and flow cytometry,
respectively. Western blot analysis, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and reverse transcriptional PCR were used to detect the expression of protein and
messenger ribonucleic acid (RNA). The location of overexpressed glucose-regulated
protein (GRP) 78 was observed by confocal fluorescence microscopy. Proteasome
inhibition induced cardiomyocyte death and activated ER stress-induced
transcriptional factor ATF6, but not XBP1 (X-box binding protein 1), without
up-regulating ER chaperones. ER-initiated apoptosis signalling, including
cytosine-cytosine-adenine-adenine-thymine enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
homologous protein (CHOP), c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK), and caspase-12, was
activated by proteasome inhibition. Short interference RNA targeting CHOP, but
not the blockage of caspase-12 or JNK pathway, attenuated cardiomyocyte death.
Overexpression of GRP78 suppressed both CHOP expression and cardiomyocyte death
by proteasome inhibition.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate that proteasome inhibition induces
ER-initiated cardiomyocyte death via CHOP-dependent pathways without compensatory
up-regulation of ER chaperones. Supplement and/or pharmacological induction of
GRP78 can attenuate cardiac damage by proteasome inhibition.

PMID: 18508854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biochem. 2008 Aug;144(2):251-7. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvn063. Epub 2008 May 13.

Nicotine suppresses tunicamycin-induced, but not thapsigargin-induced, expression
of GRP78 during ER stress-mediated apoptosis in PC12 cells.

Sasaya H(1), Utsumi T, Shimoke K, Nakayama H, Matsumura Y, Fukunaga K, Ikeuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, Faculty of Chemistry, Materials 
and Bioengineering and High Technology Research Center, Kansai University, 3-3-35
Yamate-cho, Suita, Osaka 564-8680, Japan.

We previously reported that nicotine protected against tunicamycin (Tm)-induced
ER stress-mediated apoptosis, but not thapsigargin (Tg)-induced apoptosis in PC12
cells. In the present study, we report that the expression of glucose-regulated
protein 78 (GRP78) was suppressed by nicotine in Tm-treated PC12 cells.
Interestingly, the GRP78 expression was not changed by nicotine in Tg-treated
cells. Moreover, nicotine reduced the activation of caspase-12 in Tm-treated
cells, but not in Tg-treated cells. These results suggest that nicotine prevented
Tm-induced ER stress-mediated apoptosis by attenuating an early stage of
Tm-induced ER stress. It was possible that the suppression of GRP78 expression by
nicotine was achieved through the suppression of the Ire1-XBP1 and/or ATF6
pathways. We observed that nicotine suppressed the Tm-induced, but not
Tg-induced, splicing of XBP1 mRNA, and also suppressed the Tm-induced, but not
Tg-induced, production of cleaved ATF6 in PC12 cells. These results indicate that
the suppression of Ire1-XBP1 and ATF6 pathways contributes to the suppression of 
GRP78 expression by nicotine in Tm-treated PC12 cells, suggesting that nicotine
suppresses a common step upstream of both the Ire1-XBP1 and ATF6 pathways which
are required for the expression of GRP78 during Tm-induced ER stress.

PMID: 18477628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 1;123(3):687-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23515.

Growth inhibition of colon cancer cells by polyisoprenylated benzophenones is
associated with induction of the endoplasmic reticulum response.

Protiva P(1), Hopkins ME, Baggett S, Yang H, Lipkin M, Holt PR, Kennelly EJ,
Bernard WI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030-2817, USA. protiva@uchc.edu

Polyisoprenylated benzophenones derived from Garcinia xanthochymus have cytotoxic
activity in vitro and antitumor activity in rodent models, but the mechanism is
unknown. The purpose of our study was to examine in parallel molecular pathways
that are targeted by 3 Garcinia-derived benzophenones-xanthochymol (X),
guttiferone E (GE) and guttiferone H (GH), in 3 human colon cancer cell lines,
HCT116, HT29 and SW480. The IC50 concentrations were determined and the cells
were then treated with X, GE or GH at their respective IC50 or IC50x2
concentrations. Effects on the cell cycle, mitochondrial membrane potential and
apoptosis were assessed by flow cytometry and caspase activation. Changes in gene
expression were assessed with Illumina 24 K gene arrays. We found that X, GE and 
GH induced loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and G1 arrest at their IC50
concentrations and induced caspase activation at IC50 x 2 concentrations. An
analysis of the changes in gene expression revealed that with all 3 compounds and
all 3 cell lines there was a marked increase in expression of several genes,
including XBP1, ATF4 and DDIT3/CHOP, which are components of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response. The DDIT4/REDD1 gene, an inhibitor of the mTOR
survival pathway, was also up-regulated. Therefore, X, GE and GH appear to
inhibit the growth of human colon cancer cells, at least in part, by activating
the endoplasmic reticulum stress response and inhibiting the mTOR cell survival
pathway. These combined effects may contribute to the anticancer activity of
these novel compounds.

PMID: 18470880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Clin Invest. 2008 Jun;118(6):2148-56. doi: 10.1172/JCI33777.

Seven mutations in the human insulin gene linked to permanent
neonatal/infancy-onset diabetes mellitus.

Colombo C(1), Porzio O, Liu M, Massa O, Vasta M, Salardi S, Beccaria L, Monciotti
C, Toni S, Pedersen O, Hansen T, Federici L, Pesavento R, Cadario F, Federici G, 
Ghirri P, Arvan P, Iafusco D, Barbetti F; Early Onset Diabetes Study Group of the
Italian Society of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes (SIEDP).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology and Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, Scientific Institute and Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.

Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM) is a rare disorder usually presenting
within 6 months of birth. Although several genes have been linked to this
disorder, in almost half the cases documented in Italy, the genetic cause remains
unknown. Because the Akita mouse bearing a mutation in the Ins2 gene exhibits
PNDM associated with pancreatic beta cell apoptosis, we sequenced the human
insulin gene in PNDM subjects with unidentified mutations. We discovered 7
heterozygous mutations in 10 unrelated probands. In 8 of these patients, insulin 
secretion was detectable at diabetes onset, but rapidly declined over time. When 
these mutant proinsulins were expressed in HEK293 cells, we observed defects in
insulin protein folding and secretion. In these experiments, expression of the
mutant proinsulins was also associated with increased Grp78 protein expression
and XBP1 mRNA splicing, 2 markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress, and with
increased apoptosis. Similarly transfected INS-1E insulinoma cells had diminished
viability compared with those expressing WT proinsulin. In conclusion, we find
that mutations in the insulin gene that promote proinsulin misfolding may cause
PNDM.

PMCID: PMC2350430
PMID: 18451997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17020-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802466200. Epub 2008 
Apr 21.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone regulation and survival of cells
compensating for deficiency in the ER stress response kinase, PERK.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Larkin D, Lara-Lemus R, Ramos-Castañeda J, Liu M, Arvan P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology & Diabetes, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

The activity of PERK, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) transmembrane protein kinase,
assists in an ER stress response designed to inhibit general protein synthesis
while allowing upregulated synthesis of selective proteins such as the ATF4
transcription factor. PERK null mice exhibit phenotypes that especially affect
secretory cell types. Although embryonic fibroblasts from these mice are
difficult to transfect with high efficiency, we have generated 293 cells stably
expressing the PERK-K618A dominant negative mutant. 293/PERK-K618A cells, in
response to ER stress: (a) do not properly inhibit general protein synthesis, (b)
exhibit defective/delayed induction of ATF4 and BiP, and (c) exhibit exuberant
splice activation of XBP1 and robust cleavage activation of ATF6, with abnormal
regulation of calreticulin levels. The data suggest compensatory mechanisms
allowing for cell survival in the absence of functional PERK. Interestingly,
although induction of CHOP (a transcription factor implicated in apoptosis) is
notably delayed after onset of ER stress, 293/PERK-K618A cells eventually produce
CHOP at normal or even supranormal levels and exhibit increased apoptosis either 
in response to general ER stress or, more importantly, to specific misfolded
secretory proteins.

PMCID: PMC2427336
PMID: 18426796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16446-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802272200. Epub 2008
Apr 15.

A dual task for the Xbp1-responsive OS-9 variants in the mammalian endoplasmic
reticulum: inhibiting secretion of misfolded protein conformers and enhancing
their disposal.

Bernasconi R(1), Pertel T, Luban J, Molinari M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, CH-6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Normally, non-native polypeptides are not transported through the secretory
pathway. Rather, they are translocated from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen 
into the cytosol where they are degraded by proteasomes. Here we characterize the
function in ER quality control of two proteins derived from alternative splicing 
of the OS-9 gene. OS-9.1 and OS-9.2 are ubiquitously expressed in human tissues
and are amplified in tumors. They are transcriptionally induced upon activation
of the Ire1/Xbp1 ER-stress pathway. OS-9 variants do not associate with
folding-competent proteins. Rather, they selectively bind folding-defective ones 
thereby inhibiting transport of non-native conformers through the secretory
pathway. The intralumenal level of OS-9.1 and OS-9.2 inversely correlates with
the fraction of a folding-defective glycoprotein, the Null(hong kong) (NHK)
variant of alpha1-antitrypsin that escapes retention-based ER quality control.
OS-9 up-regulation does not affect NHK disposal, but reduction of the
intralumenal level of OS-9.1 and OS-9.2 substantially delays disposal of this
model substrate. OS-9.1 and OS-9.2 also associate transiently with
non-glycosylated folding-defective proteins, but association is unproductive.
Finally, OS-9 activity does not require an intact mannose 6-P homology domain.
Thus, OS-9.1 and OS-9.2 play a dual role in mammalian ER quality control: first
as crucial retention factors for misfolded conformers, and second as promoters of
protein disposal from the ER lumen.

PMCID: PMC3762559
PMID: 18417469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Physiol Genomics. 2008 May 13;33(3):361-72. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00139.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Liver gene expression analysis reveals endoplasmic reticulum stress and metabolic
dysfunction in SCD1-deficient mice fed a very low-fat diet.

Flowers MT(1), Keller MP, Choi Y, Lan H, Kendziorski C, Ntambi JM, Attie AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. mflowers@biochem.wisc.edu

We previously reported that mice deficient in stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1)
and maintained on a very low-fat (VLF) diet for 10 days developed severe loss of 
body weight, hypoglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, and many cholestasis-like
phenotypes. To better understand the metabolic changes associated with these
phenotypes, we performed microarray analysis of hepatic gene expression in chow- 
and VLF-fed female Scd1+/+ and Scd1-/- mice. We identified an extraordinary
number of differentially expressed genes (>4,000 probe sets) in the VLF Scd1-/-
relative to both VLF Scd1+/+ and chow Scd1-/- mice. Transcript levels were
reduced for genes involved in detoxification and several facets of fatty acid
metabolism including biosynthesis, elongation, desaturation, oxidation,
transport, and ketogenesis. This pattern is attributable to the decreased mRNA
abundance of several genes encoding key transcription factors, including
LXRalpha, RXRalpha, FXR, PPARalpha, PGC-1beta, SREBP1c, ChREBP, CAR, DBP, TEF,
and HLF. A robust induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is indicated by 
enhanced splicing of XBP1, increased expression of the stress-induced
transcription factors CHOP and ATF3, and elevated expression of several genes
involved in the integrated stress and unfolded protein response pathways. The
gene expression profile is also consistent with induction of an acute
inflammatory response and macrophage recruitment. These results highlight the
importance of monounsaturated fatty acid synthesis for maintaining metabolic
homeostasis in the absence of sufficient dietary unsaturated fat and point to a
novel cellular nutrient-sensing mechanism linking fatty acid availability and/or 
composition to the ER stress response.

PMID: 18381840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 27;283(26):17954-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801395200. Epub 2008
Mar 28.

B- and T-cell development both involve activity of the unfolded protein response 
pathway.

Brunsing R(1), Omori SA, Weber F, Bicknell A, Friend L, Rickert R, Niwa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Molecular Biology, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling pathway regulates the functional
capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum for protein folding. Beyond a role for UPR 
signaling during terminal differentiation of mature B cells to antibody-secreting
plasma cells, the status or importance of UPR signaling during hematopoiesis has 
not been explored, due in part to difficulties in isolating sufficient quantities
of cells at developmentally intermediate stages required for biochemical
analysis. Following reconstitution of irradiated mice with hematopoietic cells
carrying a fluorescent UPR reporter construct, we found that IRE1 nuclease
activity for XBP1 splicing is active at early stages of T- and B-lymphocyte
differentiation: in bone marrow pro-B cells and in CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive
thymic T cells. IRE1 was not active in B cells at later stages. In T cells, IRE
activity was not detected in the more mature CD4(+) T-cell population but was
active in the CD8(+) cytotoxic T-cell population. Multiple signals are likely to 
be involved in activating IRE1 during lymphocyte differentiation, including
rearrangement of antigen receptor genes. Our results show that
reporter-transduced hematopoietic stem cells provide a quick and easy means to
identify UPR signaling component activation in physiological settings.

PMID: 18375386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2008;115(3):513-9. doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0844-z. Epub
2008 Mar 12.

Comprehensive analysis of polymorphisms throughout GAD1 gene: a family-based
association study in schizophrenia.

Du J(1), Duan S, Wang H, Chen W, Zhao X, Zhang A, Wang L, Xuan J, Yu L, Wu S,
Tang W, Li X, Li H, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center, Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China.

Studies suggest that GAD1 gene is a functional candidate susceptibility gene for 
schizophrenia. In order to investigate the contribution of GAD1 gene to the
etiology of schizophrenia in Chinese, we carried out a family-based association
study between GAD1 gene and schizophrenia in 235 Chinese Han family trios. The
GAD1 gene is comprehensively analyzed using a systematic mutation scan and the
following-up association studies between common SNPs and schizophrenia in both
single-locus and haplotype levels. Altogether, we have found 17 variants
including 10 SNPs in 5'-flanking regions, 4 SNPs and one novel in-del in intronic
regions and 2 SNPs (one novel SNP) in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR). Using the
transmission disequilibrium test of the 9 common SNPs out of 17 variants,
Significant evidence of SNP rs3791878-G allele in 5'-flanking region of GAD1 was 
preferentially transmitted to both the all offsprings of the trios (P = 0.0063,
respectively; odds ratio = 1.83; 95% confidence interval: 1.26-2.65) and the male
offsprings the trios (P = 0.0045, respectively; odds ratio = 2.21; 95% confidence
interval: 1.37-3.56). Haplotype analysis suggested that
rs3762556(C)-rs3791878(G)-rs6755102(C) is the major risky haplotype
preferentially transmitted in both all the trios and male-offspring trios (Global
P = 0.016 and 0.012, respectively). The gender-dependent of the risk of SNP
rs3791878 suggest the complexity of GAD1 gene in schizophrenia. Given that the
switch from G to T in SNP rs3791878 might cause the loss of ARNT and XBP1
transcriptional factor binding sites using a bioinformatics approach, our
positive findings of this SNP support the hypothesis that the abruption of GAD1
gene is important to the risk of schizophrenia.

PMID: 18335162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Biotechnol. 2008 Jun;39(2):155-8. doi: 10.1007/s12033-008-9055-6.

Production of recombinant human factor VIII in different cell lines and the
effect of human XBP1 co-expression.

Campos-da-Paz M(1), Costa CS, Quilici LS, de Carmo Simões I, Kyaw CM, Maranhão
AQ, Brigido MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular-IB, Laboratório de Biologia Molecular,
Universidade de Brasília, 70910-900, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

Recombinant factor VIII is one of the most complex mammalian proteins and a
biotechnology venture required for the treatment of hemophilia A. The complexity 
of the protein, post-translational modifications and limitations of expression
elements make the production of active recombinant FVIII a challenge. Here we
report the production of biologically active Factor VIII in two different cell
lines, CHO and HepG2, by transient transfection. Two expression vectors based on 
the CMV promoter were used: one harboring CMV Intron A (InA) and the other
without it. To bypass difficulties in secretion, we also studied the influence of
co-expression of the human splice isoform of the XBP1 gene. We report the
production of recombinant FVIII possessing bioengineered FVIII heavy and light
chains, linked by a minimal B domain. In our study, HepG2, a human hepatocyte
cell line, expressed Factor VIII ten-fold more than a CHO cell line, and in HepG2
cells, the expression of XBP1 improved Factor VIII activity. For CHO cells,
expression was improved by the presence of InA, but no further improvement was
noted with XBP1 co-expression. These data suggest that the minimal B domain
rFVIII preserves Factor VIII biological activity and that different expression
elements can be used to improve its production.

PMID: 18327549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Magy Seb. 2008 Feb;61(1):42-7. doi: 10.1556/MaSeb.61.2008.1.9.

[Some factors, with an impact on the outcome of the Hungarian Liver Transplant
Program, with special consideration of the hepatitis C virus].

[Article in Hungarian]

Nemes B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Transzplantációs és Sebészeti Klinika, 1082 Budapest,
Baross u. 23. nemes@trans.sote.hu

The author retrospectively evaluated the outcome of the Hungarian Liver
Transplant program from 1995 to 2006. Liver transplants in the context of HCV
positive cirrhosis were analysed separately. Furthermore, fulminant recurrence of
HCV infection in the implanted graft was also investigated. The possible
association among the serum titer of the HCV RNA, the histological patterns, the 
clinical course and the expression of the endoplasmatic chaperones in HCV graft
biopsies (which is responsible for the endoplasmatic stress response) was also
investigated. The number of liver transplants showed a four-fold yearly increase 
in the last 10 years. The 1, 3 and 5 years cumulative patient survival were 55%, 
45% and 39% (1995-1997), 72%, 64% and 61% (1998-2000), and 78%, 77% and 77%
(2001-2004), respectively. Total mortality decreased from 53% to 31%, mortality
within 60 days decreased from 24% to 5%. Cumulative survival for HCV positive
patients was respectively 64%, 55% and 51%, versus other chronic indications,
which was 73%, 66% and 63%, respectively. Virus recurrence was 43% within 1 year.
Factors with an impact on patient survival were calculated with Cox-regression
multivariate analysis: postoperative kidney failure, hepatic artery thrombosis,
biliary necrosis, cholangitis, pulmonary infection, abdominal infection, amount
of intraoperative colloid use and transfusions. All chaperones (XBP1, ATF6,
HSP70, GRP98, GP96, Calnexin and Calreticulin) were upregulated in the graft
biopsies of HCV positive patients, irrespectively of the serum HCV-RNA titer.
This upregulation decreased significantly after 1 year of interferon treatment.
In case of acute rejection, upregulation of all chaperones was significantly
higher than in HCV recurrence. An association was demonstrated between the serum 
HCV-RNA titer and the early recurrence. An RNA cut off point was identified to
predict unfavourable histological and clinical prognosis, and a worse survival as
well.

PMID: 18296285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Cell Mol Med. 2008 Dec;12(6A):2482-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00268.x.
Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Nerve growth factor blocks thapsigargin-induced apoptosis at the level of the
mitochondrion via regulation of Bim.

Szegezdi E(1), Herbert KR, Kavanagh ET, Samali A, Gorman AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

This study examined how the neurotrophin, nerve growth factor (NGF), protects
PC12 cells against endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced apoptosis. ER stress
was induced using thapsigargin (TG) that inhibits the sarcoplasmic/ER Ca2+-ATPase
pump (SERCA) and depletes ER Ca2+ stores. NGF pre-treatment inhibited
translocation of Bax to the mitochondria, loss of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential, cytochrome c release, activation of caspases (-3, -7 and -9) and
apoptosis induction by TG. Notably, TG also caused a marked induction of BimEL
mRNA and protein, and knockdown of Bim with siRNA protected cells against
TG-induced apoptosis. NGF delayed the induction and increased the phosphorylation
of BimEL. NGF-mediated protection was dependent on phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase 
(PI3K) signalling since all above apoptotic events, including expression and
phosphorylation status of BimEL protein, could be reverted by the PI3K inhibitor 
LY294002. In contrast, NGF had no effect on the TG-mediated induction of the
unfolded protein response (increased expression of Grp78, GADD34, splicing of
XBP1 mRNA) or ER stress-associated pro-apoptotic responses (induction of C/EBP
homologous protein [CHOP], induction and processing of caspase-12). These data
indicate that NGF-mediated protection against ER stress-induced apoptosis occurs 
at the level of the mitochondria by regulating induction and activation of Bim
and mitochondrial translocation of Bax.

PMCID: PMC4514125
PMID: 18266951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Lipid Res. 2008 May;49(5):985-94. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700465-JLR200. Epub 2008
Feb 8.

Apoptosis induced by t10,c12-conjugated linoleic acid is mediated by an atypical 
endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Ou L(1), Wu Y, Ip C, Meng X, Hsu YC, Ip MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA.

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) inhibits rat mammary carcinogenesis, in part by
inducing apoptosis of preneoplastic and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells. The 
current study focused on the mechanism by which apoptosis is induced. In TM4t
mammary tumor cells, trans-10,cis-12 (t10,c12)-CLA induced proapoptotic
C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP) concurrent with the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase. Knockdown of CHOP attenuated t10,c12-CLA-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, t10,c12-CLA induced the cleavage of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-resident caspase-12, and a selective inhibitor of caspase-12 significantly
alleviated t10,c12-CLA-induced apoptosis. Using electron microscopy, we observed 
that t10,c12-CLA treatment resulted in marked dilatation of the ER lumen.
Together, these data suggest that t10,c12-CLA induces apoptosis through ER
stress. To further explore the ER stress pathway, we examined the expression of
the following upstream ER stress signature markers in response to CLA treatment: 
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA (unspliced and spliced), phospho-eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF) 2 alpha, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), and
BiP proteins. We found that t10,c12-CLA induced the expression and splicing of
XBP1 mRNA as well as the phosphorylation of eIF2 alpha. In contrast, ATF4 was
induced modestly, but not significantly, and BiP was not altered. In summary, our
data demonstrate that apoptosis induced by t10,c12-CLA is mediated, at least in
part, through an atypical ER stress response that culminates in the induction of 
CHOP and the cleavage of caspase-12.

PMCID: PMC2311448
PMID: 18263853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. FEBS Lett. 2008 Mar 5;582(5):656-60. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.01.038. Epub
2008 Jan 31.

RNase domains determine the functional difference between IRE1alpha and IRE1beta.

Imagawa Y(1), Hosoda A, Sasaka S, Tsuru A, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Ikoma, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is associated with the functional disorder of
the ER. During conditions of ER stress, cells induce at least two responses to
maintain ER function: transcriptional upregulation of ER quality control genes,
and translational attenuation of protein synthesis. Induction of ER quality
control proteins is mediated by IRE1alpha, which activates the transcription
factor XBP1 via an unconventional splicing event, while a partial translational
attenuation is mediated by IRE1beta. Here, we show by both in vivo and in vitro
analyses that the RNase domain of IRE1 determines the functional specificities of
each of these isoforms.

PMID: 18242182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):207-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2007.11.010. Epub 2007
Dec 8.

IRE1beta is required for mesoderm formation in Xenopus embryos.

Yuan L(1), Cao Y, Oswald F, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 
Ulm, Germany.

IRE1 is an atypical serine/threonine kinase transmembrane protein with RNase
activity. In the unfolded protein response (UPR), they function as proximal
sensor of the unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Upon
activation by ER stress, IRE1 performs an unconventional cytoplasmic splicing of 
XBP1 pre-mRNA and thus allows the synthesis of active XBP1, which activates UPR
target genes to restore the homeostasis of the ER. IRE1/XBP1 signaling is hence
essential for UPR but its function during embryogenesis is yet unknown. The
transcripts of the two isoforms of IRE1 in Xenopus, xIRE1alpha and xIRE1beta are 
differentially expressed during embryogenesis. We found that xIRE1beta is
sufficient for cytoplasmic splicing of xXBP1 pre-mRNA. Although gain of xIRE1beta
function had no significant effect on Xenopus embryogenesis, overexpression of
both, xIRE1beta and xXBP1 pre-mRNA, inhibits activin A induced mesoderm
formation, suggesting that an enhanced activity of the IRE1/XBP1 pathway
represses mesoderm formation. Surprisingly, while loss of XBP1 function promotes 
mesoderm formation, the loss of IRE1beta function led to a reduction of mesoderm 
formation, probably by action of IRE1 being different from the IRE1/XBP1 pathway.
Therefore, both gain and loss of function studies demonstrate that IRE1 is
required for mesoderm formation in Xenopus embryos.

PMID: 18191552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 14;367(3):546-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.12.171. Epub 2008 Jan 7.

Continuous high expression of XBP1 and GRP78 is important for the survival of
bone marrow cells in CCl4-treated cirrhotic liver.

Marumoto Y(1), Terai S, Urata Y, Matsumoto T, Mizunaga Y, Yamamoto N, Jin H,
Fujisawa K, Murata T, Shinoda K, Nishina H, Sakaida I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Minami Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

We have previously shown that infusion of bone marrow cells (BMC) improves
CCl(4)-induced cirrhosis. However, it is unclear why the injected BMC are
resistant to CCl(4) damage and subsequently improve the local microenvironment in
damaged liver. To analyze the cellular phenomena involved in this process, we
studied the damaged liver using electron microscopy. We found that CCl(4) caused 
rough endoplasmic reticula to swell in hepatocytes. To analyze the gene
expression patterns associated with this process, we conducted PCR-selected
suppressive subtractive hybridization. We found that expression levels of HSP84, 
HSP40, and XBP1 differed markedly between control liver and liver infused with
BMC. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that expression levels of HSP84 and
HSP40 were markedly higher in the early phase of differentiation immediately
after BMC infusion, but decreased over time. XBP1 expression remained high during
the late phase, and GRP78 expression increased with XBP1 activation. We also
found that GFP-positive BMC expressed XBP1 and GRP78. XBP1 and GRP78 are
associated with ER stress. Thus, continuous high XBP1 and GRP78 expression might 
be essential for the survival and proliferation of BMC in a CCl(4)-induced
persistent liver damage environment.

PMID: 18182158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 15;283(7):4252-60. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Involvement of selective reactive oxygen species upstream of proapoptotic
branches of unfolded protein response.

Yokouchi M(1), Hiramatsu N, Hayakawa K, Okamura M, Du S, Kasai A, Takano Y,
Shitamura A, Shimada T, Yao J, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Shimokato 1110, Chuo,
Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Cadmium triggers apoptosis of LLC-PK1 cells through induction of endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. We found that cadmium caused generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and that cadmium-induced ER stress was inhibited by antioxidants.
In contrast, suppression of ER stress did not attenuate cadmium-triggered
oxidative stress, suggesting that ER stress occurs downstream of oxidative
stress. Exposure of the cells to either O(2)(*), H(2)O(2), or ONOO(-) caused
apoptosis, whereas ER stress was induced only by O(2)(*) or ONOO(-). Transfection
with manganese superoxide dismutase significantly attenuated cadmium-induced ER
stress and apoptosis, whereas pharmacological inhibition of ONOO(-) was
ineffective. Interestingly, transfection with catalase attenuated cadmium-induced
apoptosis without affecting the level of ER stress. O(2)(*) caused activation of 
the activating transcription factor 6-CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous
protein (CHOP) and the inositol-requiring ER-to-nucleus signal kinase
1-X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) proapoptotic cascades, and overexpression of
manganese superoxide dismutase attenuated cadmium-triggered induction of both
pathways. Furthermore, phosphorylation of proapoptotic c-Jun N-terminal kinase by
O(2)(*) or cadmium was suppressed by dominant-negative inhibition of XBP1. These 
data elucidated 1) cadmium caused ER stress via generation of ROS, 2) O(2)(*) was
selectively involved in cadmium-triggered, ER stress-mediated apoptosis through
activation of the activating transcription factor 6-CHOP and inositol-requiring
ER-to-nucleus signal kinase 1-XBP1 pathways, and 3) phosphorylation of JNK was
caused by O(2)(*)-triggered activation of XBP1.

PMID: 18086661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 25;365(4):777-83. Epub 2007 Nov 21.

A kinase inhibitor activates the IRE1alpha RNase to confer cytoprotection against
ER stress.

Han D(1), Upton JP, Hagen A, Callahan J, Oakes SA, Papa FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-2520, USA.

Unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cause
trans-autophosphorylation of the bifunctional transmembrane kinase IRE1alpha,
inducing its RNase activity to splice XBP1 mRNA, in turn triggering a
transcriptional program in the unfolded protein response (UPR). As we previously 
showed with the yeast IRE1 kinase ortholog, a single missense mutation in the
ATP-binding pocket of murine IRE1alpha kinase sensitizes it to the
ATP-competitive inhibitor 1NM-PP1, and subordinates RNase activity to the drug.
This highly unusual mechanism of kinase signaling requiring kinase domain ligand 
occupancy-even through an inhibitor-to activate a nearby RNase has therefore been
completely conserved through evolution. We also demonstrate that engagement of
the drug-sensitized IRE1alpha kinase through this maneuver affords murine cells
cytoprotection under ER stress. Thus kinase inhibitors of IRE1alpha are useful
for altering the apoptotic outcome to ER stress, and could possibly be developed 
into drugs to treat ER stress-related diseases.

PMID: 18035051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2007 Dec;28(12):1947-56.

Astragalus polysaccharide reduces hepatic endoplasmic reticulum stress and
restores glucose homeostasis in a diabetic KKAy mouse model.

Mao XQ(1), Wu Y, Wu K, Liu M, Zhang JF, Zou F, Ou-Yang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical College of Wuhan University, Hubei
Provincial Key Laboratory of Allergy and Immune-Related Diseases, Wuhan 430071,
China.

AIM: To examine the potential effects of Astragalus polysaccharide (APS) on
hepatic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in vivo and in vitro and its link with 
hypoglycemia activity, thus establishing the mechanism underlying the
hypoglycemic action of APS.
METHODS: The obese and type 2 diabetic KKAy mouse model, which is the yellow
offspring of the KK mice expressed Ay gene (700 mg/kg-1/d-1, 8 weeks) and a high 
glucose-induced HepG2 cell model (200 microg/mL, 24 h) were treated with APS. The
oral glucose tolerance test was measured to reflex insulin sensitivity with the
calculated homeostasis model assessment (HOMA-IR) index. XBP1 (XhoI site-binding 
protein 1) transcription and splicing, an indicator of ER stress, was analyzed by
RT-PCR and real-time PCR. The expression and activation of glycogen synthase
kinase 3 beta (GSK3beta), an insulin signaling protein, was measured by Western
blotting.
RESULTS: APS can alleviate ER stress in cultured cells in vivo. The hyperglycemia
status, systemic insulin sensitivity, fatty liver disease, and insulin action in 
the liver of diabetic mice were partly normalized or improved in response to APS 
administration.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that APS enables insulin-sensitizing and
hypoglycemic activity at least in part by enhancing the adaptive capacity of the 
ER, which can further promote insulin signal transduction. Thus, APS has
promising application in the treatment of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18031609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Pathol. 2008 Feb;214(3):347-56.

Expression signatures in lung cancer reveal a profile for EGFR-mutant tumours and
identify selective PIK3CA overexpression by gene amplification.

Angulo B(1), Suarez-Gauthier A, Lopez-Rios F, Medina PP, Conde E, Tang M, Soler
G, Lopez-Encuentra A, Cigudosa JC, Sanchez-Cespedes M.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The development of targeted therapies creates a need to discriminate tumours
accurately by their histological and genetic characteristics. Here, we aim to
identify gene expression profiles and single markers that recapitulate the
pathological and genetic background of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We
performed cDNA microarray analysis on a series of 69 NSCLCs, with known mutation 
status for important genes, and six normal lung tissues. Unsupervised cluster
analysis segregated normal lungs from lung tumours and lung tumours according to 
their histopathology and the presence of EGFR mutations. Several transcripts were
highly overexpressed (by approximately 20 times) in squamous cell carcinomas
(SCCs) relative to adenocarcinomas (ACs) and confirmed by immunohistochemistry in
an independent cohort of 75 lung tumours. Expression of 13 genes constituted the 
most prominent hallmarks of EGFR-mutant tumours, including increased levels of
proline dehydrogenase (PRODH) and down-regulation of X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1). No genes were differentially expressed, with a fold change >or= 4 or
<or=0.25 and a significance level of 5% false-discovery rate, in tumours carrying
mutations of TP53 or KRAS. In addition, we organized gene expression data by the 
position of each gene in the chromosome and observed a cluster of highly
expressed genes in chromosome 3q, including PIK3CA, that was characteristic of
SCCs. FISH analysis demonstrated a strong statistically significant association
between increased levels of PIK3CA expression in these tumours and gene
amplification (p < 0.0001; t-test). In conclusion, histopathological phenotypes
and, likely, the presence of EGFR mutations confer lung tumours with a marked
pattern of gene expression. Moreover, our cDNA microarray analysis identified
increased PIK3CA expression due to gene amplification in lung squamous cell
carcinomas: this may represent a marker of sensitivity to therapy with PI3K
inhibitors.

Copyright (c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17992665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2007 Dec;9(12):2323-33.

Unconventional splicing of XBP-1 mRNA in the unfolded protein response.

Yoshida H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto,
Japan., PRESTO-SORST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kyoto, Japan.
hide@biophysics.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Cytoplasmic splicing is one of the major regulatory mechanisms of the unfolded
protein response (UPR). The molecular mechanism of cytoplasmic splicing is unique
and completely different from that of conventional nuclear splicing. The
mammalian substrate of cytoplasmic splicing is XBP1 pre-mRNA, which is converted 
to spliced mRNA in response to UPR, leading to the production of an active
transcription factor [pXBP1(S)] responsible for UPR. Interestingly, XBP1 pre-mRNA
is also translated into a functional protein [pXBP1(U)] that negatively regulates
the UPR. Thus, mammalian cells can quickly adapt to a change in conditions in the
endoplasmic reticulum by switching proteins encoded in the mRNA from a negative
regulator to an activator. This elaborate system contributes to various cellular 
functions, including plasma cell differentiation, viral infections, and
carcinogenesis. In this short review, I briefly summarize research on cytoplasmic
splicing and focus on current hot topics.

PMID: 17979529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. FEBS Lett. 2007 Nov 27;581(28):5355-60. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

A different pathway in the endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced expression of
human HRD1 and SEL1 genes.

Kaneko M(1), Yasui S, Niinuma Y, Arai K, Omura T, Okuma Y, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Human HRD1 and SEL1 are components of endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation (ERAD), which is a retrograde transport mechanism from the ER to the 
cytosol for removing unfolded proteins. The expression of HRD1 and SEL1 was
induced by ER stress-inducing agents and overexpression of both ER
stress-responsive transcription factors, ATF6 and XBP1. Inhibition of IRE1 and
ATF6 revealed that ER stress-induced HRD1 and SEL1 expressions are mediated by
IRE1-XBP1- and ATF6-dependent pathways, respectively. These results suggest that 
the ER stress-induced ERAD gene expressions are mediated by different pathways,
which are attributed to the differences in the promoter regions.

PMID: 17967421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Kobe J Med Sci. 2007;53(4):151-5.

Lack of association between endoplasmic reticulum stress response genes and
suicidal victims.

Sakurai K(1), Nishiguchi N, Shirakawa O, Nushida H, Ueno Y, Maeda K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Medical Genetics, International Center for 
Medical Research and Treatment (ICMRT), Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine.

As lithium has been shown to have a protective effect against suicidal behavior, 
genes on which mood stabilizers act may be involved in biological susceptibility 
to suicide. A recent study showed that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response
was impaired in the bipolar disorders and the impairment was ameliorated by a
mood stabilizer, valproate. We hypothesized that an alteration of ER stress
response is involved in the biological susceptibility to suicide through genetic 
polymorphisms, and examined the association of polymorphisms of X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) and heat shock 70-kDa protein 5 (HSPA5) genes with suicide. We
found no significant difference in the distribution of these polymorphisms
between the suicide victims and the controls. These results suggest that the
polymorphisms examined in this study are not involved in the susceptibility to
suicide of the Japanese.

PMID: 17932454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2007 Sep;60(9):582-5.

Trierixin, a novel Inhibitor of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation from
Streptomyces sp. II. structure elucidation.

Futamura Y(1), Tashiro E, Hironiwa N, Kohno J, Nishio M, Shindo K, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.

Trierixin, a new member of the triene-ansamycin group, has been isolated from the
fermentation broth of Streptomyces sp. AC654 as an inhibitor of ER stress-induced
XBP1 activation. The structure of trierixin was determined on the basis of its
spectroscopical and chemical properties. Trierixin possessed a 21-membered
macrocyclic lactam, which contains a methylthio-benzenediol structure, and a
cyclohexanecarbonylalanine moiety. Trierixin is thus elucidated as
21-thiomethylmycotrienin II.

PMID: 17917242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2007 Sep;60(9):547-53.

Trierixin, a novel Inhibitor of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation from
Streptomyces sp. 1. Taxonomy, fermentation, isolation and biological activities.

Tashiro E(1), Hironiwa N, Kitagawa M, Futamura Y, Suzuki S, Nishio M, Imoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Keio University, Yokohama, Japan. tashiro@bio.keio.ac.jp

In the course of screening for an inhibitor of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation,
we isolated a new member of the triene-ansamycin group compound, trierixin, from 
a culture broth of Streptomyces sp. AC 654. Trierixin was purified by column
chromatography on silica gel and by HPLC. The molecular formula of trierixin is
C(37)H(52)N(2)O(8)S. Trierixin inhibited thapsigargin-induced XBP1-luciferase
activation in HeLa/XBP1-luc cells and endogenous XBP1 splicing in HeLa cells with
an IC(50) of 14 ng/ml and 19 ng/ml, respectively. Moreover, in the process of
isolating trierixin, we isolated structurally related mycotrienin II and
trienomycin A as inhibitors of ER stress-induced XBP1 activation from a culture
broth of a trierixin-producing strain. This study provides the first observation 
that triene-ansamycins have a novel inhibitory effect against XBP1 activation.

PMID: 17917237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Oncol Rep. 2007 Nov;18(5):1269-73.

Resveratrol induces pro-apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum stress in human colon
cancer cells.

Park JW(1), Woo KJ, Lee JT, Lim JH, Lee TJ, Kim SH, Choi YH, Kwon TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Chronic Disease Research Center and Institute for
Medical Science, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, 194 DingSan-Dong
Jung-Gu, Taegu 700-712, South Korea.

Resveratrol (3,4',5 tri-hydroxystilbene), a naturally occurring polyphenolic
compound highly enriched in grapes and red wine, has been shown to induce
anti-proliferation and apoptosis of human cancer cell lines. Resveratrol-induced 
dose-dependent apoptotic cell death in colon carcinoma cells, was measured by
FACS analysis. Treatment of HT29 human colon carcinoma cells with resveratrol was
found to induce a number of signature ER stress markers; phosphorylation of
eukaryotic initiation factor-2alpha (eIF-2alpha), ER stress-specific XBP1
splicing and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP). In
addition, resveratrol induced up-regulation of glucose-regulated protein
(GRP)-78, suggesting the induction of ER stress. Furthermore, the inhibition of
caspase-4 activity by z-LEVD-fmk significantly reduced resveratrol-induced
apoptosis. Taken together, the present study therefore provides strong evidence
to support an important role of ER stress response in mediating the
resveratrol-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 17914584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2486-94. Epub 2007 Sep 30.

The endoplasmic reticulum in pancreatic beta cells of type 2 diabetes patients.

Marchetti P(1), Bugliani M, Lupi R, Marselli L, Masini M, Boggi U, Filipponi F,
Weir GC, Eizirik DL, Cnop M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Metabolic Unit, Ospedale
Cisanello, University of Pisa, Via Paradisa 2, 56100, Pisa, Italy.
marchant@immr.med.unipi.it

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Pancreatic beta cells have highly developed endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) due to their role in insulin secretion. Since ER stress has been
associated with beta cell dysfunction, we studied several features of beta cell
ER in human type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Pancreatic samples and/or isolated islets from non-diabetic controls
(ND) and type 2 diabetes patients were evaluated for insulin secretion, apoptosis
(electron microscopy and ELISA), morphometric ER assessment (electron
microscopy), and expression of ER stress markers in beta cell prepared by laser
capture microdissection and in isolated islets.
RESULTS: Insulin release was lower and beta cell apoptosis higher in type 2
diabetes than ND islets. ER density volume was significantly increased in type 2 
diabetes beta cells. Expression of alpha-mannosidase (also known as mannosidase, 
alpha, class 1A, member 1) and UDP-glucose glycoprotein glucosyl transferase like
2 (UGCGL2), assessed by microarray and/or real-time reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), differed between ND and type 2 diabetes beta 
cells. Expression of immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein (BiP, also known 
as heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 [glucose-regulated protein, 78 kDa] [HSPA5]),
X-box binding protein 1 (XBP-1, also known as XBP1) and C/EBP homologous protein 
(CHOP, also known as damage-inducible transcript 3 [DDIT3]) was not higher in
type 2 diabetes beta cell or isolated islets cultured at 5.5 mmol/l glucose
(microarray and real-time RT-PCR) than in ND samples. When islets were cultured
for 24 h at 11.1 mmol/l glucose, there was induction of BiP and XBP-1 in type 2
diabetes islets but not in ND islets.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Beta cell in type 2 diabetes showed modest signs of
ER stress when studied in pancreatic samples or isolated islets maintained at
physiological glucose concentration. However, exposure to increased glucose
levels induced ER stress markers in type 2 diabetes islet cells, which therefore 
may be more susceptible to ER stress induced by metabolic perturbations.

PMID: 17906960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 23;282(47):34525-34. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

The role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)-induced XBP1 splicing during
brain development.

Hayashi A(1), Kasahara T, Iwamoto K, Ishiwata M, Kametani M, Kakiuchi C, Furuichi
T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science Institute
RIKEN, Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum initiates
intracellular signaling termed the unfolded protein response (UPR). Although Xbp1
serves as a pivotal transcription factor for the UPR, the physiological role of
UPR signaling and Xbp1 in the central nervous system remains to be elucidated.
Here, we show that Xbp1 mRNA was highly expressed during neurodevelopment and
activated Xbp1 protein was distributed throughout developing neurons, including
neurites. The isolated neurite culture system and time-lapse imaging demonstrated
that Xbp1 was activated in neurites in response to brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), followed by subsequent translocation of the active Xbp1 into the
nucleus. BDNF-dependent neurite outgrowth was significantly attenuated in
Xbp1(-/-) neurons. These findings suggest that BDNF initiates UPR signaling in
neurites and that Xbp1, which is activated as part of the UPR, conveys the local 
information from neurites to the nucleus, contributing the neurite outgrowth.

PMID: 17890727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cell Immunol. 2007 May;247(1):49-58. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

BCR ligation antagonizes the IL-21 enhancement of anti-CD40/IL-4 plasma cell
differentiation and IgE production found in low density human B cell cultures.

Caven TH(1), Sturgill JL, Conrad DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

We sought to discover the mechanisms explaining increased IgE production seen at 
low cell densities when IL-21 is added to human B cell cultures activated with
anti-CD40 and IL-4. When cells were cultured in the absence of BCR ligation, qPCR
demonstrated dramatic increases in mRNA for the plasma cell transcription factors
BLIMP1 and XBP1. Furthermore, a majority of viable cells expressed high levels of
CD38 while losing expression of surface IgD. In contrast, in the presence of BCR 
stimulation, both the XBP1 mRNA levels and CD38 cell surface expression were
markedly reduced, and a large population of cells retained IgD expression,
indicating reduced plasma cell differentiation. IgE levels were reduced in the
BCR stimulated cultures by 90%, while IgG4 levels remained unchanged. In summary,
IL-21 enhances IgE production at low densities through stimulating cell division 
and plasma cell differentiation and this activity is reduced upon BCR
cross-linking.

PMCID: PMC2075084
PMID: 17888893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Genet Genomics. 2007 Sep;34(9):790-8.

Study of transcription activity of X-box binding protein 1 gene in human
different cell lines.

Guo F(1), Song F, Zhang J, Li J, Tang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Institute of Basic Medicine Sciences,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. guofengjin919@vip.sohu.com

Human X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), an important transcription factor,
participates in many signal transduction processes. To further investigate the
biological function of XBP1, sequences of XBP1 promoter and its two deletion
mutants were first determined using bioinformatic analysis. The report vectors
containing XBP1 promoter and its deletion mutants were then constructed, namely, 
p1-XBP1p, p2-XBP1p, and p3-XBP1p. Each reporter vector was separately transfected
into HepG(2), L0(2), K562, SMMC-7721, HSF, and Lipocyte Ito Cell line using
FuGENE 6 transfection reagents. The activity of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) in each group of transfected cells was detected by ELISA assay, which in
turn reflects the transcription activity of the XBP1 gene promoter. The activity 
involving p3-XBP1p was the highest in HepG(2), which was 12.4-fold of that of
pCAT3-Basic. The activities of p3-XBP1p in K562 and SMMC-7721 were the second and
the third highest, which were 10.9-fold and 10.0-fold of that of the pCAT3-Basic,
respectively. The CAT activity in L0(2) was lower than that in the
above-mentioned abnormal cell, and no reporter activity was detected in HSF and
Ito Cell. The XBP1 transcription and expression in K562, HepG(2) and SMMC-7721
were found to be higher than that in L0(2), HSF and Ito cells, based on the
results of real-time RT-PCR and Western blot. The XBP1 transcription and
expression in L0(2), HSF was lower, whereas that in Ito cells was totally
lacking. The result was similar to that of CAT-ELISA. Therefore, the XBP1 gene
promoter can drive its downstream gene expression and its activity is cell
line-dependent. The core sequence of XBP1 promoter was found between -227bp and
66bp sequence. This sequence was closely associated with the transcriptional
activity of XBP1 promoter.

PMID: 17884689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Dev Cell. 2007 Sep;13(3):365-76.

Transcriptional induction of mammalian ER quality control proteins is mediated by
single or combined action of ATF6alpha and XBP1.

Yamamoto K(1), Sato T, Matsui T, Sato M, Okada T, Yoshida H, Harada A, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8502, Japan.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2007 Sep;13(3):322-4.

Metazoans express three unfolded protein response transducers (IRE1, PERK, and
ATF6) ubiquitously to cope with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. ATF6 is an ER 
membrane-bound transcription factor activated by ER stress-induced proteolysis
and has been duplicated in mammals. Here, we generated ATF6alpha- and
ATF6beta-knockout mice, which developed normally, and then found that their
double knockout caused embryonic lethality. Analysis of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient in ATF6alpha or ATF6beta revealed that ATF6alpha is 
solely responsible for transcriptional induction of ER chaperones and that
ATF6alpha heterodimerizes with XBP1 for the induction of ER-associated
degradation components. ATF6alpha(-/-) MEFs are sensitive to ER stress. Unaltered
responses observed in ATF6beta(-/-) MEFs indicate that ATF6beta is not a negative
regulator of ATF6alpha. These results demonstrate that ATF6alpha functions as a
critical regulator of ER quality control proteins in mammalian cells, in marked
contrast to worm and fly cells in which IRE1 is responsible.

PMID: 17765680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Blood. 2007 Dec 15;110(13):4179-87. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Mutations of the ELA2 gene found in patients with severe congenital neutropenia
induce the unfolded protein response and cellular apoptosis.

Grenda DS(1), Murakami M, Ghatak J, Xia J, Boxer LA, Dale D, Dinauer MC, Link DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO
63110, USA.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is an inborn disorder of granulopoiesis.
Mutations of the ELA2 gene encoding neutrophil elastase (NE) are responsible for 
most cases of SCN and cyclic neutropenia (CN), a related but milder disorder of
granulopoiesis. However, the mechanisms by which these mutations disrupt
granulopoiesis are unclear. We hypothesize that the ELA2 mutations result in the 
production of misfolded NE protein, activation of the unfolded protein response
(UPR), and ultimately apoptosis of granulocytic precursors. Expression of mutant 
NE but not wild-type NE strongly induced BiP/GRP78 mRNA expression and XBP1 mRNA 
splicing, 2 classic markers of the UPR. The magnitude of UPR activation by a
specific ELA2 mutation correlated with its associated clinical phenotype.
Consistent with the UPR model, expression of mutant NE in primary human
granulocytic precursors increased expression of CHOP (DDITS) and induced
apoptosis in a protease-independent fashion. Most strikingly, UPR activation and 
decreased NE protein expression were detected in primary granulocytic precursors 
from SCN patients. Collectively, these data provide strong support for a UPR
model of SCN disease pathogenesis and place SCN in a growing list of human
diseases caused by misfolded proteins.

PMCID: PMC2234798
PMID: 17761833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Nov;72(5):1337-48. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Geranylgeranylacetone, an inducer of the 70-kDa heat shock protein (HSP70),
elicits unfolded protein response and coordinates cellular fate independently of 
HSP70.

Endo S(1), Hiramatsu N, Hayakawa K, Okamura M, Kasai A, Tagawa Y, Sawada N, Yao
J, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Shimokato 1110, Chuo,
Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.

Geranylgeranylacetone (GGA), an antiulcer agent, has the ability to induce 70-kDa
heat shock protein (HSP70) in various cell types and to protect cells from
apoptogenic insults. However, little is known about effects of GGA on other HSP
families of molecules. We found that, at concentrations >/=100 microM, GGA caused
selective expression of 78-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), an HSP70 family
member inducible by endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, without affecting the
level of HSP70 in various cell types. Induction of ER stress by GGA was also
evidenced by expression of another endogenous marker, CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-homologous protein (CHOP); decreased activity of ER stress-responsive
alkaline phosphatase; and unfolded protein response (UPR), including activation
of the activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) pathway and the
inositol-requiring ER-to-nucleus signal kinase 1-X-box-binding protein 1
(IRE1-XBP1) pathway. Incubation of mesangial cells with GGA caused significant
apoptosis, which was attenuated by transfection with inhibitors of caspase-12
(i.e., a dominant-negative mutant of caspase-12 and MAGE-3). Dominant-negative
suppression of IRE1 or XBP1 significantly attenuated apoptosis without affecting 
the levels of CHOP and GRP78. Inhibition of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase, the
molecule downstream of IRE1, by 1,9-pyrazoloanthrone (SP600125) did not improve
cell survival. Blockade of ATF6 by 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride
enhanced apoptosis by GGA, and it was correlated with attenuated induction of
both GRP78 and CHOP. Overexpression of GRP78 or dominant-negative inhibition of
CHOP significantly attenuated GGA-induced apoptosis. These results suggested that
GGA triggers both proapoptotic (IRE1-XBP1, ATF6-CHOP) and antiapoptotic
(ATF6-GRP78) UPR and thereby coordinates cellular fate even without induction of 
HSP70.

PMID: 17702888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Br J Pharmacol. 2007 Oct;152(4):493-500. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Nitric oxide selectively depletes macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques via
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Martinet W(1), Croons V, Timmermans JP, Herman AG, De Meyer GR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium.
wim.martinet@ua.ac.be

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques have a tremendous 
impact on atherogenesis and plaque destabilization. We previously demonstrated
that treatment of plaques in cholesterol-fed rabbits with the nitric oxide (NO)
donor molsidomine preferentially eliminates macrophages, thereby favouring
features of plaque stability. In this study, we investigated the underlying
mechanism.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Macrophages and smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were treated in
vitro with the NO donors, spermine NONOate or S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine
(SNAP) as well as with the well-known endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducers 
thapsigargin, tunicamycin, dithiothreitol or brefeldin A. Cell viability was
analysed by Neutral Red viability assays. Cleavage of caspase-3, DNA
fragmentation and ultrastructural changes were examined to characterize the type 
of macrophage death. Induction of ER stress was evaluated by measuring C/EBP
homologous protein (CHOP) expression, phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation
factor 2 alpha (eIF2a), splicing of X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and inhibition
of protein synthesis.
KEY RESULTS: Macrophages and SMCs treated with spermine NONOate or SNAP showed
several signs of ER stress, including upregulation of CHOP expression,
hyperphosphorylation of eIF2 alpha, inhibition of de novo protein synthesis and
splicing of XBP1 mRNA. These effects were similar in macrophages and SMCs, yet
only macrophages underwent apoptosis. Plaques from molsidomine-treated
atherosclerotic rabbits showed a 2.7-fold increase in CHOP expression as compared
to placebo. Beside NO, selective induction of macrophage death could be initiated
with thapsigargin and tunicamycin.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Induction of ER stress explains selective depletion
of macrophages in atherosclerotic plaques by a NO donor, probably via inhibition 
of protein synthesis.

PMCID: PMC2050816
PMID: 17700714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 15;67(16):7929-36.

Farnesol-induced apoptosis in human lung carcinoma cells is coupled to the
endoplasmic reticulum stress response.

Joo JH(1), Liao G, Collins JB, Grissom SF, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, LRB, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Farnesol (FOH) and other isoprenoid alcohols induce apoptosis in various
carcinoma cells and inhibit tumorigenesis in several in vivo models. However, the
mechanisms by which they mediate their effects are not yet fully understood. In
this study, we show that FOH is an effective inducer of apoptosis in several lung
carcinoma cells, including H460. This induction is associated with activation of 
several caspases and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). To obtain
insight into the mechanism involved in FOH-induced apoptosis, we compared the
gene expression profiles of FOH-treated and control H460 cells by microarray
analysis. This analysis revealed that many genes implicated in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress signaling, including ATF3, DDIT3, HERPUD1, HSPA5, XBP1,
PDIA4, and PHLDA1, were highly up-regulated within 4 h of FOH treatment,
suggesting that FOH-induced apoptosis involves an ER stress response. This was
supported by observations showing that treatment with FOH induces splicing of
XBP1 mRNA and phosphorylation of eIF2alpha. FOH induces activation of several
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, including p38,
MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK)-ERK, and c-jun
NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Inhibition of MEK1/2 by U0126 inhibited the induction 
of ER stress response genes. In addition, knockdown of the MEK1/2 and JNK1/2
expression by short interfering RNA (siRNA) effectively inhibited the cleavage of
caspase-3 and PARP and apoptosis induced by FOH. However, only MEK1/2 siRNAs
inhibited the induction of ER stress-related genes, XBP1 mRNA splicing, and
eIF2alpha phosphorylation. Our results show that FOH-induced apoptosis is coupled
to ER stress and that activation of MEK1/2 is an early upstream event in the
FOH-induced ER stress signaling cascade.

PMID: 17699800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Virol. 2007 Oct;81(20):10849-60. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

West Nile virus infection activates the unfolded protein response, leading to
CHOP induction and apoptosis.

Medigeshi GR(1), Lancaster AM, Hirsch AJ, Briese T, Lipkin WI, Defilippis V, Früh
K, Mason PW, Nikolich-Zugich J, Nelson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, 505
N.W. 185th Avenue, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. medigesh@ohsu.edu

West Nile virus (WNV)-mediated neuronal death is a hallmark of WNV meningitis and
encephalitis. However, the mechanisms of WNV-induced neuronal damage are not well
understood. We investigated WNV neuropathogenesis by using human neuroblastoma
cells and primary rat hippocampal neurons. We observed that WNV activates
multiple unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways, leading to transcriptional and
translational induction of UPR target genes. We evaluated the role of the three
major UPR pathways, namely, inositol-requiring enzyme 1-dependent splicing of X
box binding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA, activation of activating transcription factor 
6 (ATF6), and protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum (ER) kinase-dependent
eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) phosphorylation, in WNV-infected 
cells. We show that XBP1 is nonessential or can be replaced by other UPR pathways
in WNV replication. ATF6 was rapidly degraded by proteasomes, consistent with
induction of ER stress by WNV. We further observed a transient phosphorylation of
eIF2alpha and induction of the proapoptotic cyclic AMP response element-binding
transcription factor homologous protein (CHOP). WNV-infected cells exhibited a
number of apoptotic phenotypes, such as (i) induction of growth arrest and DNA
damage-inducible gene 34, (ii) activation of caspase-3, and (iii) cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. The expression of WNV nonstructural proteins alone
was sufficient to induce CHOP expression. Importantly, WNV grew to significantly 
higher viral titers in chop(-)(/)(-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) than in
wild-type MEFs, suggesting that CHOP-dependent premature cell death represents a 
host defense mechanism to limit viral replication that might also be responsible 
for the widespread neuronal loss observed in WNV-infected neuronal tissue.

PMCID: PMC2045561
PMID: 17686866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Acta Neuropathol. 2007 Nov;114(5):527-35. Epub 2007 Jul 28.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress in myotonic dystrophy type 1 muscle.

Ikezoe K(1), Nakamori M, Furuya H, Arahata H, Kanemoto S, Kimura T, Imaizumi K,
Takahashi MP, Sakoda S, Fujii N, Kira J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582,
Japan. kikezoe@neuro.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

In myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), alternative splicing of ryanodine receptor 1 
(RyR1) and sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase (SERCA) genes has been 
reported. These proteins are essential for maintaining intracellular Ca2+ in
skeletal muscle. To clarify involvement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in
DM1 muscles, we examined the activation of ER stress-related proteins by
immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis and RT-PCR. In four of five DM1
muscle biopsies, except for a muscle biopsy from a patient with the shortest CTG 
expansion and no myotonia, increased expression of GRP78 and calnexin, and
phosphorylation of PERK and eIF-2 alpha were revealed in fibers with sarcoplasmic
masses and in highly atrophic fibers with pyknotic nuclear clumps. Caspase-3 and 
-7 were also expressed in these fibers. Increased expression of GRP78 in these
DM1 muscles was confirmed by western blot analysis. GRP78 mRNA and spliced
isoform of XBP1 mRNA were also increased in DM1 muscle biopsies. Furthermore, we 
demonstrated increased expression of GRP78 in highly atrophic fibers with
pyknotic nuclear clumps in all three muscle biopsies from neurogenic muscular
atrophies. However, five muscle biopsies from central core disease presumably
with disturbed intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis and a muscle biopsy from
paramyotonia congenita with myotonia showed no activation of these proteins.
Taken together, ER stress is involved in muscle wasting in DM1. However, it seems
to be evoked not only by disrupted intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis.

PMID: 17661063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. FASEB J. 2007 Dec;21(14):4013-27. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Human X-box binding protein-1 confers both estrogen independence and antiestrogen
resistance in breast cancer cell lines.

Gomez BP(1), Riggins RB, Shajahan AN, Klimach U, Wang A, Crawford AC, Zhu Y,
Zwart A, Wang M, Clarke R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, 3970 Reservoir Rd., NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Human X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) is an alternatively spliced transcription
factor that participates in the unfolded protein response (UPR), a
stress-signaling pathway that allows cells to survive the accumulation of
unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen. We have previously
demonstrated that XBP1 expression is increased in antiestrogen-resistant breast
cancer cell lines and is coexpressed with estrogen receptor alpha (ER) in breast 
tumors. The purpose of this study is to investigate the role of XBP1 and the UPR 
in estrogen and antiestrogen responsiveness in breast cancer. Overexpression of
spliced XBP1 [XBP1(S)] in ER-positive breast cancer cells leads to
estrogen-independent growth and reduced sensitivity to growth inhibition induced 
by the antiestrogens Tamoxifen and Faslodex in a manner independent of functional
p53. Data from gene expression microarray analyses imply that XBP1(S) acts
through regulation of the expression of ER, the antiapoptotic gene BCL2, and
several other genes associated with control of the cell cycle and apoptosis.
Testing this hypothesis, we show that overexpression of XBP1(S) prevents cell
cycle arrest and antiestrogen-induced cell death through the mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway. XBP1 and/or the UPR may be a useful molecular target for the
development of novel predictive and therapeutic strategies in breast cancer.

PMID: 17660348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Eur J Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;86(10):581-9. Epub 2007 Jul 24.

IRF4 negatively regulates proliferation of germinal center B cell-derived
Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines and induces differentiation toward plasma cells.

Teng Y(1), Takahashi Y, Yamada M, Kurosu T, Koyama T, Miura O, Miki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To investigate the roles of interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) in B-cell
development, we established germinal center B cell-derived Burkitt's lymphoma
cell lines that exogenously express IRF4. Daudi-IRF4 expressed IRF4 in the
presence of doxycycline (inducible expression), and Raji-IRF4 constitutively
expressed an IRF4-estrogen receptor chimeric protein, which was activated by
4-hydroxytamoxifen. Expression or activation of IRF4 resulted in growth
inhibition accompanied by accumulation of cells in G0/G1. Upregulation of the
plasma cell markers CD38 and CD138 and downregulation of the germinal center cell
marker B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) were also observed. Furthermore, mRNAs for BCL6
and paired box gene 5 (PAX5) were decreased and those for B-lymphocyte-induced
maturation protein-1 (BLIMP1)/PR domain containing 1 (PRDM1) and X-box binding
protein 1 (XBP1) were increased, which corresponds to the characteristic changes 
in transcription factor expression in B cells differentiating toward plasma
cells. Impairment in proliferation and differentiation toward plasma cells
induced by IRF4 were not inhibited by enforced expression of BCL6. These results 
suggest that IRF4 inhibits cell cycle progression of germinal center B
cell-derived Burkitt's lymphoma cells and induces terminal differentiation toward
plasma cells through mechanisms independent of BCL6 downregulation.

PMID: 17651861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2008 May;61(6):923-32. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

IPI-504, a novel and soluble HSP-90 inhibitor, blocks the unfolded protein
response in multiple myeloma cells.

Patterson J(1), Palombella VJ, Fritz C, Normant E.

Author information: 
(1)Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 780 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 induce apoptosis in
multiple myeloma (MM) cells, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this
cytotoxic outcome are not clear. Here, we investigate the effect of IPI-504, a
novel and highly soluble inhibitor of the Hsp90 ATPase activity, on the unfolded 
protein response (UPR) in MM cells. The UPR is a stress response pathway
triggered by sensors located at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane whose
function is to reduce an excessive accumulation of misfolded protein in the ER.
During normal development of B-lymphocytes to antibody-producing plasma cells, a 
partial UPR has been described, where IREalpha and ATF-6 are stimulated, whereas 
the third sensor, PERK, is not induced.
METHODS: Levels of the activated forms of the three main UPR sensors ATF-6, XBP-1
and PERK/eIF-2 were monitored in two different MM cells lines and one non-MM cell
lines under various experimental conditions including incubation with increasing 
concentration of IPI-504. Also, MM cells were incubated with IPI-504 and several 
apoptosis markers were monitored.
RESULTS: We show here that a partial UPR is constitutively activated in plasma
cell-derived MM cells and that IPI-504 can potently inhibit this pathway. IPI-504
achieves this by inactivating the transcription factors XBP1 and ATF6. In
addition, IPI-504 also blocks the tunicamycin-induced phosphorylation of eIF2 by 
PERK. Dose-response and time course experiments reveal that IPI-504's inhibitory 
effect on the UPR parallels its cytotoxic and pro-apoptotic effects on MM cells.
CONCLUSION: The results presented here suggest that the IPI-504-induced apoptosis
might be, in part, mediated by the inhibition of the partial UPR. Other
malignancies that rely on intact and efficient UPR to survive could be considered
as new indications for Hsp90 inhibitors.

PMID: 17624530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 31;360(3):615-20. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

Phosphorylated PKR contributes the induction of GRP94 under ER stress.

Ito M(1), Onuki R, Bando Y, Tohyama M, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 13-0033, Japan.

Phosphorylated double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is thought to
play an important role during ER stress induced cell death, but its molecular
mechanism of action has not yet been clarified completely. To resolve this issue,
we employed a PKR inhibitor together with ER stress inducers (tunicamycin,
thapsigargin, and 2-deoxyglucose) and found that this treatment applied to
SK-N-SH and HepG2 cells suppressed the expressional induction of 94kDa glucose
regulated protein (GRP94) but not GRP78 proteins at both protein and mRNA levels.
Although GRP94 mRNA increased, no significant difference was observed in the mRNA
level of spliced X box binding protein 1 (XBP1) and reporter gene assay using
GRP78 and GRP94 promoter with an ER stress response element (ERSE) showed that
PKR inhibitor did not affect their activity. These results suggest that a novel
mechanism other than ERSE-dependent mRNA transcription is required for the
induction of GRP94 and phosphorylation of PKR contributes to the induction of
GRP94 under ER stress.

PMID: 17612505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell. 2007 Jul 6;27(1):53-66.

XBP1 controls diverse cell type- and condition-specific transcriptional
regulatory networks.

Acosta-Alvear D(1), Zhou Y, Blais A, Tsikitis M, Lents NH, Arias C, Lennon CJ,
Kluger Y, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Using genome-wide approaches, we have elucidated the regulatory circuitry
governed by the XBP1 transcription factor, a key effector of the mammalian
unfolded protein response (UPR), in skeletal muscle and secretory cells. We
identified a core group of genes involved in constitutive maintenance of ER
function in all cell types and tissue- and condition-specific targets. In
addition, we identified a cadre of unexpected targets that link XBP1 to
neurodegenerative and myodegenerative diseases, as well as to DNA damage and
repair pathways. Remarkably, we found that XBP1 regulates functionally distinct
targets through different sequence motifs. Further, we identified Mist1, a
critical regulator of differentiation, as an important target of XBP1, providing 
an explanation for developmental defects associated with XBP1 loss of function.
Our results provide a detailed picture of the regulatory roadmap governed by XBP1
in distinct cell types as well as insight into unexplored functions of XBP1.

PMID: 17612490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 17;360(1):122-7. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Site-specific cleavage of CD59 mRNA by endoplasmic reticulum-localized
ribonuclease, IRE1.

Oikawa D(1), Tokuda M, Iwawaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Initiative Research Unit, Frontier Research System, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 7;395(3):449.

IRE1, an ER-localized transmembrane-RNase, plays a central role in ER stress
response. Upon ER stress, IRE1 induces various adaptive genes through the
processing of mRNA encoding the transcription factor XBP1. Moreover, it was
recently reported that in fly IRE1 attenuates the expression of several genes by 
cleaving mRNAs, but it has been unclear whether such a mechanism also exists in
mammal. In this study, we searched for IRE1alpha-cleaved mRNAs in mammalian cells
and identified human CD59 (complement defense 59) mRNA as a novel cleavage
target. In addition, the expression of CD59 was significantly attenuated by
overexpression of IRE1alpha or ER stress. These results suggest that
IRE1alpha-mediated mRNA cleavage functions even in mammals as a common system to 
regulate gene expression.

PMID: 17585877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(15):1639-52.

Diseases originating from altered protein quality control in the endoplasmic
reticulum.

Otsu M(1), Sitia R.

Author information: 
(1)Università Vita Salute San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58,
20132 Milano, Italy.

A challenging question in biology is how cells control their shape and volume.
The relative abundance of organelles can be radically modified to comply with a
new task, an example being the massive development of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) in Ig-secreting plasma cells. The ER is the site where secretory proteins
are made and folded. Remarkably, it can discriminate between native and
non-native proteins, restricting transport to the former, whilst retaining and
eventually degrading the latter (quality control). Recent studies revealed that
certain components of the unfolded protein response (UPR), a multidimensional
signalling pathway originally discovered in cells exposed to severe ER stress,
are crucial for the normal development of secretory cells. According to the cell 
types, different arms of the UPR are required: the IRE1-XBP1 pathway is essential
for plasma cell differentiation, whilst the PERK-eIF2alpha pathway is essential
for pancreatic beta cells survival. Therefore, the UPR is far from being a
monolithic response. Disturbances in the signalling pathways that allow the ER to
satisfy the changing demand of protein synthesis can occur at various levels and 
often cause diseases. Here we summarize the molecular mechanisms underlying this 
variegated and constantly growing class of pathological conditions, focusing on
diseases that are linked to alterations in the quality control functions that the
ER exerts over its protein products.

PMID: 17584070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Neurochem. 2007 Aug;102(4):1242-55. Epub 2007 Jun 19.

Spinal cord injury induces endoplasmic reticulum stress with different cell-type 
dependent response.

Penas C(1), Guzmán MS, Verdú E, Forés J, Navarro X, Casas C.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Neuroplasticity and Regeneration, Institute of Neurosciences and
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

The mechanisms of injury-induced apoptosis of neurons within the spinal cord are 
poorly understood. In this study, we show that spinal cord injury (SCI) induces
endoplasmic reticulum stress revealed by the activation of an unbalanced unfolded
protein response (UPR). Using a weight-drop contusion model of SCI, the UPR
activation was characterized by a quick transient phosphorylation of alpha
subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 soon restored by the up-regulation of
its regulator Gadd34; an effective cleavage/activation of the ATF6alpha
transcription factor leading to up-regulation of the canonical UPR target genes
Chop, Xbp1 and Grp78; the presence of the processing of Xbp1 mRNA indicative of
inositol requiring kinase 1 activation, and a gradual accumulation of C/EBP
homologous transcription factor protein (CHOP) with concomitant caspase-12
activation. Interestingly, the subcellular distribution of CHOP was found in the 
nucleus of neurons and oligodendrocytes but in the cytoplasm of astrocytes.
Considering the pro-apoptotic action attributed to this transcription factor,
this phenomenon might account for the different susceptibility of cell types to
dye after SCI.

PMID: 17578450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Toxicol Sci. 2007 Sep;99(1):338-45. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Calpain inhibition but not reticulum endoplasmic stress preconditioning protects 
rat kidneys from p-aminophenol toxicity.

Peyrou M(1), Hanna PE, Cribb AE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PE,
Canada. mpeyrou@upei.ca

p-Aminophenol (pAP, 225 mg/kg) administration to rats induced renal failure and
has been associated with markers of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, as well as
calpain and caspase-12 activation in kidneys. To determine the importance of ER
stress and calpain during pAP-induced nephrotoxicity, rats were pretreated with
low, nontoxic, doses of ER stress inducers or with the selective calpain
inhibitor PD150606 (3 mg/kg). Prior ER stress induced by tunicamycin and oxidized
dithiothreitol did not result in protection against renal failure, but PD150606
administration was protective and decreased significantly the rise in creatinine 
and blood urea nitrogen observed after 24-h post-pAP administration. pAP-induced 
XBP1 upregulation was not modified by calpain inhibition, but a trend to lower
GRP94 induction was determined, suggesting that pAP-induced ER stress was mostly 
calpain independent. In contrast, pAP-induced caspase-12 cleavage products were
significantly decreased with PD150606 pretreatment, demonstrating that caspase-12
activation was calpain dependent. This study reveals the importance of calpain in
pAP-induced renal failure. Further research with other nephrotoxicants needs to
be performed to determine if calpain activation is a common feature of
drug-induced renal failure.

PMID: 17567592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Toxicol Sci. 2007 Sep;99(1):346-53. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Cisplatin, gentamicin, and p-aminophenol induce markers of endoplasmic reticulum 
stress in the rat kidneys.

Peyrou M(1), Hanna PE, Cribb AE.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PE,
Canada. mpeyrou@upei.ca

In vitro evidence of the involvement of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) during
drug-induced renal toxicity is accumulating. ER stress and ER-mediated cell death
markers have been reported after exposure of renal cells to model toxicants and
nephrotoxic drugs in various in vitro models, but in vivo experiments with
clinically relevant nephrotoxic compounds are lacking. In order to determine the 
relevance of the in vitro findings, markers of ER stress (XBP1 messenger RNA
processing and protein expression; GRP78 and GRP94 upregulation) and ER-mediated 
cell death (caspase-12 and calpain activation) were examined in kidney tissue of 
rats exposed to nephrotoxic doses of cisplatin (CIS), gentamicin (GEN), and
p-aminophenol (PAP), a nephrotoxic metabolite of acetaminophen. XBP1 signaling
was observed with all three drugs and was associated with increased expression of
GRP94 and GRP78 in GEN- and PAP-treated animals, but surprisingly not after CIS
exposure. m-Calpain expression was increased after 7 days of CIS treatment,
whereas it was decreased in PAP-treated rats. Caspase-12 cleavage products were
increased after CIS, GEN, and PAP administration. The results of this study
demonstrate that three clinically relevant nephrotoxic drugs are all associated
with changes in markers of ER stress and ER-mediated cell death in vivo. Further 
investigation is warranted to determine the role of the ER, the calpain system,
and caspase-12 in drug-induced renal cell death.

PMID: 17567590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(15):5499-513. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

The kinase inhibitor sorafenib induces cell death through a process involving
induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Rahmani M(1), Davis EM, Crabtree TR, Habibi JR, Nguyen TK, Dent P, Grant S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, MCV Station Box 230, 
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Sorafenib is a multikinase inhibitor that induces apoptosis in human leukemia and
other malignant cells. Recently, we demonstrated that sorafenib diminishes Mcl-1 
protein expression by inhibiting translation through a MEK1/2-ERK1/2
signaling-independent mechanism and that this phenomenon plays a key functional
role in sorafenib-mediated lethality. Here, we report that inducible expression
of constitutively active MEK1 fails to protect cells from sorafenib-mediated
lethality, indicating that sorafenib-induced cell death is unrelated to
MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway inactivation. Notably, treatment with sorafenib induced
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in human leukemia cells (U937) manifested by
immediate cytosolic-calcium mobilization, GADD153 and GADD34 protein induction,
PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha)
phosphorylation, XBP1 splicing, and a general reduction in protein synthesis as
assessed by [35S]methionine incorporation. These events were accompanied by
pronounced generation of reactive oxygen species through a mechanism dependent
upon cytosolic-calcium mobilization and a significant decline in GRP78/Bip
protein levels. Interestingly, enforced expression of IRE1alpha markedly reduced 
sorafenib-mediated apoptosis, whereas knockdown of IRE1alpha or XBP1, disruption 
of PERK activity, or inhibition of eIF2alpha phosphorylation enhanced
sorafenib-mediated lethality. Finally, downregulation of caspase-2 or caspase-4
by small interfering RNA significantly diminished apoptosis induced by sorafenib.
Together, these findings demonstrate that ER stress represents a central
component of a MEK1/2-ERK1/2-independent cell death program triggered by
sorafenib.

PMCID: PMC1952105
PMID: 17548474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22499-512. Epub 2007 May 29.

Regulation of ERGIC-53 gene transcription in response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Renna M(1), Caporaso MG, Bonatti S, Kaufman RJ, Remondelli P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università degli Studi di Salerno,
Fisciano-Salerno I-84034, Italy.

Accumulation of unfolded proteins within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates
the unfolded protein response, also known as the ER stress response. We
previously demonstrated that ER stress induces transcription of the ER Golgi
intermediate compartment protein ERGIC-53. To investigate the molecular events
that regulate unfolded protein response-mediated induction of the gene, we have
analyzed the transcriptional regulation of ERGIC-53. We found that the ERGIC-53
promoter contains a single cis-acting element that mediates induction of the gene
by thapsigargin and other ER stress-causing agents. This ER stress response
element proved to retain a novel structure and to be highly conserved in
mammalian ERGIC-53 genes. The ER stress response element identified contains a
5'-end CCAAT sequence that constitutively binds NFY/CBF and, 9 nucleotides away, 
a 3'-end region (5'-CCCTGTTGGCCATC-3') that is equally important for ER
stress-mediated induction of the gene. This sequence is the binding site for
endogenous YY1 at the 5'-CCCTGTTGG-3' part and for undefined factors at the CCATC
3'-end. ATF6 alpha-YY1, but not XBP1, interacted with the ERGIC-53 regulatory
region and activated ERGIC-53 ER stress response element-dependent transcription.
A molecular model for the transcriptional regulation of the ERGIC-53 gene is
proposed.

PMID: 17535801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2641-9. Epub 2007 May 24.

Heat shock protein inhibition is associated with activation of the unfolded
protein response pathway in myeloma plasma cells.

Davenport EL(1), Moore HE, Dunlop AS, Sharp SY, Workman P, Morgan GJ, Davies FE.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Haemato-Oncology, Cancer Research UK, The Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Plasma cells producing high levels of paraprotein are dependent on the unfolded
protein response (UPR) and chaperone proteins to ensure correct protein folding
and cell survival. We hypothesized that disrupting client-chaperone interactions 
using heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibitors would result in an inability to
handle immunoglobulin production with the induction of the UPR and myeloma cell
death. To study this, myeloma cells were treated with Hsp90 inhibitors as well as
known endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers and proteasome inhibitors. Treatment 
with thapsigargin and tunicamycin led to the activation of all 3 branches of the 
UPR, with early splicing of XBP1 indicative of IRE1 activation, upregulation of
CHOP consistent with ER resident kinase (PERK) activation, and activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6) splicing. 17-AAG and radicicol also induced
splicing of XBP1, with the induction of CHOP and activation of ATF6, whereas
bortezomib resulted in the induction of CHOP and activation of ATF6 with minimal 
effects on XBP1. After treatment with all drugs, expression levels of the
molecular chaperones BiP and GRP94 were increased. All drugs inhibited
proliferation and induced cell death with activation of JNK and caspase cleavage.
In conclusion, Hsp90 inhibitors induce myeloma cell death at least in part via
endoplasmic reticulum stress and the UPR death pathway.

PMID: 17525289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Diabetologia. 2007 Jul;50(7):1442-52. Epub 2007 May 12.

Acute nutrient regulation of the unfolded protein response and integrated stress 
response in cultured rat pancreatic islets.

Elouil H(1), Bensellam M, Guiot Y, Vander Mierde D, Pascal SM, Schuit FC, Jonas
JC.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate, 55 (UCL 55.30), 1200, Brussels,
Belgium.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Inadequate chaperone function relative to client protein load in
the endoplasmic reticulum triggers an adaptive unfolded protein response (UPR),
including the integrated stress response (ISR), the latter being also activated
by other types of stresses. It is well established that pancreatic beta cells,
which synthesise and secrete insulin upon nutrient stimulation, are markedly
affected by pathological disruption or excessive activation of the UPR. However, 
whether and how physiological nutrient stimulation affects the beta cell UPR has 
been little investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared the effects of increasing glucose
concentrations and of endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) emptying with thapsigargin on 
the UPR (X-box binding protein [Xbp1] mRNA splicing and XBP1/activating
transcription factor [ATF] 6-target gene expression) and ISR (eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 2A phosphorylation, ATF4 protein levels and target 
gene expression) in isolated rat islets.
RESULTS: Thapsigargin strongly increased both UPR and ISR. In comparison, glucose
moderately increased the UPR between 5 and 30 mmol/l, but exerted complex effects
on the ISR as follows: (1) marked reduction between 2 and 10 mmol/l; (2) moderate
increase parallel to the UPR between 10 and 30 mmol/l. These glucose effects
occurred within 2 h, were mimicked by other metabolic substrates, but were
independent of changes in Ca(2+) influx or insulin secretion. Remarkably,
attenuating the glucose stimulation of protein synthesis with a low concentration
of cycloheximide prevented UPR activation but not ISR reduction by high glucose.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Nutrient stimulation acutely activates rat islet UPR 
in a manner dependent on protein synthesis, while exerting complex effects on the
ISR. These effects may contribute to nutrient-induced maintenance of the beta
cell phenotype.

PMID: 17497122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 May;48(5):964-77.

Homoharringtonine-induced apoptosis of MDS cell line MUTZ-1 cells is mediated by 
the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway.

Jie H(1), Donghua H, Xingkui X, Liang G, Wenjun W, Xiaoyan H, Zhen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Homoharringtonine has been shown to lead to apoptosis of leukemic cells in
several studies. Here we showed that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) may be the
initial site of apoptotic signal induced by homoharringtonine in MUTZ-1 cells.
After incubation with homoharringtonine, the percentage of apoptotic MUTZ-1 cells
increased in a time-dependent manner, Ca(2+) translocated from ER pool to
cytosol, the mitochondrial membrane potential decreased, and Bid protein
translocated from ER to mitochondria. The activation of ER stress-associated
proapoptotic factor CHOP and ER chaperones BiP and XBP1 genes followed by
cleavage of caspase-3 but not caspase-4 protein were also observed.

PMID: 17487741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Aug;14(8):1467-74. Epub 2007 Apr 27.

Atypical, bidirectional regulation of cadmium-induced apoptosis via distinct
signaling of unfolded protein response.

Yokouchi M(1), Hiramatsu N, Hayakawa K, Kasai A, Takano Y, Yao J, Kitamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Signaling, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi 409-3898,
Japan.

Cadmium is a widely distributed nephrotoxic metal that causes renal tubular
injury. In this report, we investigated involvement of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and individual unfolded protein responses in cadmium-initiated apoptosis
of tubular epithelial cells. Cadmium chloride (CdCl(2)) induced expression of
endogenous ER stress markers, GRP78, GRP94 and CHOP in vitro and in vivo, and
subsequently caused cytological changes typical of apoptosis. Attenuation of ER
stress by transfection with ER chaperone GRP78 or ORP150 suppressed
CdCl(2)-triggered apoptosis. In response to CdCl(2), phosphorylation of
RNA-dependent protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) was observed. Enhanced phosphorylation of
eIF2alpha attenuated, whereas inhibition of eIF2alpha exacerbated CdCl(2)-induced
apoptosis. Activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) was also activated by CdCl(2)
and blockade of this process suppressed induction of CHOP and thereby improved
cell survival. CdCl(2) also triggered activation of the inositol-requiring
ER-to-nucleus signal kinase 1 (IRE1)-X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) pathway and
inhibition of XBP1 attenuated apoptosis independent of GRP78 and CHOP. c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), another molecule downstream of IRE1, was also
phosphorylated by CdCl(2) and its inhibition attenuated apoptosis. These results 
evidenced bidirectional regulation of apoptosis in cadmium-exposed cells. The
ATF6 and IRE1 pathways cooperatively caused apoptosis via induction of CHOP,
activation of XBP1 and phosphorylation of JNK, and the PERK-eIF2alpha pathway
counteracted the proapoptotic processes.

PMID: 17464326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Jun;85(8):1674-84.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor suppresses tunicamycin-induced upregulation of 
CHOP in neurons.

Chen G(1), Fan Z, Wang X, Ma C, Bower KA, Shi X, Ke ZJ, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia
University School of Medicine, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, Morgantown,
West Virginia 26506, USA.

The accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) lumen triggers ER stress. ER stress initiates a number of specific
compensatory signaling pathways including unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR is
characterized by translational attenuation, synthesis of ER chaperone proteins
such as glucose-regulated protein of 78 kDa (GRP78, also known as Bip), and
transcriptional induction, which includes the activation of transcription factors
such as activating transcriptional factor 6 (ATF6) and C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP, also known as growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 [GADD153]). 
Sustained ER stress ultimately leads to cell death. ER functions are believed to 
be impaired in various neurodegenerative diseases, as well as in some acute
disorders of the brain. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the
neurotrophin family, functions as a neuroprotective agent and rescues neurons
from various insults. The molecular mechanisms underlying BDNF neuroprotection,
however, remain to be elucidated. We showed that CHOP partially mediated ER
stress-induced neuronal death. BDNF suppressed ER stress-induced upregulation/
nuclear translocation of CHOP. The transcription of CHOP is regulated by ATF4,
ATF6, and XBP1; BDNF selectively blocked the ATF6/CHOP pathway. Furthermore, BDNF
inhibited the induction of death receptor 5 (DR5), a transcriptional target of
CHOP. Our study thus suggests that suppression of CHOP activation may contribute 
to BDNF-mediated neuroprotection during ER stress responses.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3085896
PMID: 17455323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. FEBS Lett. 2007 May 1;581(9):1819-24. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Activation of the unfolded protein response and alternative splicing of ATF6alpha
in HLA-B27 positive lymphocytes.

Lemin AJ(1), Saleki K, van Lith M, Benham AM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Durham, South
Road, Durham DH1 3LE, England, United Kingdom.

Misfolding of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules has been
implicated in the rheumatic autoimmune disease ankylosing spondylitis (AS), and
has been linked to the unfolded protein response (UPR) in rodent AS models. XBP1 
and ATF6alpha are two important transcription factors that initiate and
co-ordinate the UPR. Here we show that misoxidised MHC class I heavy chains
activate XBP1 processing in a similar manner to tunicamycin, with tunicamycin and
dithiothreitol (DTT) inducing differential XBP1 processing. Unexpectedly,
ATF6alpha mRNA is alternatively spliced during reducing stress in lymphocytes.
This shorter ATF6alpha message lacks exon 7 and may have a regulatory role in the
UPR.

PMID: 17442311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Sep;12(9):815-25. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Expression profiling in monozygotic twins discordant for bipolar disorder reveals
dysregulation of the WNT signalling pathway.

Matigian N(1), Windus L, Smith H, Filippich C, Pantelis C, McGrath J, Mowry B,
Hayward N.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, Herston, QLD, Australia.
Nick.Matigian@qimr.edu.au

To identify genes dysregulated in bipolar disorder (BD1), we carried out global
gene expression profiling using whole-genome microarrays. To minimize genetic
variation in gene expression levels between cases and controls, we compared
expression profiles in lymphoblastoid cell lines from monozygotic twin pairs
discordant for the disease. We identified 82 genes that were differentially
expressed by >or=1.3-fold in three BD1 cases compared to their co-twins, and
which were statistically (P<or=0.05) differentially expressed between the groups 
of BD1 cases and controls. Using quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction, we confirmed the differential expression of some of these genes, 
including: KCNK1, MAL, PFN2, TCF7, PGK1 and PI4KCB, in at least two of the twin
pairs. In contrast to the findings of a previous study by Kakiuchi and colleagues
with similar discordant BD1 twin design, our data do not support the
dysregulation of XBP1 and HSPA5. From pathway and gene ontology analysis, we
identified upregulation of the WNT signalling pathway and the biological process 
of apoptosis. The differentially regulated genes and pathways identified in this 
study may provide insights into the biology of BD1.

PMID: 17440432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Vis. 2007 Apr 5;13:578-87.

Involvement of ER stress in retinal cell death.

Shimazawa M(1), Inokuchi Y, Ito Y, Murata H, Aihara M, Miura M, Araie M, Hara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biofunctional Molecules, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu,
Japan. shimazawa@gifu-pu.ac.jp <shimazawa@gifu-pu.ac.jp>

PURPOSE: To clarify whether endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in
retinal cell death, using cultured retinal ganglion cells (RGC-5, a rat ganglion 
cell line transformed with E1A virus), and transgenic mice ER stress-activated
indicator (ERAI) mice carrying a human XBP1 and venus a variant of green
fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion gene.
METHODS: RGC-5 damage was induced by tunicamycin, and cell viability was measured
by double nuclear staining (Hoechst 33342 and either YO-PRO-1 or propidium
iodide). The expressions of glucose-regulated protein 78(GRP78)/BiP, the
phosphorylated form of eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha (p-eIF2alpha), and
C/EBP-homologous (CHOP) protein after tunicamycin (in vitro or in vivo) or
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA; in vivo) treatment were measured using immunoblot or 
immunostaining. ERAI mice carrying the F-XBP1-DBD-venus expression gene were used
to monitor ER-stress in vivo. Twenty-four hours after intravitreal injection of
tunicamycin or NMDA, or after raising intraocular pressure (IOP), the retinal
fluorescence intensity was visualized in anesthetized animals using an
ophthalmoscope and in retinal flatmount or cross-section specimens using laser
confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Treatment with tunicamycin induced apoptotic cell death in RGC-5 and
also induced production of ER stress-related proteins (BiP, the phosphorylated
form of eIF2alpha, and CHOP protein). In vivo, tunicamycin induced retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) loss and thinning of the inner plexiform layer, 7 days after 
intravitreal injection. In flatmounted retinas of ERAI mice, the fluorescence
intensity arising from the XBP-1-venus fusion protein, indicating ER-stress
activation, was increased at 24 h after tunicamycin, NMDA, or IOP elevation. In
transverse cross-sections from ERAI mice, the fluorescence intensity was first
increased in cells of the ganglion cell and inner plexiform layers at 12 and 24
h, respectively, after NMDA injection, and it was localized to ganglion and
amacrine cells at 12 and 24 h, respectively, and to microglial cells at 72 h. BiP
and CHOP were increased at 12 h after NMDA injection, and the increases persisted
for the remainder of the 72 h observation period.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that ER-stress may play a pivotal role in RGC
death, whether induced by NMDA or IOP elevation.

PMCID: PMC2652022
PMID: 17438523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Jun;292(6):G1804-12. Epub 2007 Apr 
12.

Secretagogues differentially activate endoplasmic reticulum stress responses in
pancreatic acinar cells.

Kubisch CH(1), Logsdon CD.

Author information: 
(1)The Univ. of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Dept. of Cancer Biology, Unit
0953, SCRB2.2021, 7435 Fannin St., PO Box 301429, Houston, TX 77230-1429, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to the accumulation of misfolded proteins
in the ER lumen and initiates the unfolded protein response (UPR). Components of 
the UPR are important in pancreatic development, and recent studies have
indicated that the UPR is activated in the arginine model of acute pancreatitis. 
However, the effects of secretagogues on UPR components in the pancreas are
unknown. The present study aimed to examine the effects of different types and
concentrations of secretagogues on acinar cell function and specific components
of the UPR. Rat pancreatic acini were stimulated with the CCK analogs CCK8 (10
pM-10 nM) or JMV-180 (10 nM-10 microM) or with bombesin (1-100 nM). Components of
the UPR, including chaperone BiP expression, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK)
phosphorylation, X box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) splicing, and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) expression, were measured, as were
effects on amylase secretion and intracellular trypsin activation. CCK8 generated
a biphasic secretion dose-response curve, and high concentrations increased
intracellular active trypsin levels. In contrast, JMV-180 and bombesin secretion 
dose-response curves were monophasic, and high concentrations did not increase
intracellular trypsin activity. All three secretagogues increased BiP levels and 
XBP1 splicing. However, only supraphysiological levels of CCK8 associated with
inhibited amylase secretion and trypsin activation stimulated PERK
phosphorylation and expression of CHOP. The effects of CCK8 on UPR components
were rapid, occurring within 5-20 min. In conclusion, ER stress response
mechanisms appear to be involved in both pancreatic physiology and
pathophysiology, and future efforts should be directed at understanding the roles
of these mechanisms in the pancreas.

PMID: 17431218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Neuroscience. 2007 Apr 25;146(1):1-8. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress response in dendrites of cultured primary neurons.

Murakami T(1), Hino SI, Saito A, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Kihara 5200, Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692,
Japan.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an organelle in which secretory and
transmembrane proteins are folded or processed, and is susceptible to various
stresses that provoke the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER lumen.
Recently, ER stress has been reported to be linked to neuronal death in various
neurodegenerative diseases. Neurons contain the ER not only in the soma, but also
in the dendrites, thus presenting a different case to non-neuronal cells. The ER 
in the dendrites has potential functions in local protein synthesis and sorting
of synthesized proteins to postsynaptic membranes. It raises the possibility that
ER stress could occur locally in the dendrites. Here we showed that ER stress
sensors, inositol-requiring 1 (IRE1), PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) exist in the ER of both soma
and dendrites in primary mouse neurons, and that under ER stress conditions,
GRP78/BiP and phosphorylated eIF2alpha are induced. Furthermore, XBP1 mRNA was
localized in the proximal dendrites where IRE1 was rapidly phosphorylated in
response to ER stress. These results indicate that the ER in dendrites could
respond to ER stress and retain the capacity of protein quality control.

PMID: 17367944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Schizophr Bull. 2007 Nov;33(6):1343-53. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

eIF2B and oligodendrocyte survival: where nature and nurture meet in bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia?

Carter CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)chris_car@yahoo.com

Bipolar disorder and schizophrenia share common chromosomal susceptibility loci
and many risk-promoting genes. Oligodendrocyte cell loss and hypomyelination are 
common to both diseases. A number of environmental risk factors including famine,
viral infection, and prenatal or childhood stress may also predispose to
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. In cells, related stressors (starvation,
viruses, cytokines, oxidative, and endoplasmic reticulum stress) activate a
series of eIF2-alpha kinases, which arrest protein synthesis via the eventual
inhibition, by phosphorylated eIF2-alpha, of the translation initiation factor
eIF2B. Growth factors increase protein synthesis via eIF2B activation and
counterbalance this system. The control of protein synthesis by eIF2-alpha
kinases is also engaged by long-term potentiation and repressed by long-term
depression, mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and metabotropic glutamate
receptors. Many genes reportedly associated with both schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder code for proteins within or associated with this network. These include 
NMDA (GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B) and metabotropic (GRM3, GRM4) glutamate receptors,
growth factors (BDNF, NRG1), and many of their downstream signaling components or
accomplices (AKT1, DAO, DAOA, DISC1, DTNBP1, DPYSL2, IMPA2, NCAM1, NOS1, NOS1AP, 
PIK3C3, PIP5K2A, PDLIM5, RGS4, YWHAH). They also include multiple gene products
related to the control of the stress-responsive eIF2-alpha kinases (IL1B, IL1RN, 
MTHFR, TNF, ND4, NDUFV2, XBP1). Oligodendrocytes are particularly sensitive to
defects in the eIF2B complex, mutations in which are responsible for vanishing
white matter disease. The convergence of natural and genetic risk factors on this
area in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia may help to explain the apparent
vulnerability of this cell type in these conditions. This convergence may also
help to reconcile certain arguments related to the importance of nature and
nurture in the etiology of these psychiatric disorders. Both may affect common
stress-related signaling pathways that dictate oligodendrocyte viability and
synaptic plasticity.

PMCID: PMC2779884
PMID: 17329232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 10;25(11):1341-9. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Differential gene expression patterns and interaction networks in
BCR-ABL-positive and -negative adult acute lymphoblastic leukemias.

Juric D(1), Lacayo NJ, Ramsey MC, Racevskis J, Wiernik PH, Rowe JM, Goldstone AH,
O'Dwyer PJ, Paietta E, Sikic BI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305-5151, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify gene expression patterns and interaction networks related to
BCR-ABL status and clinical outcome in adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA microarrays were used to profile a set of 54 adult ALL 
specimens from the Medical Research Council UKALL XII/Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group E2993 trial (21 p185BCR-ABL-positive, 16 p210BCR-ABL-positive and 
17 BCR-ABL-negative specimens).
RESULTS: Using supervised and unsupervised analysis tools, we detected
significant transcriptomic changes in BCR-ABL-positive versus -negative
specimens, and assessed their validity in an independent cohort of 128 adult ALL 
specimens. This set of 271 differentially expressed genes (including GAB1, CIITA,
XBP1, CD83, SERPINB9, PTP4A3, NOV, LOX, CTNND1, BAALC, and RAB21) is enriched for
genes involved in cell death, cellular growth and proliferation, and hematologic 
system development and function. Network analysis demonstrated complex
interaction patterns of these genes, and identified FYN and IL15 as the hubs of
the top-scoring network. Within the BCR-ABL-positive subgroups, we identified
genes overexpressed (PILRB, STS-1, SPRY1) or underexpressed (TSPAN16, ADAMTSL4)
in p185BCR-ABL-positive ALL relative to p210BCR-ABL-positive ALL. Finally, we
constructed a gene expression- and interaction-based outcome predictor consisting
of 27 genes (including GRB2, GAB1, GLI1, IRS1, RUNX2, and SPP1), which correlated
with overall survival in BCR-ABL-positive adult ALL (P = .0001), independent of
age (P = .25) and WBC count at presentation (P = .003).
CONCLUSION: We identified prominent molecular features of BCR-ABL-positive adult 
ALL, which may be useful for developing novel therapeutic targets and prognostic 
markers in this disease.

PMID: 17312329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):525-40. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Nodal signaling activates differentiation genes during zebrafish gastrulation.

Bennett JT(1), Joubin K, Cheng S, Aanstad P, Herwig R, Clark M, Lehrach H, Schier
AF.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
and Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10016, USA.

Nodal signals induce mesodermal and endodermal progenitors during vertebrate
development. To determine the role of Nodal signaling at a genomic level, we
isolated Nodal-regulated genes by expression profiling using macroarrays and gene
expression databases. Putative Nodal-regulated genes were validated by in situ
hybridization screening in wild type and Nodal signaling mutants. 46 genes were
identified, raising the currently known number of Nodal-regulated genes to 72.
Based on their expression patterns along the dorsoventral axis, most of these
genes can be classified into two groups. One group is expressed in the dorsal
margin, whereas the other group is expressed throughout the margin. In addition
to transcription factors and signaling components, the screens identified several
new functional classes of Nodal-regulated genes, including cytoskeletal
components and molecules involved in protein secretion or endoplasmic reticulum
stress. We found that x-box binding protein-1 (xbp1) is a direct target of Nodal 
signaling and required for the terminal differentiation of the hatching gland, a 
specialized secretory organ whose specification is also dependent on Nodal
signaling. These results indicate that Nodal signaling regulates not only
specification genes but also differentiation genes.

PMCID: PMC1885460
PMID: 17306247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Diabetologia. 2007 Apr;50(4):752-63. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress contributes to beta cell apoptosis in type 2
diabetes.

Laybutt DR(1), Preston AM, Akerfeldt MC, Kench JG, Busch AK, Biankin AV, Biden
TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Increased lipid supply causes beta cell death, which may
contribute to reduced beta cell mass in type 2 diabetes. We investigated whether 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is necessary for lipid-induced apoptosis in
beta cells and also whether ER stress is present in islets of an animal model of 
diabetes and of humans with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Expression of genes involved in ER stress was evaluated in
insulin-secreting MIN6 cells exposed to elevated lipids, in islets isolated from 
db/db mice and in pancreas sections of humans with type 2 diabetes.
Overproduction of the ER chaperone heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (HSPA5, previously
known as immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein [BIP]) was performed to
assess whether attenuation of ER stress affected lipid-induced apoptosis.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the pro-apoptotic fatty acid palmitate triggers a
comprehensive ER stress response in MIN6 cells, which was virtually absent using 
non-apoptotic fatty acid oleate. Time-dependent increases in mRNA levels for
activating transcription factor 4 (Atf4), DNA-damage inducible transcript 3
(Ddit3, previously known as C/EBP homologous protein [Chop]) and DnaJ homologue
(HSP40) C3 (Dnajc3, previously known as p58) correlated with increased apoptosis 
in palmitate- but not in oleate-treated MIN6 cells. Attenuation of ER stress by
overproduction of HSPA5 in MIN6 cells significantly protected against
lipid-induced apoptosis. In islets of db/db mice, a variety of marker genes of ER
stress were also upregulated. Increased processing (activation) of X-box binding 
protein 1 (Xbp1) mRNA was also observed, confirming the existence of ER stress.
Finally, we observed increased islet protein production of HSPA5, DDIT3, DNAJC3
and BCL2-associated X protein in human pancreas sections of type 2 diabetes
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide evidence that ER stress occurs in
type 2 diabetes and is required for aspects of the underlying beta cell failure.

PMID: 17268797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 16;354(3):789-94. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

Ire1 regulated XBP1 mRNA splicing is essential for the unfolded protein response 
(UPR) in Drosophila melanogaster.

Plongthongkum N(1), Kullawong N, Panyim S, Tirasophon W.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Mahidol University, Salaya,
Nakhonpathom 73170, Thailand.

The ability of cells to survive and recover from deteriorating effects of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress relies on the unfolded protein response (UPR). 
The signaling pathway of Ire1p mediate mRNA splicing plays diverge role in UPR
response in different organisms from yeast to mammals. Here, we report that Ire1p
mediated XBP1 mRNA splicing mechanism is extremely conserved and exerts a
critical role for modulating Xbp1 protein synthesis in Drosophila melanogaster.
This system is operative in Drosophila S2 cells as a prominent mechanism to
mediate transcriptional activation of UPR responsive genes during ER stress.

PMID: 17266933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neurochem Int. 2007 Feb;50(3):461-90. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

Multiple genes and factors associated with bipolar disorder converge on growth
factor and stress activated kinase pathways controlling translation initiation:
implications for oligodendrocyte viability.

Carter CJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)chris_car@yahoo.com

Famine and viral infection, as well as interferon therapy have been reported to
increase the risk of developing bipolar disorder. In addition, almost 100
polymorphic genes have been associated with this disease. Several form most of
the components of a phosphatidyl-inositol signalling/AKT1 survival pathway
(PIK3C3, PIP5K2A, PLCG1, SYNJ1, IMPA2, AKT1, GSK3B, TCF4) which is activated by
growth factors (BDNF, NRG1) and also by NMDA receptors (GRIN1, GRIN2A, GRIN2B).
Various other protein products of genes associated with bipolar disorder either
bind to or are affected by phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate products of this
pathway (ADBRK2, HIP1R, KCNQ2, RGS4, WFS1), are associated with its constituent
elements (BCR, DUSP6, FAT, GNAZ) or are downstream targets of this signalling
cascade (DPYSL2, DRD3, GAD1, G6PD, GCH1, KCNQ2, NOS3, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, SST, TH,
TIMELESS). A further pathway relates to endoplasmic reticulum-stress (HSPA5,
XBP1), caused by problems in protein glycosylation (ALG9), growth factor receptor
sorting (PIK3C3, HIP1R, SYBL1), or aberrant calcium homoeostasis (WFS1). Key
processes relating to these pathways appear to be under circadian control (ARNTL,
CLOCK, PER3, TIMELESS). DISC1 can also be linked to many of these pathways. The
growth factor pathway promotes protein synthesis, while the endoplasmic reticulum
stress pathway, and other stress pathways activated by viruses and cytokines
(IL1B, TNF, Interferons), oxidative stress or starvation, all factors associated 
with bipolar disorder risk, shuts down protein synthesis via control of the EIF2 
alpha and beta translation initiation complex. For unknown reasons,
oligodendrocytes appear to be particularly prone to defects in the translation
initiation complex (EIF2B) and the convergence of these environmental and genomic
signalling pathways on this area might well explain their vulnerability in
bipolar disorder.

PMID: 17239488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Jul 15;62(2):141-7. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Impaired endoplasmic reticulum stress response in B-lymphoblasts from patients
with bipolar-I disorder.

So J(1), Warsh JJ, Li PP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Pathophysiology, Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant intracellular calcium (Ca2+) signaling in patients with
bipolar-I disorder (BD-I) suggests disturbed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function 
in BD. We examined whether the ER stress response is altered in BD-I patients and
the relationship to basal intracellular Ca2+ levels ([Ca2+]B), in B lymphoblasts 
(BLCLs) from BD-I patients.
METHODS: Endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1),
C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), and GRP78 expression in BLCLs from BD-I subjects
stratified on elevated or normal [Ca2+]B and control subjects were determined by 
real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The XBP1 
-116C/G polymorphism, which impairs the XBP1 loop in the ER stress response, were
genotyped with a TaqMan-based assay.
RESULTS: Compared with control subjects, thapsigargin- and tunicamycin-induced
increases in XBP1 and CHOP but not GRP78 messenger RNA levels were significantly 
lower in BD-I patients. However, induction of these genes did not differ
significantly in the two BD-I subgroups stratified on [Ca2+]B. Furthermore, the
attenuated XBP1 induction cannot be explained solely by differences of XBP1
-116C/G genotype frequency.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the ER stress response is impaired in BD-I
patients but irrespective of altered intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis as reflected 
in elevated [Ca2+]B. Moreover, an effect of XBP1 -116C/G polymorphism could not
account for the attenuated XBP1 induction in bipolar-I disorder observed in this 
study.

PMID: 17217928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Feb;217(2):159-67. Epub 2007 Jan 6.

The xbp-1 gene is essential for development in Drosophila.

Souid S(1), Lepesant JA, Yanicostas C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, CNRS, Université Denis-Diderot Paris 7 and
Université Paris 6 Pierre et Marie Curie, 2, Place Jussieu, 75251, Paris Cedex
05, France.

We report in this paper the characterization of Dxbp-1, the Drosophila homologue 
of the xpb-1 gene that encodes a "bZIP"-containing transcription factor that
plays a key role in the unfolded protein response (UPR), an evolutionarily
conserved signalling pathway activated by an overload of misfolded proteins in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Dxbp-1 is ubiquitously transcribed, and high
levels are found in embryonic salivary glands and in the ovarian follicle cells
committed to the synthesis of the respiratory appendages. Loss of function of
Dxbp-1 induced a recessive larval lethality, thus, revealing an essential
requirement for this gene. The Dxbp-1 transcript was submitted to an
"unconventional" splicing that generated a processed Dxbp-1s transcript encoding 
a DXbp-1 protein isoform, as is the case for yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans and
vertebrate hac1/xbp-1 transcripts after UPR activation. However, in the absence
of exogenously induced ER stress, the Dxbp-1s transcript was also detectable not 
only throughout embryonic and larval development but also in adults with a high
level of accumulation in the male sexual apparatus and, to a lesser extent, in
the salivary glands of the third-instar larvae. Using a Dxbp-1:GFP transgene as
an in vivo reporter for Dxbp-1 mRNA unconventional splicing, we confirmed that
Dxbp-1 processing took place in the salivary glands of the third-instar larvae.
The Dxbp-1 gene appears, thus, to play an essential role during the development
of Drosophila, hypothetically by stimulating the folding capacities of the ER in 
cells committed to intense secretory activities.

PMID: 17206451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3953-62. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

Integrated molecular profiling of SOD2 expression in multiple myeloma.

Hurt EM(1), Thomas SB, Peng B, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, 1050 Boyles Street, Frederick, 
MD 21702, USA.

Reactive oxygen species are known to be involved in several cellular processes,
including cell signaling. SOD2 is a key enzyme in the conversion of reactive
oxygen species and has been implicated in a host of disease states, including
cancer. Using an integrated, whole-cell approach encompassing epigenetics,
genomics, and proteomics, we have defined the role of SOD2 in multiple myeloma.
We show that the SOD2 promoter is methylated in several cell lines and there is a
correlative decrease in expression. Furthermore, myeloma patient samples have
decreased SOD2 expression compared with healthy donors. Overexpression of SOD2
results in decreased proliferation and altered sensitivity to
2-methoxyestradiol-induced DNA damage and apoptosis. Genomic profiling revealed
regulation of 65 genes, including genes involved in tumorigenesis, and proteomic 
analysis identified activation of the JAK/STAT pathway. Analysis of nearly 400
activated transcription factors identified 31 transcription factors with altered 
DNA binding activity, including XBP1, NFAT, forkhead, and GAS binding sites.
Integration of data from our gestalt molecular analysis has defined a role for
SOD2 in cellular proliferation, JAK/STAT signaling, and regulation of several
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1874573
PMID: 17192397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 10;26(1):242-52. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Unfolded protein response in a Drosophila model for retinal degeneration.

Ryoo HD(1), Domingos PM, Kang MJ, Steller H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER stress) and its cellular response, the
unfolded protein response (UPR), are implicated in a wide variety of diseases,
but its significance in many disorders remains to be validated in vivo. Here, we 
analyzed a branch of the UPR mediated by xbp1 in Drosophila to establish its role
in neurodegenerative diseases. The Drosophila xbp1 mRNA undergoes ire-1-mediated 
unconventional splicing in response to ER stress, and this property was used to
develop a specific UPR marker, xbp1-EGFP, in which EGFP is expressed in frame
only after ER stress. xbp1-EGFP responds specifically to ER stress, but not to
proteins that form cytoplasmic aggregates. The ire-1/xbp1 pathway regulates heat 
shock cognate protein 3 (hsc3), an ER chaperone. xbp1 splicing and hsc3 induction
occur in the retina of ninaE(G69D)-/+, a Drosophila model for autosomal dominant 
retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP), and reduction of xbp1 gene dosage accelerates
retinal degeneration of these animals. These results demonstrate the role of the 
UPR in the Drosophila ADRP model and open new opportunities for examining the UPR
in other Drosophila disease models.

PMCID: PMC1782370
PMID: 17170705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Dec;13(4):1109-20.

Identification of novel genes that co-cluster with estrogen receptor alpha in
breast tumor biopsy specimens, using a large-scale real-time reverse
transcription-PCR approach.

Tozlu S(1), Girault I, Vacher S, Vendrell J, Andrieu C, Spyratos F, Cohen P,
Lidereau R, Bieche I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre René Huguenin, FNCLCC, St-Cloud F-92210, France.

The estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
and clinical behavior of breast cancer. To obtain further insights into the
molecular basis of estrogen-dependent forms of this malignancy, we used real-time
quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR to compare the mRNA expression of 560
selected genes in ERalpha-positive and ERalpha-negative breast tumors. Fifty-one 
(9.1%) of the 560 genes were significantly upregulated in ERalpha-positive breast
tumors compared with ERalpha-negative breast tumors. In addition to well-known
ERalpha-induced genes (PGR, TFF1/PS2, BCL2, ERBB4, CCND1, etc.) and genes
recently identified by cDNA microarray-based approaches (GATA3, TFF3, MYB, STC2, 
HPN/HEPSIN, FOXA1, XBP1, SLC39A6/LIV-1, etc.), an appreciable number of novel
genes were identified, many of, which were weakly expressed. This validates the
use of large-scale real-time RT-PCR as a method complementary to cDNA microarrays
for molecular tumor profiling. Most of the new genes identified here encoded
secreted proteins (SEMA3B and CLU), growth factors (BDNF, FGF2 and EGF), growth
factor receptors (IL6ST, PTPRT, RET, VEGFR1 and FGFR2) or metabolic enzymes
(CYP2B6, CA12, ACADSB, NAT1, LRBA, SLC7A2 and SULT2B1). Importantly, we also
identified a large number of genes encoding proteins with either pro-apoptotic
(PUMA, NOXA and TATP73) or anti-apoptotic properties (BCL2, DNTP73 and TRAILR3). 
Surprisingly, only a small proportion of the 51 genes identified in breast tumor 
biopsy specimens were confirmed to be ERalpha-regulated and/or E2-regulated in
vitro (cultured cell lines). Therefore, this study identified a limited number of
genes and signaling pathways, which better delineate the role of ERalpha in
breast cancer. Some of the genes identified here could be useful for diagnosis or
for predicting endocrine responsiveness, and could form the basis for novel
therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 17158757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 Nov 30;39(6):677-85.

Overexpressed Derlin-1 inhibits ER expansion in the endothelial cells derived
from human hepatic cavernous hemangioma.

Hu D(1), Ran YL, Zhong X, Hu H, Yu L, Lou JN, Sun LX, Yang ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, 100021, P.R. China.

Proteins that are unfolded or misfolded in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) must be
targeted for refolding or degradation to maintain the homeostasis of the ER.
Derlin-1 was reportedly implicated in the retro-translocation of misfolded
proteins from the ER to the cytosol for degradation. In this report, we showed
that Derlin-1 was down-regulated in the endothelial cells derived from human
hepatic cavernous hemangioma (CHEC) compared with other tested cells. Electron
microscopy analysis showed that ER was aberrantly enlarged in CHEC cells, but not
in other tested cells. When overexpressed, Derlin-1 induced the dilated ER to
return normal size. This ER dynamic was associated with the activation of
unfolded protein response (UPR). In CHEC cells where Derlin-1 was down-regulated,
increased expression of the immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein (Bip) and 
UPR-specific splicing of X-box DNAbinding protein 1 (XBP1) mRNA were detected, as
compared with that in other tested cells, indicating that UPR was activated.
After Derlin-1 overexpression, the extent of UPR activation diminished, as
evidenced by decreased expression of Bip, reduced amount of the spliced form of
XBP1 (XBP1s), and elevated expression of the unspliced form of XBP1 (XBP1u).
Taken together, these findings provide another example of a single protein being 
able to affect ER dynamic in mammalian cells, and an insight into the possible
molecular mechanism(s).

PMID: 17129402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cell Struct Funct. 2006;31(2):117-25. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

XBP1 is critical to protect cells from endoplasmic reticulum stress: evidence
from Site-2 protease-deficient Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Yoshida H(1), Nadanaka S, Sato R, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Kitashirakawa-Oiwake, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

XBP1 is a transcription factor downstream of IRE1, a transmembrane protein in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) which functions as a sensor and transducer of ER
stress. XBP1 mRNA is constitutively expressed at a low level as an
intron-containing precursor mRNA (unspliced mRNA), which is subject to
IRE1-mediated splicing reaction upon ER stress to produce the active form of
XBP1, pXBP1(S). Because the XBP1 promoter carries a perfect ER stress-response
element, namely, the cis-acting element responsible for the induction of ER
chaperones, and XBP1 mRNA is induced in response to ER stress with a time course 
similar to that of ER chaperone mRNAs, it is conjectured that transcription
factor ATF6, activated immediately upon ER stress, induces the transcription of
not only ER chaperone genes but also of XBP1 gene, such that pXBP1(S) produced by
the splicing of an increased level of XBP1 mRNA escapes from proteasome-mediated 
degradation. Here, we examined this notion by determining the induction of XBP1
mRNA and pXBP1(S) in mutant Chinese hamster ovary (M19) cells deficient in Site-2
protease, which executes the last step of ER stress-induced activation of ATF6.
We found that the induction of XBP1 mRNA and pXBP1(S) was greatly reduced in M19 
cells as compared with wild-type cells, leading to a marked reduction in the
extent of induction of XBP1-target gene. M19 cells were much more sensitive to ER
stress than wild-type cells. Importantly, overexpression of XBP1 unspliced mRNA
in M19 cells reversed all of these phenotypes. We concluded that ATF6-mediated
induction of XBP1 mRNA is important to the production of pXBP1(S), activation of 
XBP1-target genes, and protection of cells from ER stress.

PMID: 17110785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Virus Res. 2007 Mar;124(1-2):44-9. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) activates ATF6 and IRE1-XBP1 pathways of
unfolded protein response.

Li B(1), Gao B, Ye L, Han X, Wang W, Kong L, Fang X, Zeng Y, Zheng H, Li S, Wu Z,
Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.

Numerous viruses including hepatitis B virus (HBV) induce endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress, which interrupts protein folding causing accumulation of unfolded or
misfolded proteins in ER. To alleviate the stress placed on ER, these proteins
must be refolded or degraded by activating a specific cellular response known as 
ER stress response or unfolded protein response (UPR). Two UPR-specific signaling
pathways involving transmembrane proteins ATF6 and XBP1 generate critical
transcription factors that activate UPR-responsive genes. In this study, the role
of the multifunctional regulatory protein of HBV (HBx protein) in activation of
UPR was investigated. In Hep3B cells with transit or stable expression of HBx,
XBP1 expression and ATF6 cleavage was observed, suggesting that the ATF6 and
IRE1-XBP1 pathways were activated. Furthermore, these two pathways were also
activated in HepG2.2.15 cells that constitutively replicate the intact HBV
genome, and blocked at least partly by cotransfection with small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) expression plasmid that knocked down HBx expression. Our results clearly 
establish HBx as an inducer of UPR and the activator of the ATF6 and IRE1-XBP1
pathways of UPR. HBx-mediated activation of these pathways of UPR probably
promote HBV replication and expression in liver cells, and contribute to liver
pathogenesis, perhaps even to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development.

PMID: 17092596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;581:139-44.

Mouse hepatitis virus infection activates the Ire1/XBP1 pathway of the unfolded
protein response.

Bechill J(1), Chen Z, Brewer JW, Baker SC.

Author information: 
(1)Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA.

PMID: 17037520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Trends Genet. 2006 Dec;22(12):645-8. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Functionality of unspliced XBP1 is required to explain evolution of overlapping
reading frames.

Nekrutenko A(1), He J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Comparative
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Huck Institutes for Life Sciences, Penn State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. anton@bx.psu.edu

Eukaryotic genes with overlapping reading frames exemplify some of the most
striking biological phenomena. Transcript of one such gene, the gene encoding
X-box protein (XBP1), has evolved a mechanism for "on-demand" switching of
translation between two overlapping reading frames. Despite the existence of this
elaborate system, only one reading frame was believed to be functional. Here, we 
show that XBP1 evolves in a fashion that is only consistent with functionality of
both reading frames. Our study provides a novel evolutionary framework for the
analysis of loci with overlapping reading frames, which can be used for
identification and analyses of novel dual-coding genes.

PMID: 17034899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Feb 15;100(3):773-82.

Apoptosis induced by all-trans retinoic acid in N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V
repressed human hepatocarcinoma cells is mediated through endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Xu YY(1), Lu Y, Fan KY, Shen ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

We previously demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress was triggered
in human hepatocarcinoma 7721 cells transfected with antisense cDNA of
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GnT-V-AS/7721) which were more susceptible to 
apoptosis induced by all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). In the present study, we
report that ATRA-induced apoptosis in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells is mediated through ER 
stress. We show here that ER stress is enhanced in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells with 80
microM ATRA treatment for 24 h, which is evidenced by the increase of GRP78/Bip, 
C/EBP-homologous protein-10 (CHOP, also known as GADD153) and spliced XBP1.
Additionally, activation of caspase-12, caspase-9, and -3 was detected, and
apoptosis morphology was observed in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells with ATRA treatment.
These results suggest that ATRA enhances the ER stress triggered in GnT-V-AS/7721
cells, which represents a novel mechanism of ATRA to induce apoptosis. We further
observed that GnT-V was significantly repressed and the structure of N-glycans
was changed in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells with 80 microM ATRA treatment for 24 h,
suggesting that repression of GnT-V by ATRA causes the enhanced ER stress and ER 
stress-mediated apoptosis in GnT-V-AS/7721 cells.

PMID: 17031849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 24;350(3):709-15. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Analysis of the XBP1 splicing mechanism using endoplasmic reticulum
stress-indicators.

Iwawaki T(1), Akai R.

Author information: 
(1)Iwawaki Initiative Research Unit, Frontier Research System, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. iwawaki@riken.jp

Under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress conditions, XBP1 mRNA is processed by
unconventional splicing and translated into a functional transcription factor. ER
stress-specific XBP1 splicing is also known to be activated by IRE1. However,
many aspects of the molecular mechanism of XBP1 splicing remain to be elucidated.
We previously developed an indicator system that enabled detection of XBP1
splicing using fluorescent proteins as the reporter signals. Here, we use a
modification of this method that employs modified ER stress-indicators and mutant
IRE1 in vivo and in vitro to analyze XBP1 splicing mechanisms. Our analyses
suggest that the 506-579 nt region of the XBP1 mRNA is necessary and sufficient
for XBP1 splicing, that XBP1 splicing can occur in the cytoplasm, and that
cleavage and ligation of XBP1 mRNA during splicing may occur as a coupled
reaction.

PMID: 17026957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):C756-66. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and the unfolded protein response regulate genomic
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator expression.

Rab A(1), Bartoszewski R, Jurkuvenaite A, Wakefield J, Collawn JF, Bebok Z.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology, Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, 1918 Univ. Blvd., MCLM 
760, Birmingham, AL 35294-0005, USA. bebok@uab.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;292(2):C687-8.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cellular recovery mechanism activated by
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The UPR is coordinated with the ER-associated 
degradation (ERAD) to regulate the protein load at the ER. In the present study, 
we tested how membrane protein biogenesis is regulated through the UPR in
epithelia, using the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
as a model. Pharmacological methods such as proteasome inhibition and treatment
with brefeldin A and tunicamycin were used to induce ER stress and activate the
UPR as monitored by increased levels of spliced XBP1 and BiP mRNA. The results
indicate that activation of the UPR is followed by a significant decrease in
genomic CFTR mRNA levels without significant changes in the mRNA levels of
another membrane protein, the transferrin receptor. We also tested whether
overexpression of a wild-type CFTR transgene in epithelia expressing endogenous
wild-type CFTR activated the UPR. Although CFTR maturation is inefficient in this
setting, the UPR was not activated. However, pharmacological induction of ER
stress in these cells also led to decreased endogenous CFTR mRNA levels without
affecting recombinant CFTR message levels. These results demonstrate that under
ER stress conditions, endogenous CFTR biogenesis is regulated by the UPR through 
alterations in mRNA levels and posttranslationally by ERAD, whereas recombinant
CFTR expression is regulated only by ERAD.

PMID: 16987996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Virol. 2006 Dec;80(23):11868-80. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Flavivirus infection activates the XBP1 pathway of the unfolded protein response 
to cope with endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Yu CY(1), Hsu YW, Liao CL, Lin YL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
115, Taiwan, Republic of China.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a coordinated change in gene expression
triggered by perturbations in functions of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). XBP1, 
a key transcription factor of the UPR, is activated by an IRE1-mediated splicing 
event, which results in a frameshift and encodes a protein with transcriptional
activity. Here, we report that XBP1 was activated during flaviviral infection, as
evidenced by XBP1 mRNA splicing and protein expression, as well as induction of
the downstream genes ERdj4, EDEM1, and p58(IPK) in Japanese encephalitis virus
(JEV)- and dengue virus serotype 2 (DEN-2)-infected cells. Reporter systems based
on IRE1-mediated XBP1 splicing were established, and several flaviviral proteins 
associated with the ER, including glycoproteins and small hydrophobic
membrane-anchored proteins, were found to trigger the splicing event. Notably,
nonstructural protein NS2B-3 of DEN-2, but not of JEV, was a potent inducer of
XBP1 splicing through an unclear mechanism(s). Reduction of XBP1 by a small
interfering RNA had no effect on cells' susceptibility to the two viruses but
exacerbated the flavivirus-induced cytopathic effects. Overall, flaviviruses
trigger the XBP1 signaling pathway and take advantage of this cellular response
to alleviate virus-induced cytotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC1642612
PMID: 16987981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Nov 3;349(4):1406-11. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

ER stress contributes to ischemia-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis.

Szegezdi E(1), Duffy A, O'Mahoney ME, Logue SE, Mylotte LA, O'brien T, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

Myocardial ischemia is a severe stress condition that leads to loss of
cardiomyocytes. The cell loss is attributed to apoptosis, although the exact
mechanisms involved are only partially defined, which limits therapeutic
opportunities. Here, we show caspase activation and apoptosis in neonatal rat
cardiomyocyte cultures subjected to simulated ischemia by serum, glucose, and
oxygen deprivation (SGO). Caspase activation was preceded by endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR), 
detected by the induction of Grp78, induction and splicing of XBP1, and
phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2-alpha (eIF2alpha). At a later
time the ER stress response switched from UPR and cytoprotective response to a
pro-apoptotic response as demonstrated by the upregulation of CHOP and processing
of pro-caspase-12. Thus, we provide evidence that the ER can generate and
propagate apoptotic signals in response to ischemic stress and this pathway is
therefore a novel target for prevention of ischemia-mediated cardiomyocyte loss.

PMID: 16979584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):C353-61. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Methoxyflavones protect cells against endoplasmic reticulum stress and
neurotoxin.

Takano K(1), Tabata Y, Kitao Y, Murakami R, Suzuki H, Yamada M, Iinuma M, Yoneda 
Y, Ogawa S, Hori O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 13-1 Takara-Machi, Kanazawa City, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Enhanced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress leads to cell death in various
pathophysiological situations. During a search for compounds that regulate ER
stress, we identified methoxyflavones, a group of flavonoids, as strong
protective agents against ER stress. Analysis in mouse insulinoma MIN6 cells
revealed that methoxyflavones mildly activated the eukaryotic initiation factor
2alpha and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor pathways, but not the XBP1
pathway, and induced downstream genes, including glucose-regulated protein (GRP) 
78, a molecular chaperone in the ER. The protective effect of methoxyflavones was
enhanced by agents that increase intracellular cAMP levels such as forskolin,
dibutyryl-cAMP and IBMX, but suppressed by the protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor
H-89, suggesting involvement of the PKA pathway in the regulation of ER stress by
methoxyflavones. Consistent with the results in cultured cells, pretreatment of
mice with tangeretin, a methoxyflavone, enhanced expression of GRP78 and HO-1
without causing ER stress in renal tubular epithelium and prevented
tunicamycin-induced cell death. Furthermore, preadministration of tangeretin in
mice enhanced expression of GRP78 in the substantia nigra pars compacta and
protected dopaminergic neurons against
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, a neurotoxin that induces both
oxidative and ER stress. These results suggest that methoxyflavones play an
important role in the regulation of ER stress and could be a therapeutic target
for the ER stress-related diseases.

PMID: 16971492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2006 Oct;60(5):633-5.

Association study of a functional promoter polymorphism of the X-box binding
protein 1 gene in Japanese patients with schizophrenia.

Watanabe Y(1), Fukui N, Muratake T, Amagane H, Kaneko N, Nunokawa A, Someya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

The functional promoter polymorphism -116C/G of the X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1) gene was found to be associated with schizophrenia in Han Chinese and
Japanese subjects, although contradictive negative findings were also reported in
European populations. To confirm this association in a Japanese population, the
authors conducted a case-control association study. There was no significant
difference in both genotype and allele frequencies between the patients and
control subjects, suggesting that the XBP1 -116C/G polymorphism might not confer 
increased susceptibility for schizophrenia in a Japanese population. However,
further studies using a larger sample with detailed clinical data should be
performed in several populations.

PMID: 16958950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Neurochem Res. 2007 Feb;32(2):167-76. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

Genetic background influences UPR but not PLP processing in the rumpshaker model 
of PMD/SPG2.

McLaughlin M(1), Karim SA, Montague P, Barrie JA, Kirkham D, Griffiths IR, Edgar 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Applied Neurobiology Group, Division of Cell Sciences, Institute of
Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1QH,
Scotland.

Mutations of the proteolipid protein gene (PLP1) cause Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease (PMD) and Spastic paraplegia type 2 (SPG2). The rumpshaker mutation is
associated with mild forms of PMD or SPG2 in man and the identical mutation
occurs in mice, the phenotype depending on genetic background. The mild phenotype
in C3H mice becomes a lethal disease when expressed on the C57BL/6 background.
rumpshaker PLP is synthesised at a similar rate to wild type but is rapidly
degraded by the proteasome. We show that the rates of synthesis, degradation and 
myelin incorporation of PLP/DM20 are similar in mutants on both backgrounds and
therefore differences in PLP processing are unlikely to be the basis of the
phenotypic variation. An unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated in
rumpshaker. Whereas activation of CHOP correlates with phenotypic severity, we
find no difference in the response of BiP and X-box protein1 (Xbp1) between the
two strains.

PMID: 16944321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(21):7999-8010. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Luman/CREB3 induces transcription of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response protein Herp through an ER stress response element.

Liang G(1), Audas TE, Li Y, Cockram GP, Dean JD, Martyn AC, Kokame K, Lu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph,
Ontario, Canada N1G 2W1.

Luman/CREB3 (also called LZIP) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-bound
transcription factor which is believed to undergo regulated intramembrane
proteolysis in response to cellular cues. We previously found that Luman
activates transcription from the unfolded protein response element. Here we
report the identification of Herp, a gene involved in ER stress-associated
protein degradation (ERAD), as a direct target of Luman. We found that Luman was 
transcriptionally induced and proteolytically activated by the ER stress inducer 
thaspsigargin. Overexpression of Luman activated transcription of cellular Herp
via ER stress response element II (ERSE-II; ATTGG-N-CCACG) in the promoter
region. Mutagenesis studies and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that 
Luman physically associates with the Herp promoter, specifically the second
half-site (CCACG) of ERSE-II. Luman was also necessary for the full activation of
Herp during the ER stress response, since Luman small interfering RNA knockdown
or functional repression by a dominant negative mutant attenuated Herp gene
expression. Like Herp, overexpression of Luman protected cells against ER
stress-induced apoptosis. With Luman structurally similar to ATF6 but resembling 
XBP1 in DNA-binding specificities, we propose that Luman is a novel factor that
plays a role in ERAD and a converging point for various signaling pathways
channeling through the ER.

PMCID: PMC1636730
PMID: 16940180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Nov;26(11):2490-6. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

The unfolded protein response is an important regulator of inflammatory genes in 
endothelial cells.

Gargalovic PS(1), Gharavi NM, Clark MJ, Pagnon J, Yang WP, He A, Truong A,
Baruch-Oren T, Berliner JA, Kirchgessner TG, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Department of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1679, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Oxidized 1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonyl-sn-3-glycero-phosphorylcholine
(oxPAPC) accumulates in atherosclerotic lesions and in vitro studies suggest that
it mediates chronic inflammatory response in endothelial cells (ECs). The goal of
our studies was to identify pathways mediating the induction of inflammatory
genes by oxPAPC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using expression arrays, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), and immunoblotting we demonstrate that oxPAPC leads to
endoplasmic reticulum stress and activation of the unfolded protein response
(UPR) in human aortic ECs. Immunohistochemistry analysis of human atherosclerotic
lesions indicated that UPR is induced in areas containing oxidized phospholipids.
Using the UPR inducing agent tunicamycin and selective siRNA targeting of the
ATF4 and XBP1 branches of the UPR, we demonstrate that these transcription
factors are essential mediators of IL8, IL6, and MCP1 expression in human aortic 
ECs required for maximal inflammatory gene expression in the basal state and
after oxPAPC treatment. We also identify a novel oxPAPC-induced chemokine, the
CXC motif ligand 3 (CXCL3), and show that its expression requires XBP1.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the UPR pathway is a general mediator of
vascular inflammation and EC dysfunction in atherosclerosis, and, likely, other
inflammatory disorders.

PMID: 16931790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Virol. 2006 Sep;80(17):8613-26.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress and neurodegeneration in rats neonatally infected
with borna disease virus.

Williams BL(1), Lipkin WI.

Author information: 
(1)Jerome L. and Dawn Greene Infectious Disease Laboratory, Mailman School of
Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. wil2001@columbia.edu

Borna disease virus infection of neonatal rats results in a characteristic
behavioral syndrome and apoptosis of subsets of neurons in the hippocampus and
cerebellum (neonatal Borna disease [NBD]). The cellular mechanisms leading to
neurodevelopmental damage in NBD have not been fully elucidated. Insights into
this model may have general implications for understanding the pathogenesis of
virus-associated neurodevelopmental damage. Here we report the presence of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers and activation of the unfolded protein 
response in the NBD hippocampus and cerebellum. Specific findings included
enhanced PERK-mediated phosphorylation of eif2alpha and concomitant regulation of
ATF4 translation; IRE1-mediated splicing of XBP1 mRNA; and cleavage of the ATF6
protein in NBD rat brains. We found evidence for regional and cell type-specific 
divergence in the expression of ER stress-induced proapoptotic and quality
control signals. Our results demonstrate that ER stress induction in
death-susceptible Purkinje neurons in NBD is associated with the expression of
the proapoptotic molecule CHOP in the absence of compensatory expression of the
ER quality control molecules Bip and protein disulfide isomerase. In contrast, ER
stress in death-resistant astrocytes is associated with complementary expression 
of CHOP and ER quality control signals. These results implicate an imbalance
between ER stress-mediated apoptosis and survival signaling as a critical
determinant of neural cell fate in NBD.

PMCID: PMC1563873
PMID: 16912310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 13;281(41):30431-8. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Conditions of endoplasmic reticulum stress favor the accumulation of cytosolic
prion protein.

Orsi A(1), Fioriti L, Chiesa R, Sitia R.

Author information: 
(1)Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, DiBiT Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, 
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy.

After signal sequence-dependent targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
prion protein (PrP) undergoes several post-translational modifications, including
glycosylation, disulfide bond formation, and the addition of a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. As a result, multiple isoforms are
generated. Because of the intrinsic weakness of the PrP signal sequence, a
fraction of newly synthesized molecules fails to translocate and localizes to the
cytosol. The physiopathologic role of this cytosolic isoform is still being
debated. Here we have shown that, in both cultured cell lines and primary
neurons, ER stress conditions weaken PrP co-translational translocation, favoring
accumulation of aggregation-prone cytosolic species, which retain the signal
sequence but lack N-glycans and disulfides. Inhibition of proteasomes further
increases the levels of cytosolic PrP. Overexpression of spliced XBP1 facilitates
ER translocation, suggesting that downstream elements of the Ire1-XBP1 pathway
are involved in PrP targeting. These studies reveal a link between ER stress and 
the formation of cytosolic PrP isoforms potentially endowed with novel signaling 
or cytotoxic functions.

PMID: 16908519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 Jul;5(7):756-9. Epub 2006 Jul 1.

Targeting XBP-1 as a novel anti-cancer strategy.

Koong AC(1), Chauhan V, Romero-Ramirez L.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Department of Radiation Oncology, CA 94305-5152, USA.
akoong@stanford.edu

The survival and growth of tumor cells within the microenvironment of a solid
tumor necessitates the adaptation of these cells to ER stress. Hypoxia, in the
context of the tumor microenvironment, is a critical ER stress that activates the
unfolded protein response (UPR). This review focuses on the role of the IRE1-XBP1
branch of the UPR and its role in mediating cell survival and tumor growth.
Inhibition of this pathway will be discussed as a therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 16861911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Dec 1;99(5):1308-25.

A limited number of genes are involved in the differentiation of germinal center 
B cells.

Nakayama Y(1), Stabach P, Maher SE, Mahajan MC, Masiar P, Liao C, Zhang X, Ye ZJ,
Tuck D, Bothwell AL, Newburger PE, Weissman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 Cedar St., New
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA. yasuhiro.nakayama@yale.edu

Mature B cells, upon activation, progressively differentiate through centroblasts
into centrocytes and finally to plasmacytes that express large amounts of
selected immunoglobulins. A significant part of this maturation is thought to
involve induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR). We have compared gene
expression in normal germinal center centroblasts, centrocytes, lymphoblastoid
cells undergoing induced UPR, and the CCL155 plasmacytoma cell line. In the
centroblast to centrocyte transition there is a change in the expression of a
relatively small number of genes. These include a limited subset of the genes
upregulated by a fully activated UPR as well as a small number of other
transcription factors, some disulphide isomerases, and other genes. This is
consistent with a model in which this transition is mediated by changes in the
levels of expression of transcription factor B-lymphocyte-induced maturation
protein 1 (Blimp1) (PRDM1), BACH2, X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), interferon
regulatory factor 4 (IRF4), and possibly vitamin D receptor (VDR) expression,
together with post-transcriptional changes and a limited induction of aspects of 
the UPR.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16795035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Circ Res. 2006 Aug 4;99(3):275-82. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Activation of the unfolded protein response in infarcted mouse heart and hypoxic 
cultured cardiac myocytes.

Thuerauf DJ(1), Marcinko M, Gude N, Rubio M, Sussman MA, Glembotski CC.

Author information: 
(1)San Diego State University Heart Institute and the Department of Biology, San 
Diego State University, Calif. 92182, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stresses that reduce ER protein folding activate the
unfolded protein response (UPR). One effector of the UPR is the transcription
factor X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), which is expressed on ER stress-mediated
splicing of the XBP1 mRNA. XBP1 induces certain ER-targeted proteins, eg,
glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), that help resolve the ER stress and foster 
cell survival. In this study, we determined whether hypoxia can activate the UPR 
in the cardiac context. Neonatal rat ventricular myocyte cultures subjected to
hypoxia (16 hours) exhibited increased XBP1 mRNA splicing, XBP1 protein
expression, GRP78 promoter activation, and GRP78 protein levels; however, the
levels of these UPR markers declined during reoxygenation, suggesting that the
UPR is activated during hypoxia but not during reoxygenation. When cells were
infected with a recombinant adenovirus (AdV) encoding dominant-negative XBP1
(AdV-XBP1dn), UPR markers were reduced; however, hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced
apoptosis increased. Confocal immunocytofluorescence demonstrated that hypoxia
induced GRP78 in neonatal rat and isolated adult mouse ventricular myocytes.
Moreover, mouse hearts subjected to in vivo myocardial infarction exhibited
increased GRP78 expression in cardiac myocytes near the infarct, but not in
healthy cells distal to the infarct. These results indicate that hypoxia
activates the UPR in cardiac myocytes and that XBP1-inducible proteins may
contribute to protecting the myocardium during hypoxic stress.

PMID: 16794188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 27;103(26):9976-81. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Gene expression patterns define novel roles for E47 in cell cycle progression,
cytokine-mediated signaling, and T lineage development.

Schwartz R(1), Engel I, Fallahi-Sichani M, Petrie HT, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0377, USA.

In maturing T lineage cells, the helix-loop-helix protein E47 has been shown to
enforce a critical proliferation and developmental checkpoint commonly referred
to as beta selection. To examine how E47 regulates cellular expansion and
developmental progression, we have used an E2A-deficient lymphoma cell line and
DNA microarray analysis to identify immediate E47 target genes. Hierarchical
cluster analysis of gene expression patterns revealed that E47 coordinately
regulates the expression of genes involved in cell survival, cell cycle
progression, lipid metabolism, stress response, and lymphoid maturation. These
include Plcgamma2, Cdk6, CD25, Tox, Gadd45a, Gadd45b, Gfi1, Gfi1b, Socs1, Socs3, 
Id2, Eto2, and Xbp1. We propose a regulatory network linking Janus kinase
(JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-mediated signaling,
E47, and suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins in a common pathway.
Finally, we suggest that the aberrant activation of Cdk6 in E47-deficient T
lineage cells contributes to the development of lymphoid malignancy.

PMCID: PMC1502564
PMID: 16782810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Toxicol Sci. 2006 May;31(2):149-56.

Quantitative measurement of spliced XBP1 mRNA as an indicator of endoplasmic
reticulum stress.

Hirota M(1), Kitagaki M, Itagaki H, Aiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Shiseido Research Center, 2-11-1 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
236-8643, Japan. morihiko.hirota@to.shiseido.co.jp

The unfolded protein response (UPR) events triggered by the accumulation of
unfolded protein in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activate the three UPR signaling
pathways mediated by IRE1, ATF6 and PERK. Spliced XBP1 mRNA induced by activated 
IRE1 is translated to the protein, a potent transcription factor that induces BiP
expression. XBP1 is also induced by activated ATF6. It is thus thought to be an
important marker reflecting both IRE1 and ATF6 signaling in response to ER
stress. For quantitative measurement of XBP1 gene expression, it is important to 
distinguish between the spliced and non-spliced form of XBP1 mRNA. We have
developed a new method to detect the spliced XBP1 mRNA by means of real-time PCR 
and we compared the result with measurements of the expression of the ER stress
inducible gene BiP. A good correlation was found between spliced XBP1 expression 
and BiP expression. Thus, our method may be useful for simple and quantitative
evaluation of ER stress.

PMID: 16772704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2006 Jun;51(7):863-70.

[Cytoplasmic mRNA splicing].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida H(1).

Author information: 
(1)hide@biophysics.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PMID: 16758932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell Cycle. 2006 May;5(10):1102-10. Epub 2006 May 15.

Repression of new p53 targets revealed by ChIP on chip experiments.

Ceribelli M(1), Alcalay M, Viganò MA, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomolecolari e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milano, Italy.

Following DNA-damage, the tumor suppressor p53 activates G1/S blocking and
apoptotic genes, and represses other genes, including those involved in G2/M
transition. In this latter system, it acts through the CCAAT-binding histone-like
NF-Y. Several groups have reported that p53 is associated to promoters in
unstressed conditions. We developed an oligo-based array containing 179 human
promoters, enriched in genes involved in the DNA-damage and ER-stress response.
We performed ChIP on chip experiments with p53 and NF-Y in cells under normal
growing conditions. We identified 46 new p53 targets and noted (i) a significant 
enrichment in genes of the ER-stress response, including crucial regulators such 
as XBP1 and C/EBPbeta (ii) genes whose products are involved in the regulation of
p53 function. Several genes were validated by conventional ChIP. DNA-damage
dependent PCAF-mediated acetylation was observed on most, but not all promoters. 
The effect of p53 activation was checked by RT-PCR and transfections in HCT116
wt, E6 and p53-/- cells: most promoters were actively repressed upon Adriamycin
treatment or following p53 transfection in p53-/- cells. In particular, the
behaviour of some of the genes (BRCA1, RAD23 and RAD17) is consistent with a
feedback loop regulation on p53 levels. Finally, there is a large overlap (66%)
between p53 and NF-Y targets. Our data reinstate the physiological importance of 
p53 promoter recognition and direct transcriptional repression as a mechanism to 
cope with DNA-damage.

PMID: 16721047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 7;281(27):18691-706. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Cytoplasmic IRE1alpha-mediated XBP1 mRNA splicing in the absence of nuclear
processing and endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Back SH(1), Lee K, Vink E, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0650, USA.

Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates an 
intracellular signal transduction program termed the unfolded protein response
(UPR). In mammalian cells, the UPR is signaled in part through dimerization of ER
membrane-localized IRE1alpha to activate its protein kinase and endoribonuclease 
activities. Activated IRE1alpha cleaves XBP1 mRNA at two sites to initiate an
unconventional splicing reaction. The 5' and 3' fragments are subsequently joined
by an RNA ligase activity, thereby removing a 26-base intron. This splicing
reaction creates a translational frameshift to produce a functional XBP1
transcription factor. However, the cellular location and physiological processes 
required for splicing of XBP1 mRNA are not well characterized. To study these
processes, XBP1 mRNAs were engineered in which translation of enhanced green
fluorescence protein or luciferase required splicing of the XBP1 intron. Using
cell lines that continuously or transiently express these reporter constructs, we
show that cytoplasmic unspliced XBP1 mRNA is efficiently spliced by activated
IRE1alpha and requires ongoing cellular transcription but not active translation.
The XBP1 intron was effectively removed from RNA substrates transcribed from T7
RNA polymerase or delivered directly to the cytoplasm by RNA transfection, thus
indicating that the splicing reaction does not require nuclear processing of the 
RNA substrate. Analysis of nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA fractions demonstrated
that XBP1 mRNA splicing occurs in the cytoplasm. Moreover, an artificial
F(v)-IRE1alphaDeltaN was engineered that was able to splice XBP1 mRNA upon
chemical-induced dimerization. These findings demonstrate that IRE1alpha
dimerization is sufficient to activate XBP1 mRNA splicing in the absence of the
UPR. We propose that XBP1 mRNA cytoplasmic splicing provides a novel mechanism to
rapidly induce translation of a transcription factor in response to a specific
stimulus.

PMID: 16644724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):17743-50. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Zinc transport complexes contribute to the homeostatic maintenance of secretory
pathway function in vertebrate cells.

Ishihara K(1), Yamazaki T, Ishida Y, Suzuki T, Oda K, Nagao M, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, 
Kambe T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Zinc transporters play important roles in a wide range of biochemical processes. 
Here we report an important function of ZnT5/ZnT6 hetero-oligomeric complexes in 
the secretory pathway. The activity of human tissue-nonspecific alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) expressed in ZnT5(-)ZnT7(-/-) cells was significantly reduced
compared with that expressed in wild-type cells as in the case of endogenous
chicken tissue-nonspecific ALP activity. The inactive human tissue-nonspecific
ALP in ZnT5(-)ZnT7(-/-) cells was degraded by proteasome-mediated degradation
without being trafficked to the plasma membrane. ZnT5(-)ZnT7(-/-) cells showed
exacerbation of the unfolded protein response as did the wild-type cells cultured
under a zinc-deficient condition, revealing that both complexes play a role in
homeostatic maintenance of secretory pathway function. Furthermore, we showed
that expression of ZnT5 mRNA was up-regulated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress
in various cell lines. The up-regulation of the hZnT5 transcript was mediated by 
transcription factor XBP1 through the TGACGTGG sequence in the hZnT5 promoter,
and this sequence was highly conserved in the ZnT5 genes of mouse and chicken.
These results suggest that zinc transport into the secretory pathway is strictly 
regulated for the homeostatic maintenance of secretory pathway function in
vertebrate cells.

PMID: 16636052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Metab Eng. 2006 May;8(3):264-72.

Xbp1-based engineering of secretory capacity enhances the productivity of Chinese
hamster ovary cells.

Tigges M(1), Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical and Bio-Engineering (ICB), Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology-ETH Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10,ETH Hoenggerberg, HCI F115,
CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

A variety of successful transcription and translation engineering strategies
implemented during the past decade have driven the specific productivity of
mammalian cells to an apparent limit. Restricted post-translation competence has 
since been considered the major bottleneck preventing mammalian cells from fully 
exploiting their physiologic production capacity in a biopharmaceutical
manufacturing scenario. Through ectopic expression of the human transcription
factor Xbp1 (X-box-binding-protein 1), evolved to manage plasma cell
differentiation and coordinate the unfolded protein response, we have
specifically expanded the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi of transgenic
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1)-derived cell lines with a resulting increase in
overall production capacity. Xbp-1-based engineering of secretory bottlenecks was
compatible with a variety of different promoterproduct gene configurations
suggesting that Xbp-1 induces generic production increases in CHO-K1 cell
derivatives. Secretion engineering, illustrated here by Xbp1-based reprogramming 
of the post-translational processing machinery, provides a first insight into
mastering a major system bottleneck which impacts biopharmaceutical manufacturing
of secreted protein therapeutics.

© 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 16635796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Immunol Rev. 2006 Apr;210:67-85.

A library of gene expression signatures to illuminate normal and pathological
lymphoid biology.

Shaffer AL(1), Wright G, Yang L, Powell J, Ngo V, Lamy L, Lam LT, Davis RE,
Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Genomics has provided a lever to pry open lymphoid cells and examine their
regulatory biology. The large body of available gene expression data has also
allowed us to define the of coordinately expressed genes, termed gene expression 
signatures, which characterize the states of cellular physiology that reflect
cellular differentiation, activation of signaling pathways, and the action of
transcription factors. Gene expression signatures that reflect the action of
individual transcription factors can be defined by perturbing transcription
factor function using RNA interference (RNAi), small-molecule inhibition, and
dominant-negative approaches. We have used this methodology to define gene
expression signatures of various transcription factors controlling B-cell
differentiation and activation, including BCL-6, B lymphocyte-induced maturation 
protein-1 (Blimp-1), X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), nuclear factor-kappaB
(NF-kappaB), and c-myc. We have also curated a wide variety of gene expression
signatures from the literature and assembled these into a signature database.
Statistical methods can define whether any signature in this database is
differentially expressed in independent biological samples, an approach we have
used to gain mechanistic insights into the origin and clinical behavior of B-cell
lymphomas. We also discuss the use of genomic-scale RNAi libraries to identify
genes and pathways that may serve as therapeutic targets in B-cell malignancies.

PMID: 16623765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 26;344(1):221-5. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

1-Deoxymannojirimycin, the alpha1,2-mannosidase inhibitor, induced cellular
endoplasmic reticulum stress in human hepatocarcinoma cell 7721.

Lu Y(1), Xu YY, Fan KY, Shen ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, 200032, PR China.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 25;347(2):541.

Alpha1,2-mannosidases, key enzymes in N-glycan processing and located both in the
endoplasmic reticulum and golgi, have been targets in the development of
anti-cancer therapies. Previous studies have shown its involvement in protein
degradation. In this study, 1-deoxymannojirimycin, a specific inhibitor of
alpha1,2-mannosidase and generating 'high mannose' type of N-glycan, was treated 
in human hepatocarcinoma 7721 cells and induced the endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Key moleculars as XBP1 and GRP78/Bip were activated and up-regulated, which
suggested the UPR pathway was activated. The cleavage of caspase-12, -9, and -3
was also detected, which implicated the ER stress was triggered and apoptosis
occurred in H7721 cells. The results indicate the 'high Man' structure generated 
by 1-deoxymannojirimycin may constitute potential novel mechanism for ER stress
and caspase-12 pathway of cell apoptosis.

PMID: 16615997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1229-36. Epub 2006 Apr 8.

Interferon-gamma potentiates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced death by
reducing pancreatic beta cell defence mechanisms.

Pirot P(1), Eizirik DL, Cardozo AK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Route de
Lennik, 808, B-1070, Brussels, Belgium.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: A tight control of endoplasmic reticulum homeostasis is crucial 
for beta cell function and survival. We recently described that IL-1beta plus
IFN-gamma deplete endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ stores in beta cells, leading to
endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis. IL-1beta alone induced endoplasmic
reticulum stress but failed to induce beta cell death, while IFN-gamma alone
neither caused endoplasmic reticulum stress nor induced beta cell death. This
suggests that IFN-gamma aggravates endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by
IL-1beta, eventually triggering apoptosis. Here we tested this hypothesis and the
mechanisms involved, by investigating the effects of IFN-gamma on endoplasmic
reticulum-stress-induced beta cell apoptosis caused by a specific blocker of the 
sarcoendoplasmic-reticulum pump Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: INS-1E cells or beta cells were pretreated with IFN-gamma 
and then exposed to the SERCA blocker cyclopiazonic acid (CPA) for induction of
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Cell death was evaluated by Hoechst 342 and
propidium iodide staining. Expression of genes related to endoplasmic reticulum
stress was determined by real-time RT-PCR, while activation of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress response was determined by analysing X-box binding protein-1
(Xbp1) splicing and using a reporter construct containing five copies of the
unfolded protein response element (UPRE).
RESULTS: CPA induces endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis in
insulin-producing cells. Pretreatment with IFN-gamma decreased the basal level of
spliced Xbp1 mRNA, the basal and CPA-induced activity of the UPRE reporter, and
the mRNA expression of several endoplasmic reticulum chaperones (Bip, Grp94 and
Orp 150) and Sec61a. Furthermore, CPA-induced Chop mRNA expression and beta cell 
apoptosis were potentiated in cells that had been pretreated with IFN-gamma.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: CPA-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and
apoptosis is enhanced in IFN-gamma-treated beta cells. These effects are mediated
via downregulation of the expression of genes involved in beta cell defence
against endoplasmic reticulum stress.

PMID: 16604358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 May 15;15(10):1600-9. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

WFS1-deficiency increases endoplasmic reticulum stress, impairs cell cycle
progression and triggers the apoptotic pathway specifically in pancreatic
beta-cells.

Yamada T(1), Ishihara H, Tamura A, Takahashi R, Yamaguchi S, Takei D, Tokita A,
Satake C, Tashiro F, Katagiri H, Aburatani H, Miyazaki J, Oka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan.

Wolfram syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder associated with diabetes
mellitus and optic atrophy, is caused by mutations in the WFS1 gene encoding an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein. Herein, we report that pancreatic
islets of wfs1-deficient mice exhibit increases in phosphorylation of
RNA-dependent protein kinase-like ER kinase, chaperone gene expressions and
active XBP1 protein levels, indicating an enhanced ER stress response. We
established wfs1-deficient MIN6 clonal beta-cells by crossing wfs1-deficient mice
with mice expressing simian virus 40 large T antigen in beta-cells. These cells
show essentially the same alterations in ER stress responses as wfs1-deficient
islets, which were reversed by re-expression of WFS1 protein or overexpression of
GRP78, a master regulator of the ER stress response. In contrast, these changes
are not observed in heart, skeletal muscle or brown adipose tissues with
WFS1-deficiency. The increased ER stress response was accompanied by reduced BrdU
incorporation and increased caspase-3 cleavage, indicating impaired cell cycle
progression and accelerated apoptotic processes in the mutant islets. These
changes are associated with increased expression of the cell cycle regulator
p21(CIP1) in wfs1-deficient islets and clonal beta-cells. Treatment of islets
with thapsigargin, an ER stress inducer, caused upregulation of p21(CIP1). In
addition, forced expression of p21(CIP1) resulted in reduced MIN6 beta-cell
numbers, suggesting the ER stress-induced increase in p21(CIP1) expression to be 
involved in beta-cell loss in the mutant islets. These data indicate that
WFS1-deficiency activates the ER stress response specifically in beta-cells,
causing beta-cell loss through impaired cell cycle progression and increased
apoptosis.

PMID: 16571599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Neurochem. 2006 Apr;97(2):545-55. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

XBP1 induces WFS1 through an endoplasmic reticulum stress response element-like
motif in SH-SY5Y cells.

Kakiuchi C(1), Ishiwata M, Hayashi A, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science
Institute, RIKEN, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

XBP1 is a key transcription factor in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
response pathway. In a previous study, we suggested a possible link between XBP1 
and bipolar disorder, but its role in neuronal cells has not yet been clarified. 
Here we examined the target genes of XBP1, using DNA microarray analysis in
SH-SY5Y cells transfected with an XBP1-expressing vector. Among the genes
up-regulated by XBP1, the most significant p-value was observed for WFS1, which
is an ER stress response-related gene. Examining the promoter region of WFS1, we 
found a conserved sequence (CGAGGCGCACCGTGATTGG) that is highly similar to the ER
stress response element (ERSE). A promoter assay showed that this ERSE-like motif
is critical for the regulation of WFS1 by XBP1. An electrophoretic mobility shift
assay suggested that XBP1 does not directly bind to this sequence. Our results
demonstrate that WFS1 is one of the target genes of XBP1 in SH-SY5Y cells.

PMID: 16539657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Aug;291(2):E275-81. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Saturated fatty acids induce endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis
independently of ceramide in liver cells.

Wei Y(1), Wang D, Topczewski F, Pagliassotti MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523-1571, USA.

Accumulation of lipids in nonadipose tissues can lead to cell dysfunction and
cell death, a phenomenon known as lipotoxicity. However, the signaling pathways
and mechanisms linking lipid accumulation to cell death are poorly understood.
The present study examined the hypothesis that saturated fatty acids disrupt
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis and promote apoptosis in liver cells via
accumulation of ceramide. H4IIE liver cells were exposed to varying
concentrations of saturated (palmitate or stearate) or unsaturated (oleate or
linoleate) fatty acids. ER homeostasis was monitored using markers of the ER
stress response pathway, including phosphorylation of IRE1alpha and eIF2alpha,
splicing of XBP1 mRNA, and expression of molecular chaperone (e.g., GRP78) and
proapoptotic (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein) genes. Apoptosis
was monitored using caspase activity and DNA laddering. Palmitate and stearate
induced ER stress, caspase activity, and DNA laddering. Inhibition of caspase
activation prevented DNA laddering. Unsaturated fatty acids did not induce ER
stress or apoptosis. Saturated fatty acids increased ceramide concentration;
however, inhibition of de novo ceramide synthesis did not prevent saturated fatty
acid-induced ER stress and apoptosis. Unsaturated fatty acids rescued
palmitate-induced ER stress and apoptosis. These data demonstrate that saturated 
fatty acids disrupt ER homeostasis and induce apoptosis in liver cells via
mechanisms that do not involve ceramide accumulation.

PMID: 16492686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 29;25(28):3994-4008. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

An estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer subset characterized by a hormonally 
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen.

Doane AS(1), Danso M, Lal P, Donaton M, Zhang L, Hudis C, Gerald WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Little is known of the underlying biology of estrogen receptor-negative,
progesterone receptor-negative (ER(-)/PR(-)) breast cancer (BC), and few targeted
therapies are available. Clinical heterogeneity of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors suggests
that molecular subsets exist. We performed genome-wide expression analysis of 99 
primary BC samples and eight BC cell lines in an effort to reveal distinct
subsets, provide insight into their biology and potentially identify new
therapeutic targets. We identified a subset of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors with
paradoxical expression of genes known to be either direct targets of ER,
responsive to estrogen, or typically expressed in ER(+) BC. Differentially
expressed genes included SPDEF, FOXA1, XBP1, CYB5, TFF3, NAT1, APOD, ALCAM and AR
(P<0.001). A classification model based on the expression signature of this tumor
class identified molecularly similar BCs in an independent human BC data set and 
among BC cell lines (MDA-MB-453). This cell line demonstrated a proliferative
response to androgen in an androgen receptor-dependent and ER-independent manner.
In addition, the androgen-induced transcriptional program of MDA-MB-453
significantly overlapped the molecular signature of the unique ER(-)/PR(-)
subclass of human tumors. This subset of BCs, characterized by a hormonally
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen, suggests the
potential for therapeutic strategies targeting the androgen signaling pathway.

PMID: 16491124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2006 Aug 5;94(5):830-41.

Functional proteomic analysis of GS-NS0 murine myeloma cell lines with varying
recombinant monoclonal antibody production rate.

Dinnis DM(1), Stansfield SH, Schlatter S, Smales CM, Alete D, Birch JR, Racher
AJ, Marshall CT, Nielsen LK, James DC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Engineering, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland 4072,
Australia.

We previously compared changes in individual protein abundance between the
proteomes of GS-NS0 cell lines with varying rates of cell-specific recombinant
monoclonal antibody production (qMab). Here we extend analyses of our proteomic
dataset to statistically determine if particular cell lines have distinct
functional capabilities that facilitate production of secreted recombinant Mab.
We categorized 79 proteins identified by mass spectrometry according to their
biological function or location in the cell and statistically compared the
relative abundance of proteins in each category between GS-NS0 cell lines with
varying qMab. We found that the relative abundance of proteins in ER chaperone,
non-ER chaperone, cytoskeletal, cell signaling, metabolic, and mitochondrial
categories were significantly increased with qMab. As the GS-NS0 cell line with
highest qMab also had an increased intracellular abundance of unassembled Mab
heavy chain (HC), we tested the hypothesis that the increased ER chaperone
content was caused by induction of an unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling
pathway. Immunoblot analyses revealed that spliced X-box binding protein 1
(XBP1), a marker for UPR induction, was not detectable in the GS-NS0 cells with
elevated qMab, although it was induced by chemical inhibitors of protein folding.
These data suggest that qMab is functionally related to the abundance of specific
categories of proteins that together facilitate recombinant protein production.
We infer that individual cells within parental populations are more functionally 
equipped for high-level recombinant protein production than others and that this 
bias could be used to select cells that are more likely to achieve high qMab.

(c) 2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16489627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Curr Mol Med. 2006 Feb;6(1):55-69.

ER stress, hypoxia tolerance and tumor progression.

Koumenis C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. ckoumeni@wfubmc.edu

The development of chronic and fluctuating hypoxic regions in tumors has profound
consequences for malignant progression, response to therapy and overall patient
survival. Understanding the events involved in hypoxia tolerance will offer new
opportunities for antitumor modalities. A universal response of tumor cells to
hypoxia is a rapid and substantial decrease in the rates of macromolecular
synthesis. Hypoxia induces phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor
eIF2alpha on Ser51 via activation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident
kinase PERK and that this modification is required for the rapid downregulation
of global protein synthesis by this hypoxic stress. PERK-dependent
phosphorylation of eIF2alpha is one component of the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR), a coordinated program that promotes cell survival under conditions of ER
stress. Inactivation of PERK or eIF2alpha phosphorylation impairs cell survival
under hypoxia, and transformed cells with inactivating PERK or eIF2alpha
mutations form tumors in nude mice that are slower growing, and have higher
levels of apoptosis in hypoxic areas compared to tumors with an intact UPR.
Expression of the transcription factor ATF4, a downstream effector of eIF2alpha
phosphorylation, is also upregulated by hypoxia in vitro and in human tumors and 
increases hypoxia tolerance. A second UPR pathway mediated by activation of IRE1 
and its downstream target XBP1 is also required for hypoxia tolerance in vitro
and for tumor growth. These results reveal a critical role for UPR activation for
tumor cell resistance to hypoxia and tumor growth promotion and suggest that the 
UPR may be an attractive target for anti-tumor modalities.

PMID: 16472113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Cell Biol. 2006 Feb 13;172(4):565-75. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

pXBP1(U) encoded in XBP1 pre-mRNA negatively regulates unfolded protein response 
activator pXBP1(S) in mammalian ER stress response.

Yoshida H(1), Oku M, Suzuki M, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8502, Japan. hide@biophysics.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Upon the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the mammalian endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) premessenger RNA (premRNA) is converted to
mature mRNA by unconventional splicing that is mediated by the endonuclease
inositol-requiring enzyme 1. The transcription factor protein (p) XBP1 spliced
(S), which is translated from mature XBP1 mRNA, contains the nuclear localization
signal and the transcriptional activation domain and activates the transcription 
of target genes, including those encoding ER chaperones in the nucleus. We show
that pXBP1 unspliced (U) encoded in XBP1 pre-mRNA was constitutively expressed
and markedly accumulated at the recovery phase of ER stress. pXBP1(U) contained
the nuclear exclusion signal instead of the transcriptional activation domain and
shuttled between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Interestingly, pXBP1(U) formed a 
complex with pXBP1(S), and the pXBP1(U)-pXBP1(S) complex was sequestered from the
nucleus. Moreover, the complex was rapidly degraded by proteasomes because of the
degradation motif contained in pXBP1(U). Thus, pXBP1(U) is a negative feedback
regulator of pXBP1(S), which shuts off the transcription of target genes during
the recovery phase of ER stress.

PMCID: PMC2063676
PMID: 16461360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Feb;23(1):1-6.

An analysis on transcriptional regulation activity of human XBP1 gene 5' upstream
DNA sequences.

Guo FJ(1), Cheng HE, Yi FP, Peng HM, Song FZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400016, P.R.China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the transcription activation and possible regulation
mechanism of human X-box binding protein 1(XBP1)gene 5'upstream DNA sequence in
different cell lines.
METHODS: Six kinds of XBP1 promoter deletion mutants were cloned into pGEM-Teasy 
vector, which included XBP1 gene 5' upstream -1039 to 66 bp,-859 to 66 bp,-623 to
66 bp,-351 to 66 bp,-227 to 66 bp,-227 to -45 bp respectively. Every deletion
mutant sequence was cut from Teasy-XBP1p by KpnI and Xho I, and subcloned into
pCAT3-Basic to produce a set of constructs termed as p1-XBP1p, p2-XBP1p,
p3-XBP1p, p4-XBP1p, p5-XBP1p, p6-XBP1p, respectively. The transcription activity 
of each construct was detected after transiently transfecting K562, HepG2,NIH-3T3
and L0(2)cell with FuGENE 6 transfection reagent. Cells transfected by
pCAT3-Basic or pCAT3-Promoter were used as negative and positive controls. The
activity of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase(CAT), which reflects the
transcription activation of the XBP1 gene promoter, was detected by ELISA after
48 hours of transfection.
RESULTS: The reporter vectors of six kinds of XBP1 promoter deletion mutants were
successfully constructed, as confirmed by restriction enzyme digestion and
sequencing. The activities of p4-XBP1p and p5-XBP1p were higher than the other
deletion mutants in K562 and HepG2. And the activity of p5-XBP1p was the highest 
in HepG2. There was no activity detected from any transfected NIH-3T3.
CONCLUSION: The XBP1 gene promoter can transactivate its downstream gene to
transcription. The core sequence of XBP1 promoter was implied between -227 bp and
66 bp. This sequence was connected with the transcriptional activity of XBP1
promoter closely. Its transcription activity varies with different cell lines.
XBP1 promoter might drive gene expression with cell-type specificity.

PMID: 16456775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Microbiol. 2005 Dec;43(6):529-36.

Hepatitis C virus non-structural protein NS4B can modulate an unfolded protein
response.

Zheng Y(1), Gao B, Ye L, Kong L, Jing W, Yang X, Wu Z, Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key laboratory of virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Hubei, PRChina.

Viral infection causes stress to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The response to 
endoplasmic reticulum stress, known as the unfolded protein response (UPR), is
designed to eliminate misfolded proteins and allow the cell to recover. The role 
of hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural protein NS4B, a component of the HCV
replicons that induce UPR, is incompletely understood. We demonstrate that HCV
NS4B could induce activating transcription factor (ATF6) and inositol-requiring
enzyme 1 (IRE1), to favor the HCV subreplicon and HCV viral replication. HCV NS4B
activated the IRE1 pathway, as indicated by splicing of X box-binding protein
(Xbp-1) mRNA. However, transcriptional activation of the XBP-1 target gene, EDEM 
(ER degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein, a protein degradation
factor), was inhibited. These results imply that NS4B might induce UPR through
ATF6 and IRE1-XBP1 pathways, but might also modify the outcome to benefit HCV or 
HCV subreplicon replication.

PMID: 16410770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Feb 17;340(3):758-66. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Elevated expression and potential roles of human Sp5, a member of Sp
transcription factor family, in human cancers.

Chen Y(1), Guo Y, Ge X, Itoh H, Watanabe A, Fujiwara T, Kodama T, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

In this report, we describe the expression and function of human Sp5, a member of
the Sp family of zinc finger transcription factors. Like other family members,
the Sp5 protein contains a Cys2His2 zinc finger DNA binding domain at the
C-terminus. Our experiments employing Gal4-Sp5 fusion proteins reveal multiple
transcriptional domains, including a N-terminal activity domain, an intrinsic
repressive element, and a C-terminal synergistic domain. Elevated expression of
Sp5 was noted in several human tumors including hepatocellular carcinoma, gastric
cancer, and colon cancer. To study the effects of the Sp5 protein on growth
properties of human cancer cells and facilitate the identification of its
downstream genes, we combined an inducible gene expression system with microarray
analysis to screen for its transcriptional targets. Transfer of Sp5 into MCF-7
cells that expressed no detectable endogenous Sp5 protein elicited significant
growth promotion activity. Several of the constitutively deregulated genes have
been associated with tumorigenesis (CDC25C, CEACAM6, TMPRSS2, XBP1, MYBL1, ABHD2,
and CXCL12) and Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling pathways (BAMBI, SIX1, IGFBP5, AES,
and p21WAF1). This information could be utilized for further mechanistic research
and for devising optimized therapeutic strategies against human cancers.

PMID: 16380080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Apoptosis. 2006 Jan;11(1):5-13.

Role of the unfolded protein response in cell death.

Kim R(1), Emi M, Tanabe K, Murakami S.

Author information: 
(1)International Radiation Information Center, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
rkim@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Unfolded protein response (UPR) is an important genomic response to endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. The ER chaperones, GRP78 and Gadd153, play critical roles 
in cell survival or cell death as part of the UPR, which is regulated by three
signaling pathways: PERK/ATF4, IRE1/XBP1 and ATF6. During the UPR, accumulated
unfolded protein is either correctly refolded, or unsuccessfully refolded and
degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. When the unfolded protein exceeds a
threshold, damaged cells are committed to cell death, which is mediated by ATF4
and ATF6, as well as activation of the JNK/AP-1/Gadd153-signaling pathway.
Gadd153 suppresses activation of Bcl-2 and NF-kappaB. UPR-mediated cell survival 
or cell death is regulated by the balance of GRP78 and Gadd153 expression, which 
is coregulated by NF-kappaB in accordance with the magnitude of ER stress. Less
susceptibility to cell death upon activation of the UPR may contribute to tumor
progression and drug resistance of solid tumors.

PMID: 16374548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jan 9;580(1):184-90. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Transformation-associated gene regulation by ATF6alpha during
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Arai M(1), Kondoh N, Imazeki N, Hada A, Hatsuse K, Kimura F, Matsubara O, Mori K,
Wakatsuki T, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry II, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa-shi, Saitama 359-8513, Japan.

We have previously reported that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-regulated 
transmembrane transcription factor 6 alpha (ATF6alpha) is implicated in the
pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). In order to further identify
genes that are regulated by ATF6alpha, the global gene expression profiles of the
ATF6alpha-transfected and untransfected HCC cell line, HLF, were analyzed. These 
results were then compared with the differential gene expression patterns of
poorly differentiated HCC and control non-tumorous liver tissue. Our findings
demonstrate that at least 18 genes are specifically upregulated by ATF6alpha,
while another UPR mediator, XBP1 or ER-stress inducer, thapsigargin could
partially stimulate or even repress some of them in HCC cells. Moreover, six of
these identified genes contain potential ER stress-responsive elements and/or
unfolded protein response elements in their 5' regulatory regions.

PMID: 16364319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006 Jan 5;141B(1):71-5.

Association study of a functional promoter polymorphism in the XBP1 gene and
schizophrenia.

Jönsson EG(1), Cichon S, Schumacher J, Abou Jamra R, Schulze TG, Deschner M,
Forslund K, Hall H, Propping P, Czerski PM, Dmitrak-Weglarz M, Kapelski P,
Driessen M, Maier W, Hauser J, Rietschel M, Nöthen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Psychiatry Section, R5:00, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. erik.jonsson@cna.ki.se

Erratum in
    Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2006 Jun 5;141(4):430-2.

A functional promoter polymorphism (-116C/G) of the X-box binding protein 1 gene 
(XBP1) gene was reported to be associated with schizophrenia in Asian subjects.
In a replication attempt, three European case-control samples comprising 2,182
German, Polish, and Swedish subjects, were genotyped for the XBP1 -116C/G
polymorphism. Allele and genotype frequencies were compared between schizophrenic
patients and control subjects. There were no significant case-control differences
in any of the three samples, although in a meta-analysis with previous results
comprising 3,612 subjects there was a borderline association between the
-116G-containing genotypes and schizophrenia. We conclude that the functional
XBP1 gene polymorphism is not of major importance to schizophrenia in the
European populations investigated. It cannot be excluded, however, that the XBP1 
polymorphism is involved in schizophrenia in other populations or adds minor
susceptibility to the disorder.

PMID: 16342282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mech Dev. 2006 Jan;123(1):84-96. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

XBP1 forms a regulatory loop with BMP-4 and suppresses mesodermal and neural
differentiation in Xenopus embryos.

Cao Y(1), Knöchel S, Oswald F, Donow C, Zhao H, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm,
Germany.

The active form of the Xenopus X-box binding protein 1 (xXBP1) partially
synergizes and partially antagonizes with BMP-4 signaling. xXBP1 overexpression
inhibits mesoderm differentiation and formation of neural tissues. A functional
knockdown promotes differentiation of lateral and dorsal mesoderm but not of
ventral mesoderm and of neuroectoderm. We show that the active form of xXBP1 in
gastrula and early neurula stage embryos is generated by removal of exon 4 and
not by an endoribonuclease activity in the endoplasmic reticulum. The N-terminal 
region of xXBP1 which contains the basic leucine-zipper also contains a nuclear
localization signal and both, the N-terminal as well as the C-terminal regions
are required for xXBP1 function. The effects of xXBP1 are in part correlated to a
regulatory loop between xXBP1 and BMP-4. xXBP1 and BMP-4 stimulate mutually the
transcription of each other, but xXBP1 inhibits the BMP-4 target gene, Xvent-2.
Both, in vitro and in vivo assays demonstrate that xXBP1 interacts with BMP-4 and
Xvent-2B promoters. GST-pulldown assays reveal that xXBP1 can interact with
c-Jun, the transcriptional co-activator p300 and with the BMP-4 responsive Smad1.
On the other hand, xXBP1 also binds to the inhibitory Smads, Smad6 and Smad7,
that can act as transcriptional co-repressors. Based on these data, we conclude
that xXBP1 might function as an inhibitor of mesodermal and neural tissue
formation by acting either as transcriptional activator or as repressor. This
dual activity depends upon binding of co-factors being involved in the formation 
of distinct transcription complexes.

PMID: 16278078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Methods Mol Biol. 2006;317:267-77.

Identification of target genes of a yeast transcriptional repressor.

Mai B(1), Breeden LL.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Sciences, Sanofi-Aventis Group, Frankfurt, Germany.

Xbp1 is a transcriptional repressor with homology to the DNA binding domains of
two cell-cycle regulatory transcription factors, Swi4 and Mbp1. Target genes
bound and regulated by Xbp1, have been identified using differential display
(DD). Because little was known about the regulation or function of Xbp1, we
identified genes that were underrepresented in RNAs purified from cells in which 
Xbp1 was ectopically expressed. Four target genes, including three cyclin genes, 
were identified by DD and then confirmed by binding studies and Northern
analysis. The binding site for Xbp1, previously identified by site selection, was
present in these target genes and is conserved phylogenetically.

PMID: 16264235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Oncogene. 2006 Jan 26;25(4):546-54.

Enhanced selenium effect on growth arrest by BiP/GRP78 knockdown in p53-null
human prostate cancer cells.

Zu K(1), Bihani T, Lin A, Park YM, Mori K, Ip C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemoprevention, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, 
NY 14263, USA.

Redox modification of thiol/disulfide interchange in proteins by selenium could
lead to protein unfolding. When this occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a 
process known as unfolded protein response (UPR) is orchestrated for survival
through activation of PERK-eIF2alpha (PERK: double-stranded RNA-activated protein
kinase-like ER kinase; eIF2alpha: eucaryotic initiation factor 2alpha), ATFalpha 
(ATFalpha: activating transcription factor 6) and inositol requiring 1
(IRE1)-x-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) signalings. All three UPR transducer
pathways were upregulated very rapidly when PC-3 cells were exposed to selenium. 
These changes were accompanied by increased expression of UPR target genes,
including immunoglobulin heavy chain-binding protein/glucose-regulated protein,
78 kDa and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-homologous protein/growth arrest- and
DNA damage-inducible gene (CHOP/GADD153). Induction of BiP/GRP78, an ER-resident 
chaperone, is part of the damage control mechanism, while CHOP/GADD153 is a
transcription factor associated with growth arrest and apoptosis in the event of 
prolonged ER stress. Knocking down BiP/GRP78 induction by small interference RNA 
produced a differential response of the three transducers to selenium, suggesting
that the signaling intensity of each transducer could be fine-tuned depending on 
BiP/GRP78 availability. In the presence of selenium, CHOP/GADD153 expression was 
raised even higher by BiP/GRP78 knockdown. Under this condition, the selenium
effect on wild-type p53-activated fragment p21 (p21(WAF)), cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK)1 and CDK2 was also magnified in a manner consistent with enhanced
cell growth arrest. Additional experiments with CHOP/GADD153 siRNA knockdown
strongly suggested that CHOP/GADD153 may play a positive role in upregulating the
expression of p21(WAF) in a p53-independent manner (PC-3 cells are p53 null).
Collectively, the above findings support the idea that UPR could be an important 
mechanism in mediating the anticancer activity of selenium.

PMCID: PMC2424019
PMID: 16205645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. PLoS Genet. 2005 Sep;1(3):e37.

Genetic interactions due to constitutive and inducible gene regulation mediated
by the unfolded protein response in C. elegans.

Shen X(1), Ellis RE, Sakaki K, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an adaptive signaling pathway utilized to 
sense and alleviate the stress of protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). In mammals, the UPR is mediated through three proximal sensors PERK/PEK,
IRE1, and ATF6. PERK/PEK is a protein kinase that phosphorylates the alpha
subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 to inhibit protein
synthesis. Activation of IRE1 induces splicing of XBP1 mRNA to produce a potent
transcription factor. ATF6 is a transmembrane transcription factor that is
activated by cleavage upon ER stress. We show that in Caenorhabditis elegans,
deletion of either ire-1 or xbp-1 is synthetically lethal with deletion of either
atf-6 or pek-1, both producing a developmental arrest at larval stage 2.
Therefore, in C. elegans, atf-6 acts synergistically with pek-1 to complement the
developmental requirement for ire-1 and xbp-1. Microarray analysis identified
inducible UPR (i-UPR) genes, as well as numerous constitutive UPR (c-UPR) genes
that require the ER stress transducers during normal development. Although ire-1 
and xbp-1 together regulate transcription of most i-UPR genes, they are each
required for expression of nonoverlapping sets of c-UPR genes, suggesting that
they have distinct functions. Intriguingly, C. elegans atf-6 regulates few i-UPR 
genes following ER stress, but is required for the expression of many c-UPR
genes, indicating its importance during development and homeostasis. In contrast,
pek-1 is required for induction of approximately 23% of i-UPR genes but is
dispensable for the c-UPR. As pek-1 and atf-6 mainly act through sets of
nonoverlapping targets that are different from ire-1 and xbp-1 targets, at least 
two coordinated responses are required to alleviate ER stress by distinct
mechanisms. Finally, our array study identified the liver-specific transcription 
factor CREBh as a novel UPR gene conserved during metazoan evolution.

PMCID: PMC1231716
PMID: 16184190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Neurotrauma. 2005 Sep;22(9):1018-24.

Spinal cord trauma activates processing of xbp1 mRNA indicative of endoplasmic
reticulum dysfunction.

Aufenberg C(1), Wenkel S, Mautes A, Paschen W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Neurological
Research, Cologne, Germany.

The contribution of the various subcellular compartments in the induction of cell
injury triggered by spinal cord trauma has not been clearly elucidated yet. In
the present study, we investigated changes in mRNA levels of processed xbp1,
ho-1, and hsp70 induced in mice by hemisection or contusion of the spinal cord.
The expression of these genes is upregulated under conditions associated with
endoplasmic reticulum (ER; xbp1, ho-1) dysfunction or impairment of cytoplasmic
function (hsp70) respectively. When the functioning of the ER or the cytoplasm is
impaired, unfolded proteins accumulate in these compartments. This is the warning
signal for activation of the unfolded protein response (ER) and heat-shock
response (cytoplasm) respectively. Spinal cord trauma activated the expression of
these genes starting at 3 h and peaking at 6 h of recovery (processed xbp1,
12-fold and fivefold increase; ho-1, fourfold and eightfold increase; hsp70,
fourfold, no increase, after contusion and hemisection, respectively). After 6 h 
of recovery, the rise in hsp70 mRNA levels was confined to the traumatized
segment (fourfold), whereas a significant increase in processed xbp1 and ho-1
mRNA levels was also observed in the adjacent segments. This suggests a spread of
the pathological process from the site of the primary impact into the surrounding
tissue. After induction of spinal cord trauma processed xbp1 mRNA levels rose in 
a delayed fashion. This implies that the pathological process that causes
impairment of ER functioning, starts with a delay of a few hours after induction 
of trauma and may therefore be amenable to therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16156717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Dec 31;391(1-2):7-10. Epub 2005 Sep 9.

Relationship between XBP1 genotype and personality traits assessed by TCI and
NEO-FFI.

Kusumi I(1), Masui T, Kakiuchi C, Suzuki K, Akimoto T, Hashimoto R, Kunugi H,
Kato T, Koyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
North 15, West 7, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan. ikusumi@med.hokudai.ac.jp

There have been several researches on the role of personality in the
pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. Recently, a polymorphism of XBP1, a pivotal 
gene in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, was shown to contribute
to the genetic risk factor for bipolar disorder. Therefore, in this study, we
examined the relationship between the XBP1 gene polymorphism and the personality 
traits assessed by two self-rating scales, a shortened version of Temperament and
Character Inventory (TCI) and NEO-Five Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) in healthy
subjects. The present results suggested that the XBP1 gene polymorphism was
associated with the NEO-FFI score of neuroticism in female subjects. However, no 
significant differences in the other personality scale scores of both assessments
were observed among normal subjects with -116C/C, C/G and G/G genotypes. Further 
investigations are necessary to examine the relationship in patients with bipolar
disorder, or use full version of various self-rating personality assessments.

PMID: 16154272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(17):7522-33.

Activation of hepatitis B virus S promoter by a cell type-restricted
IRE1-dependent pathway induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Huang ZM(1), Tan T, Yoshida H, Mori K, Ma Y, Yen TS.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121,
USA.

IRE1-alpha is an integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that
is a key sensor in the cellular transcriptional response to stress in the ER.
Upon induction of ER stress, IRE1-alpha is activated, resulting in the synthesis 
of the active form of the transcription factor XBP1 via IRE1-mediated splicing of
its mRNA. In this report, we have examined the role of IRE1-alpha and XBP1 in
activation of the hepatitis B virus S promoter by ER stress. Cotransfection
experiments revealed that overexpression of either IRE1-alpha or XBP1 activated
this promoter. Conversely, cotransfected dominant-negative IRE1-alpha or small
interfering RNA directed against XBP1 decreased the activation of the S promoter 
by ER stress, confirming an important role for the IRE1-alpha/XBP1 signaling
pathway in activation of the S promoter. However, XBP1 does not bind directly to 
the S promoter; rather, a novel S promoter-binding complex that does not contain 
XBP1 is induced in cells undergoing ER stress in an XBP1-dependent manner. This
complex, as well as transcriptional activation of the S promoter, is induced by
ER stress in hepatocytes but not in fibroblasts, despite the presence of active
XBP1 in the latter. Thus, the hepatitis B virus S promoter responds to a novel,
cell type-restricted transcriptional pathway downstream of IRE1-alpha and XBP1.

PMCID: PMC1190304
PMID: 16107700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Adv Immunol. 2005;87:163-208.

The biology of human lymphoid malignancies revealed by gene expression profiling.

Staudt LM(1), Dave S.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Gene expression profiling provides a quantitative molecular framework for the
study of human lymphomas. This genomic technology has revealed that existing
diagnostic categories are comprised of multiple molecularly and clinically
distinct diseases. Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), for example, consists
of three gene expression subgroups, termed germinal center B-cell-like (GCB)
DLBCL, activated B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCL, and primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma
(PMBL). These DLBCL subgroups arise from different stages of normal B-cell
differentiation, utilize distinct oncogenic mechanisms, and differ in their
ability to be cured by chemotherapy. Key regulatory factors and their target
genes are differentially expressed among these subgroups, including BCL-6,
Blimp-1, and XBP1. ABC DLBCL and PMBL depend upon constitutive activation of the 
NF-kappaB pathway for their survival but GCB DLBCL does not, demonstrating that
this pathway is a potential therapeutic target for certain DLBCL subgroups. In
DLBCL, mantle cell lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma, gene expression profiling
has also been used to create gene expression-based models of survival, which have
identified the biological characteristics of the tumors that influence their
clinical behavior. In mantle cell lymphoma, the length of survival following
diagnosis is primarily influenced by the tumor proliferation rate, which can be
quantitatively measured by a proliferation gene expression "signature." Based on 
this accurate measure, the proliferation rate can now be viewed as an integration
of several oncogenic lesions that each increase progression from the G1 to the S 
phase of the cell cycle. In DLBCL and follicular lymphoma, gene expression
profiling has revealed that the molecular characteristics of non-malignant
tumor-infiltrating immune cells have a major influence on the length of survival.
The implications of these insights for the diagnosis and treatment of non-Hodgkin
lymphomas are discussed.

PMCID: PMC1351148
PMID: 16102574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Drugs Today (Barc). 2005 May;41(5):335-44.

Genetics of bipolar disorder.

Kato T(1), Kuratomi G, Kato N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako, Saitama, Japan. kato@brain.riken.go.jp

Many linkage loci and candidate genes have been reported in molecular genetic
studies of bipolar disorder. However, none of these findings have been
consistently replicated. Meta-analyses of linkage studies have also reported
conflicting results. Among recently reported candidate genes, BDNF, G72, AKT1,
GRIN2A, XBP1, GRK3, HTR4, IMPA2 and GABRA1 may have some importance. Study of the
possible roles of epigenetics or analysis of genetic diseases, in which bipolar
disorder is one of phenotypes, may also be promising. In addition to
monoaminergic and intracellular signaling pathways, recent studies have revealed 
possible roles for mitochondrial dysfunction, for glutamatergic dysfunction and
for the endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway.

Copyright 2005 Prous Science. All rights reserved.

PMID: 16082431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Bipolar Disord. 2005;7 Suppl 4:13-20.

Translating knowledge of genetics and pharmacology into improving everyday
practice.

Yatham LN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. yatham@interchange.ubc.ca

Bipolar disorder is associated with significant morbidity and mortality; however,
many aspects of this disorder remain poorly understood. It is likely that rapid
advances in molecular genetics and neuroimaging will play a major role in
advancing our understanding of bipolar disorder in future. Molecular genetics
studies have already identified some candidate genes; for example, the BDNF, G72 
and XBP1 genes, and chromosomal 'hot spots', which may confer a predisposition to
development of bipolar disorder. Such advances may facilitate earlier, easier and
more accurate diagnosis and provide novel targets for the treatment of this
condition. Brain imaging studies using positron emission tomography and single
photon emission computed tomography have shown that reduction in brain
5-hydroxytryptamine type 2 (5-HT(2)) receptors may be associated with prevention 
of or relief from depressive symptoms. Similarly, other imaging studies suggest
that increased dopamine levels in the synapse mediate the symptoms of bipolar
mania and that reduction in dopamine transmission through reduction in dopamine
synthesis or blockade of dopamine D(2) receptors may be associated with antimanic
effects. The ability of atypical antipsychotics to block both 5-HT(2) and D(2)
receptors and downregulate 5-HT(2) receptors may explain how these drugs treat
both the depressive and manic symptoms of bipolar disorder. Although molecular
genetics and imaging techniques are not yet used as clinical tools for bipolar
disorder, they provide valuable data to improve the understanding of the
pathophysiology of bipolar disorder and should lead to new treatments and
potentially episode prevention.

PMID: 15948763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Jul 22-29;383(1-2):194-8. Epub 2005 Apr 21.

The X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) gene is not associated with methamphetamine
dependence.

Morita Y(1), Ujike H, Tanaka Y, Uchida N, Nomura A, Otani K, Kishimoto M, Morio
A, Inada T, Harano M, Komiyama T, Yamada M, Sekine Y, Iwata N, Iyo M, Sora I,
Ozaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Japan.

Bipolar disorder has known as a high risk factor for substance abuse and
dependence such as alcohol and illegal drugs. Recently, Kakiuchi et al. reported 
that the -116C/G polymorphism in the promoter region of the X-box binding protein
1 (XBP-1) gene, which translates a transcription factor specific for endoplasmic 
reticulum stress caused by misfolded proteins, was associated with bipolar
disorders and schizophrenia in a Japanese population. Abuse of methamphetamine
often produces affective disorders such as manic state, depressive state, and
psychosis resembling paranoid-type schizophrenia. To clarify a possible
involvement of XBP-1 in the etiology of methamphetamine dependence, we examined
the genetic association of the -116C/G polymorphism of the XBP-1 gene by a
case-control study. We found no significant association in allele and genotype
frequencies of the polymorphism either with methamphetamine dependence or any
clinical phenotype of dependence. Because the polymorphism is located in the
promoter region of the XBP-1 gene and affects transcription activity of the gene,
it is unlikely that dysfunction of XBP-1 may induces susceptibility to
methamphetamine dependence.

PMID: 15936534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006 Feb;9(1):83-8. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

A possible association between the -116C/G single nucleotide polymorphism of the 
XBP1 gene and lithium prophylaxis in bipolar disorder.

Masui T(1), Hashimoto R, Kusumi I, Suzuki K, Tanaka T, Nakagawa S, Kunugi H,
Koyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

Bipolar disorder (BPD) is a severe, chronic, and life-threatening illness, and
its pathogenesis remains unclear. Recently, a functional polymorphism (-116C/G)
of the X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) gene was reported to be a genetic risk
factor for BPD. Moreover, the endoplasmic reticulum stress responses were
impaired in cultured lymphocytes from BPD patients with the -116G allele and only
valproate rescued such impairment among three major mood stabilizers. In this
context, we hypothesized that BPD patients with different genotypes respond
differently to mood stabilizers. We investigated the association between the
-116C/G polymorphism of the XBP1 gene and lithium response in Japanese patients
with BPD. We found that lithium treatment is more effective among BPD patients
with the -116C allele carrier than in patients homozygous for the -116G allele.
The association between the -116C/G polymorphism and clinical efficacy of mood
stabilizers should be further investigated in a prospective study with a larger
sample.

PMID: 15927087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2005 Jul 5;136B(1):103-5.

XBP1 gene polymorphism (-116C/G) and personality.

Kato C(1), Kakiuchi C, Umekage T, Tochigi M, Kato N, Kato T, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.

Recently, a polymorphism of the XBP1 gene (-116 C/G) was observed to play a
significant role in the development of bipolar mood disorder from the Japanese
population. The present study investigated a role of the polymorphism in the
development of personality in healthy Japanese volunteers (n = 195). Personality 
traits were evaluated using NEO Personality Inventory-Revised (NEO PI-R). As a
result, a statistical trend for association between the polymorphism (genotype)
and the NEO PI-R scores of agreeableness and neuroticism was observed (ANOVA, P =
0.01 and 0.006, respectively). Subjects with the G allele, especially those with 
G-G genotype, tended to show lower neuroticism and higher agreeableness in the
present study. The result is provisional and should be interpreted with caution, 
partly because the previous study suggested the allele as a risk allele for
bipolar disorder. Further studies are required to confirm the results.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15892135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biotechniques. 2005 Apr;38(4):605-10.

Locked nucleic acid inhibits amplification of contaminating DNA in real-time PCR.

Hummelshoj L(1), Ryder LP, Madsen HO, Poulsen LK.

Author information: 
(1)National University Hospital, Laboratory of Medical Allergology, Copenhagen,
Denmark. l.hummelshoj@rh.dk

Locked nucleic acid (LNA) is a modified DNA with increased binding affinityfor
complementary DNA sequences. Our strategy was to use this property of LNA to
inhibit undesired PCR amplification (e.g.,from contaminating genomic DNA) in a
cDNA-based assay. By placing a short complementary LNA sequence in intronic DNA, 
the aim was to inhibit the amplification of genomic DNA without affecting the
amplification of reverse-transcribed spliced mRNA. LNA was designed to bind
within intron 5 in the x-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) gene. An irrelevant LNA
oligonucleotide served as a negative control. In both PCR and real-time PCR, the 
addition of LNA showed blocking of the amplification of genomic XBP1 but not cDNA
XBP1. To test the effect of melting temperature (Tm) on the LNA, we investigated 
the number of LNA nucleotides that could be replaced with DNA nucleotides and
still retain the blocking activity. More than three DNA nucleotides reduced the
LNA inhibition ability. The sequence specificity of the LNA was tested by
investigating the number of LNA nucleotide mismatches permitted. The introduction
of one mismatch maintained the inhibition of genomic amplification whereas two
mismatches reduced the amplification. Our results show that LNA may be used to
enhance the specificity of PCR by eliminating unwanted PCR products.

PMID: 15884678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jun 17;331(4):1146-53.

XBP1 activates the transcription of its target genes via an ACGT core sequence
under ER stress.

Kanemoto S(1), Kondo S, Ogata M, Murakami T, Urano F, Imaizumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Anatomy, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, Kihara 5200, Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692,
Japan.

In mammals, the transmembrane protein kinase/endoribonuclease IRE1 is activated
by endoplasmic reticulum stress and subsequently processes XBP1 mRNA to generate 
an active form of XBP1 protein. The spliced form of XBP1 protein acts as a
transcription factor and induces the expression of ER-resident molecular
chaperones. However, the mechanism for how XBP1 promotes the transcription of its
target genes as well as the cis-acting elements for XBP1 during ER stress has
been unclear. Recently, it was demonstrated that the expression of MDG1/ERdj4, a 
member of the DnaJ family, is regulated by the IRE1-XBP1 pathway. In the present 
report, we investigated the regulatory mechanisms of MDG1/ERdj4 gene expression
by XBP1. We identified a cis-acting element in the MDG1/ERdj4 promoter region, to
which XBP1 specifically binds in response to ER stress. Our results reveal a
target sequence for the IRE1-XBP1 pathway under ER stress conditions.

PMID: 15882996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005 Dec;8(4):631-2. Epub 2005 Apr 19.

Lithium response and -116C/G polymorphism of XBP1 in Japanese patients with
bipolar disorder.

Kakiuchi C, Kato T.

PMID: 15836800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Methods. 2005 Apr;35(4):395-416.

ER stress signaling by regulated splicing: IRE1/HAC1/XBP1.

Back SH(1), Schröder M, Lee K, Zhang K, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0650, USA.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) serves many specialized functions in the cell
including calcium storage and gated release, biosynthesis of membrane and
secretory proteins, and production of lipids and sterols. Therefore, the ER
integrates many internal and external signals to coordinate downstream responses,
although the mechanism(s) that maintain homeostasis are largely unknown. When
misfolded or unfolded proteins accumulate in the ER, an intracellular signaling
pathway termed the unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated. Identification
of IRE1 in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a proximal sensor in the UPR
pathway was a milestone in understanding how the ER responds to the accumulation 
of unfolded protein and signals transcriptional activation through regulated
nonconventional splicing of its substrate mRNA encoding the transcription factor 
Hac1p. Subsequent studies identified IRE1 and HAC1 homologues in mammalian cells.
Here, we summarize various approaches to study the IRE1-Hac1 pathway in yeast and
the homologous IRE1-XBP1 pathway in mammalian cells. We present microbiological
growth assays for the UPR, reporter assays for UPR signaling, direct techniques
to measure UPR activation in vivo, methods to study translation of HAC1 mRNA, and
in vitro cleavage and ligation of HAC1 and XBP1 mRNA. Especially we think the
newly developed quantitative and qualitative methods to detect IRE1
activity-dependent XBP1 mRNA splicing will be fast and accurate tools to show the
activation of the UPR.

PMID: 15804613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Methods. 2005 Apr;35(4):390-4.

Quantitative measurement of events in the mammalian unfolded protein response.

Shang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA. jie.shang@utsouthwestern.edu

Erratum in
    Methods. 2005 Sep;37(1):128.

The accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) triggers the unfolded protein response. IRE1, PERK, ATF6, BiP, EDEM,
lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLOs), and XBP1 directly or indirectly participate
in this process. This article provides methods used in our laboratory to
quantitatively measure the accumulation of mRNAs encoding BiP and EDEM; splicing 
of XBP-1; cleavage of ATF6; inhibition of protein synthesis by PERK; and
extension of LLOs under control and stress conditions.

PMID: 15804612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2004;106(12):1593-7.

[Mood disorders and XBP1].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato T.

PMID: 15770962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Clin Invest. 2005 Feb;115(2):268-81.

The unfolded protein response sensor IRE1alpha is required at 2 distinct steps in
B cell lymphopoiesis.

Zhang K(1), Wong HN, Song B, Miller CN, Scheuner D, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Feb;115(2):224-7.

B lymphocyte differentiation is coordinated with the induction of high-level Ig
secretion and expansion of the secretory pathway. Upon accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the lumen of the ER, cells activate an intracellular signaling
pathway termed the unfolded protein response (UPR). Two major proximal sensors of
the UPR are inositol-requiring enzyme 1alpha (IRE1alpha), an ER transmembrane
protein kinase/endoribonuclease, and ER-resident eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2alpha (eIF2alpha) kinase (PERK). To elucidate whether the UPR 
plays an important role in lymphopoiesis, we carried out reconstitution of
recombinase-activating gene 2-deficient (rag2-/-) mice with hematopoietic cells
defective in either IRE1alpha- or PERK-mediated signaling. IRE1alpha-deficient
(ire1alpha-/-) HSCs can proliferate and give rise to pro-B cells that home to
bone marrow. However, IRE1alpha, but not its catalytic activities, is required
for Ig gene rearrangement and production of B cell receptors (BCRs). Analysis of 
rag2-/- mice transplanted with IRE1alpha trans-dominant-negative bone marrow
cells demonstrated an additional requirement for IRE1alpha in B lymphopoiesis:
both the IRE1alpha kinase and RNase catalytic activities are required to splice
the mRNA encoding X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) for terminal differentiation of 
mature B cells into antibody-secreting plasma cells. Furthermore, UPR-mediated
translational control through eIF2alpha phosphorylation is not required for B
lymphocyte maturation and/or plasma cell differentiation. These results suggest
specific requirements of the IRE1alpha-mediated UPR subpathway in the early and
late stages of B lymphopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC546421
PMID: 15690081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Clin Invest. 2005 Feb;115(2):224-7.

Birth pangs: the stressful origins of lymphocytes.

Pillai S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02129, USA. pillai@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Feb;115(2):268-81.

Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) is a transmembrane protein that signals from
the ER and contributes to the generation of an active spliced form of the
transcriptional regulator X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1). XBP1 is required for
the terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes into plasma cells, and IRE1 also
participates in this differentiation event. A study in this issue of the JCI
reveals, quite unexpectedly, that IRE1 is also required early in B lymphocyte
development for the induction of the machinery that mediates Ig gene
rearrangement.

PMCID: PMC546430
PMID: 15690077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):9467-73. Epub 2004 Dec 28.

Deficiency of ATP2C1, a Golgi ion pump, induces secretory pathway defects in
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation and sensitivity to ER stress.

Ramos-Castañeda J(1), Park YN, Liu M, Hauser K, Rudolph H, Shull GE, Jonkman MF, 
Mori K, Ikeda S, Ogawa H, Arvan P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology, and Diabetes, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor Michigan 48109, USA.

Relatively few clues have been uncovered to elucidate the cell biological role(s)
of mammalian ATP2C1 encoding an inwardly directed secretory pathway Ca2+/Mn2+
pump that is ubiquitously expressed. Deficiency of ATP2C1 results in a human
disease (Hailey-Hailey), which primarily affects keratinocytes. ATP2C1-encoded
protein is detected in the Golgi complex in a calcium-dependent manner. A small
interfering RNA causes knockdown of ATP2C1 expression, resulting in defects in
both post-translational processing of wild-type thyroglobulin (a secretory
glycoprotein) as well as endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation of 
mutant thyroglobulin, whereas degradation of a nonglycosylated misfolded
secretory protein substrate appears unaffected. Knockdown of ATP2C1 is not
associated with elevated steady state levels of ER chaperone proteins, nor does
it block cellular activation of either the PERK, ATF6, or Ire1/XBP1 portions of
the ER stress response. However, deficiency of ATP2C1 renders cells
hypersensitive to ER stress. These data point to the important contributions of
the Golgi-localized ATP2C1 protein in homeostatic maintenance throughout the
secretory pathway.

PMCID: PMC2527542
PMID: 15623514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biochem. 2004 Sep;136(3):343-50.

Differential contributions of ATF6 and XBP1 to the activation of endoplasmic
reticulum stress-responsive cis-acting elements ERSE, UPRE and ERSE-II.

Yamamoto K(1), Yoshida H, Kokame K, Kaufman RJ, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

ATF6 and XBP1 are transcription factors activated specifically in response to
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Three cis-acting elements capable of binding
to ATF6, XBP1 or both have been identified to date, namely ER stress-response
element (ERSE), unfolded protein response element (UPRE) and ERSE-II. ERSE
controls the expression of ER-localized molecular chaperones such as BiP that can
refold unfolded proteins in the ER; transcription from ERSE is fully activated by
ATF6 even in the absence of XBP1. In contrast, transcription from UPRE depends
solely on XBP1 and it has been suggested that UPRE may control the expression of 
components of the ER-associated degradation system that can degrade unfolded
proteins in the ER. The Herp gene, one of the most highly inducible genes under
ER stress, encodes an ER membrane protein containing a ubiquitin-like domain with
unknown functions, and carries ERSE-II in addition to ERSE in its promoter. In
this report, we show that ERSE-II allows the NF-Y-dependent binding of ATF6 as in
the case of ERSE and NF-Y-independent binding of XBP1 as in the case of UPRE, and
that transcription from ERSE-II is mitigated in the absence of XBP1. Accordingly,
the induction of Herp mRNA was diminished in the absence of XBP1 whereas that of 
BiP mRNA was not affected. These results may help in understanding the role of
Herp in the quality control system in the ER.

PMID: 15598891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Environ Sci Technol. 2004 Dec 1;38(23):6396-406.

Gene expression profiles for detecting and distinguishing potential
endocrine-disrupting compounds in environmental samples.

Wang DY(1), McKague B, Liss SN, Edwards EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3E5.

Industrial and municipal processes may produce and release endocrine-disrupting
compounds (EDCs) into the environment, but the exact nature of their effects is
difficult to investigate. EDCs typically exert their effect by affecting gene
expression aberrantly. To determine if gene expression profiles could be used to 
detect and distinguish estrogenic EDCs, an estrogen receptor positive human
breast cancer cell line (MCF-7) was exposed to known estrogenic compounds,
suspected EDCs, and extracts from three effluent samples. A set of specifically
estrogen-regulated genes was identified by microarray analysis. Nine estrogen
up-regulated genes (IGFBP4, HSPA8, B4GALT1, XBP1, KRT8, GTPBP4, HNRPAB, SLC2A1,
and CALM1) and two estrogen down-regulated genes (ID2 and ZNF217) were
consistently detectable in response to estrogen and other estrogenic compounds.
Gene expression patterns in cells that were exposed to effluent sample extracts
were compared to gene expression patterns in cells that were exposed to known
endocrines. Using this technique, two of the effluent samples were shown to have 
estrogenic activity. This approach could easily be extended to screen for other
types of receptor-mediated endocrine disruption. For example, cells expressing
androgen or aryl hydrocarbon receptors could be used in gene expression profiling
assays to detect androgenic effects or for the presence of bioactive aromatic
hydrocarbons. Gene expression profiling is emerging as a sensitive and specific
method to screen complex samples for endocrine disrupting activity.

PMID: 15597897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 28;280(4):2424-8. Epub 2004 Dec 3.

A novel stress-induced EDEM variant regulating endoplasmic reticulum-associated
glycoprotein degradation.

Olivari S(1), Galli C, Alanen H, Ruddock L, Molinari M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, CH-6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.

Proteins expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are subjected to a tight
quality control. Persistent association with ER-resident molecular chaperones
prevents exit of misfolded or incompletely assembled polypeptides from the ER and
forward transport along the secretory line. ER-associated degradation (ERAD) is
in place to avoid ER constipation. Folding-incompetent products have to be
identified to interrupt futile folding attempts and then targeted for unfolding
and dislocation into the cytosol for proteasome-mediated destruction. These
processes are better understood for N-glycosylated proteins that represent the
majority of polypeptides expressed in the ER. EDEM, a mannosidase-like chaperone,
regulates the extraction of misfolded glycoproteins from the calnexin cycle. Here
we identify and characterize EDEM2, a novel, stress-regulated mannosidase-like
protein that operates in the ER lumen. We show that transcriptional up-regulation
of EDEM2 depends on the ER stress-activated transcription factor Xbp1, that EDEM2
up-regulation selectively accelerates ERAD of terminally misfolded glycoproteins 
by facilitating their extraction from the calnexin cycle, and that the previously
characterized homolog EDEM is also a soluble protein of the ER lumen in HEK293
cells.

PMID: 15579471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2004 Dec;124(6):391-8.

[Protective effects of HRD1 and 4-phenylbutyric acid against neuronal cell
death].

[Article in Japanese]

Kaneko M(1), Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) is a system in which unfolded
proteins drained from the ER lumen to the cytosol are ubiquitinated then degraded
by 26S proteasome. We have identified and characterized human HRD1 as a ubiquitin
ligase involved in ERAD that protects against ER stress-induced cell death.
Accumulation of Pael receptor (Pael-R), a substrate of Parkin, has been proposed 
to lead to neuronal death in Autosomal Recessive Juvenile Parkinsonism (AR-JP).
HRD1 co-localized with Pael-R in the ER and interacted with Pael-R through the
proline-rich region of HRD1. HRD1 ubiquitinated and degraded Pael-R through its
ubiqutin ligase activity. Furthermore, we found that ATF6 and XBP1 that induce
HRD1 promoted the degradation of Pael-R. A class of compounds known as chemical
chaperones, such as 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA), has been demonstrated to repair
unfolded proteins. We demonstrated that 4-PBA protected against ER stress-induced
neuronal cell death. The tunicamycin-induced up-regulation of GRP78 and GRP94 and
phosphorylation of PERK was suppressed by treatment with 4-PBA, indicating that
4-PBA suppresses ER stress responses by decreasing unfolded protein. Furthermore,
4-PBA suppressed ER stress induced by the overexpression of Pael-R. Thus,
up-regulation of HRD1 and 4-PBA could decrease accumulation of Pael-R.

PMID: 15572843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Cell Biol. 2004 Oct 11;167(1):35-41. Epub 2004 Oct 4.

XBP1: a link between the unfolded protein response, lipid biosynthesis, and
biogenesis of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Sriburi R(1), Jackowski S, Mori K, Brewer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2004 Oct 11;167(1):23-5.

When the protein folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is
challenged, the unfolded protein response (UPR) maintains ER homeostasis by
regulating protein synthesis and enhancing expression of resident ER proteins
that facilitate protein maturation and degradation. Here, we report that enforced
expression of XBP1(S), the active form of the XBP1 transcription factor generated
by UPR-mediated splicing of XBP1 mRNA, is sufficient to induce synthesis of
phosphatidylcholine, the primary phospholipid of the ER membrane. Cells
overexpressing XBP1(S) exhibit elevated levels of membrane phospholipids,
increased surface area and volume of rough ER, and enhanced activity of the
cytidine diphosphocholine pathway of phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. These data
suggest that XBP1(S) links the mammalian UPR to phospholipid biosynthesis and ER 
biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2172532
PMID: 15466483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Oct 7;369(1):1-3.

Lack of association between XBP1 genotype and calcium signaling in the platelets 
of healthy subjects.

Kusumi I(1), Masui T, Kakiuchi C, Suzuki K, Akimoto T, Hashimoto R, Kunugi H,
Kato T, Koyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
North 15, West 7, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. ikusumi@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Dysregulations of calcium (Ca) homeostasis may be involved in the pathophysiology
of bipolar disorder. Enhanced Ca response to various agonists in peripheral blood
cells is one of a few confirmed biological markers for bipolar disorder.
Recently, a polymorphism of XBP1, a pivotal gene in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress response, was shown to contribute to the genetic risk factor for
bipolar disorder. Thus, in this study, we examined the relationship between the
XBP1 gene polymorphism and the Ca signaling in the platelets of healthy controls.
The present results suggest no significant difference in the basal Ca level or
5-HT-induced Ca mobilization among normal subjects with -116C/C, C/G, and G/G
genotypes. Further investigations are necessary to examine the relationship in
the different peripheral blood cells and/or in larger samples from patients with 
bipolar disorder.

PMID: 15380296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Immunity. 2004 Jul;21(1):81-93.

XBP1, downstream of Blimp-1, expands the secretory apparatus and other
organelles, and increases protein synthesis in plasma cell differentiation.

Shaffer AL(1), Shapiro-Shelef M, Iwakoshi NN, Lee AH, Qian SB, Zhao H, Yu X, Yang
L, Tan BK, Rosenwald A, Hurt EM, Petroulakis E, Sonenberg N, Yewdell JW, Calame
K, Glimcher LH, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The differentiation of B cells into immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells is
controlled by two transcription factors, Blimp-1 and XBP1. By gene expression
profiling, we defined a set of genes whose induction during mouse plasmacytic
differentiation is dependent on Blimp-1 and/or XBP1. Blimp-1-deficient B cells
failed to upregulate most plasma cell-specific genes, including xbp1.
Differentiating xbp1-deficient B cells induced Blimp-1 normally but failed to
upregulate genes encoding many secretory pathway components. Conversely, ectopic 
expression of XBP1 induced a wide spectrum of secretory pathway genes and
physically expanded the endoplasmic reticulum. In addition, XBP1 increased cell
size, lysosome content, mitochondrial mass and function, ribosome numbers, and
total protein synthesis. Thus, XBP1 coordinates diverse changes in cellular
structure and function resulting in the characteristic phenotype of professional 
secretory cells.

PMID: 15345222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):5943-7.

XBP1 is essential for survival under hypoxic conditions and is required for tumor
growth.

Romero-Ramirez L(1), Cao H, Nelson D, Hammond E, Lee AH, Yoshida H, Mori K,
Glimcher LH, Denko NC, Giaccia AJ, Le QT, Koong AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305-5152, USA.

Hypoxia within solid tumors is a major determinant of outcome after anticancer
therapy. Analysis of gene expression changes during hypoxia indicated that
unfolded protein response genes were one of the most robustly induced groups of
genes. In this study, we investigated the hypoxic regulation of X-box binding
protein (XBP1), a major transcriptional regulator of the unfolded protein
response. Hypoxia induced XBP1 at the transcriptional level and activated
splicing of its mRNA, resulting in increased levels of activated XBP1 protein.
After exposure to hypoxia, apoptosis increased and clonogenic survival decreased 
in XBP1-deficient cells. Loss of XBP1 severely inhibited tumor growth due to a
reduced capacity for these transplanted tumor cells to survive in a hypoxic
microenvironment. Taken together, these studies directly implicate XBP1 as an
essential survival factor for hypoxic stress and tumor growth.

PMID: 15342372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Sep 16;368(1):37-40.

Spreading depression activates unfolded protein response.

Schneeloch E(1), Wenkel S, Mies G, Paschen W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, Cologne, Gleuelerstr. 50, 50931 Koeln, Germany.

Preconditioning is a process where a preceding non-lethal form of stress
activates a stress response that protects cells against an otherwise lethal form 
of stress. Preconditioning can be induced in various ways including short-term
ischemia or spreading depression. Here we investigated the effect of 1 h
repetitive spreading depression on the unfolded protein response (UPR), a stress 
response activated under conditions associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
dysfunction. Spreading depression induced processing of xbp1 mRNA, indicative of 
an activation of UPR. Processing of xbp1 was paralleled by a rise in grp78 mRNA
levels resulting from an activation of a signal transduction pathway that depends
on protein synthesis. Preconditioning-induced activation of UPR may preserve ER
functioning under pathological conditions interfering with ER functions.

PMID: 15342130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004 Sep 1;96(17):1300-10.

Effect on tumor cells of blocking survival response to glucose deprivation.

Park HR(1), Tomida A, Sato S, Tsukumo Y, Yun J, Yamori T, Hayakawa Y, Tsuruo T,
Shin-ya K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004 Sep 1;96(17):1266-7.

BACKGROUND: Glucose deprivation, a feature of poorly vascularized solid tumors,
activates the unfolded protein response (UPR), a stress-signaling pathway, in
tumor cells. We recently isolated a novel macrocyclic compound, versipelostatin
(VST), that inhibits transcription from the promoter of GRP78, a gene that is
activated as part of the UPR. We examined the effect of VST on the UPR induced by
glucose deprivation or other stressors and on tumor growth in vivo.
METHODS: Human colon cancer HT-29, fibrosarcoma HT1080, and stomach cancer MKN74 
cells were cultured in the absence of glucose or in the presence of glucose and a
UPR-inducing chemical stressor (the N-glycosylation inhibitor tunicamycin, the
calcium ionophore A23187, or the hypoglycemia-mimicking agent 2-deoxyglucose
[2DG]). The effect of VST on UPR induction was determined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot analysis of the UPR target
genes GRP78 and GRP94; by immunoblot analysis of the UPR transcriptional
activators ATF6, XBP1, and ATF4; and by analyzing reporter gene expression in
cells transiently transfected with a GRP78 promoter-reporter gene. Cell
sensitivity to VST was examined with a colony formation assay and flow cytometry.
In vivo antitumor activity of VST was assessed with an MKN74 xenograft model.
RESULTS: VST inhibited expression of UPR target genes in glucose-deprived or
2DG-treated cells but not in cells treated with tunicamycin or A23187. VST also
inhibited the production of the UPR transcriptional activators XBP1 and ATF4
during glucose deprivation. The UPR-inhibitory action of VST was seen only in
conditions of glucose deprivation and caused selective and massive killing of the
glucose-deprived cells. VST alone and in combination with cisplatin statistically
significantly (P =.004 and P<.001 for comparisons with untreated control,
respectively) inhibited tumor growth of MKN74 xenografts.
CONCLUSION: Disruption of the UPR may provide a novel therapeutic approach to
targeting glucose-deprived solid tumors.

PMID: 15339968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Sep 2;367(2):232-4.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1) C--116G polymorphisms in bipolar disorders and age
of onset.

Hou SJ(1), Yen FC, Cheng CY, Tsai SJ, Hong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Psychiatry, Cheng-Hsin Rehabilitation and Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.

X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), a critical gene in the endoplasmic reticulum
stress response, is located on chromosome 22q12, which has been linked with
bipolar disorders in several studies. Recently, associations have been reported
between a polymorphism (-116C --> G) in the promoter region of XBP1, and bipolar 
disorders in both case-control study and family-based association study, however,
this finding is not yet confirmed by other research using independent sample
populations. To replicate this finding and determine the association between
onset age of bipolar disorders and the XBP1 C--116G polymorphism, we investigated
the prevalence of this polymorphism in a Chinese population (153 bipolar disorder
patients and 174 controls). We were unable, however, to demonstrate a significant
association between the C--116G polymorphism and bipolar disorders (P = 0.674 for
genotype and P = 0.436 for allele frequency) or age at onset (P = 0.563).
Further, no association was demonstrated between this polymorphism and family
history in bipolar disorder patients. These negative findings suggest that the
XBP1 C--116G polymorphism does not play a major role in the pathogenesis of
bipolar disorders in Chinese populations.

PMID: 15331160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 17;322(2):570-6.

The physiological unfolded protein response in the thyroid epithelial cells.

Sargsyan E(1), Baryshev M, Mkrtchian S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institute, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.

The perturbation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis by the
pharmacological agents or mutant secretory proteins invokes the adaptive cellular
reaction, unfolded protein response (UPR). Here we show the activation of UPR
under the physiological conditions of the hormone-stimulated expression of
thyroglobulin (Tg), the major secretory product of thyroid cells. The early
increase in the Tg synthesis within 1h after stimulation apparently triggers UPR 
as it is evidenced by the activation of ATF6- and PERK-dependent pathways of UPR 
and subsequent expression of the UPR target genes, ER molecular chaperones.
However, little or no activation of the other UPR sensor, IRE1, was observed, as 
judged by the absence of the spliced mRNA of its downstream effector,
transcription factor XBP1. We conclude that the physiological UPR in
differentiating thyrocytes differs substantially from the drug-induced stress by 
its weaker manifestation and distinct pattern of the activation of UPR sensors.

PMID: 15325268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biol Pharm Bull. 2004 Aug;27(8):1202-6.

Manganese superoxide dismutase is induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress through
IRE1-mediated nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB and AP-1 activation.

Kaneko M(1), Takahashi T, Niinuma Y, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is an antioxidative enzyme that scavenges 
superoxide radicals and is localized in the mitochondrial matrix. MnSOD is
induced by a variety of stimuli through nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB and AP-1
activation. We investigated the expression of MnSOD in HeLa cells exposed to
various agents interfering with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) functions. All agents 
caused an increase in the mRNA and protein levels of MnSOD. Although ER
stress-responsive genes often are up-regulated by ATF6, IRE1 and XBP1, which are 
ER stress-related transcription factors/transducers, the overexpression of
neither molecule affected the levels of MnSOD mRNA and protein. Furthermore, we
showed that ER stress reagents induced NF-kappaB and AP-1 activation that were
inhibited by a dominant-negative IRE1 mutant. We finally demonstrated that ER
stress-induced MnSOD expression was reduced by the IRE1 mutant. These results
suggest that the MnSOD expression is controlled by ER stress through
IRE1-mediated NF-kappaB and AP-1 activation.

PMID: 15305022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2004 Aug;58(4):438-40.

Association of the XBP1-116C/G polymorphism with schizophrenia in the Japanese
population.

Kakiuchi C(1), Ishiwata M, Umekage T, Tochigi M, Kohda K, Sasaki T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science
Institute, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan.

Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder share some clinical features and linkage
studies have shown that several loci are common. Recently, the authors found that
the -116C-->G substitution in the promotor region of XBP1, a pivotal gene in
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, causes the impairment of ER stress
response, and that the -116C/C genotype is a protective factor; in other words
the presence of the G allele increases the risk for bipolar disorder. The gene is
located on 22q12.1, which is also linked with schizophrenia. The polymorphisms
were investigated in 234 schizophrenic patients as compared with controls.
Significant difference of genotype distribution was observed, which suggested
that the -116C/C genotype is a protective factor for both of the major mental
disorders.

PMID: 15298659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nat Genet. 2004 Aug;36(8):783-4; author reply 784-5.

Lack of support for a genetic association of the XBP1 promoter polymorphism with 
bipolar disorder in probands of European origin.

Cichon S, Buervenich S, Kirov G, Akula N, Dimitrova A, Green E, Schumacher J,
Klopp N, Becker T, Ohlraun S, Schulze TG, Tullius M, Gross MM, Jones L, Krastev
S, Nikolov I, Hamshere M, Jones I, Czerski PM, Leszczynska-Rodziewicz A, Kapelski
P, Bogaert AV, Illig T, Hauser J, Maier W, Berrettini W, Byerley W, Coryell W,
Gershon ES, Kelsoe JR, McInnis MG, Murphy DL, Nurnberger JI, Reich T, Scheftner
W, O'Donovan MC, Propping P, Owen MJ, Rietschel M, Nöthen MM, McMahon FJ,
Craddock N.

PMID: 15284840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jul;41(9):919-27.

A role for the unfolded protein response in optimizing antibody secretion.

Gunn KE(1), Gifford NM, Mori K, Brewer JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University Chicago 2160 South First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes into antibody(Ab)-secreting plasma
cells is marked by a sharp rise in immunoglobulin (Ig) biosynthesis that
increases demand on the protein folding capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). The unfolded protein response pathway (UPR) allows cells to respond to
challenging conditions within the ER, in part by the activities of the XBP1 and
ATF6alpha/beta transcription factors. The UPR is activated in differentiating B
cells, and XBP1 is required for the generation of Ab-secreting plasma cells.
Therefore, it has been hypothesized that the UPR mediates ER homeostasis as B
cells transition into high-rate Ab secretion. We sought to test this hypothesis
in primary murine splenic B cells stimulated to secrete Ab in vitro. Here, we
report that enforced expression of a dominant-negative ATF6alpha mutant in
differentiating B cells reduces the output of secreted IgM and increases improper
release of IgM assembly intermediates. These data indicate that the UPR functions
to optimize the efficiency of Ab secretion and provide new insight into the
fundamental role of the UPR in humoral immunity.

PMID: 15261464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jul 2;319(3):866-70.

A case-control study provides evidence of association for a functional
polymorphism -197C/G in XBP1 to schizophrenia and suggests a sex-dependent
effect.

Chen W(1), Duan S, Zhou J, Sun Y, Zheng Y, Gu N, Feng G, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Life Science Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 1954
Huashan Road, Shanghai 200030, PR China.

Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are two major psychiatric illnesses that may
share specific genetic risk factors to a certain extent. Increasing evidence
suggests that the two disorders might be more closely related than previously
considered. In order to test this hypothesis, we investigated a functional
polymorphism -197C/G in XBP1, which was reported to increase the risk of bipolar 
disorder, in a case-control study (374 cases vs. 371 controls) to evaluate its
genetic role in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. In the present study, this
polymorphism was found to be associated with schizophrenia both at allele
(P=0.034; OR=1.26, 95% CI 1.02-1.55) and genotype levels (GG vs. CG+CC, 47.59%
vs. 38.81%; P=0.016, df=1; OR=1.43, 95% CI 1.07-1.92). Our current data suggest
that -197C/G in XBP1 is also a genetic risk factor for schizophrenia. In
addition, it presents a sex-dependent genetic effect for the disorder.

PMID: 15184063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jun;32(3):903-20.

Unfolded protein response is involved in the pathology of human congenital
hypothyroid goiter and rat non-goitrous congenital hypothyroidism.

Baryshev M(1), Sargsyan E, Wallin G, Lejnieks A, Furudate S, Hishinuma A,
Mkrtchian S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 13, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an intracellular signaling pathway that
regulates the protein folding and processing capacity of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). The UPR is induced by the pharmacological agents that perturb ER 
functions but is also activated upon excessive accumulation of the mutant
secretory proteins that are unable to attain correct three-dimensional structure 
and are thus retained in the ER. Such defects in intracellular protein transport 
underlie the development of a number of phenotypically diverse inherited
pathologies, termed endoplasmic reticulum storage diseases (ERSD). We have
studied UPR development in two similar ERSDs, human congenital goiter caused by
the C1264R and C1996S mutations in the thyroglobulin (Tg) gene and non-goitrous
congenital hypothyroidism in rdw dwarf rats determined by the G2320R Tg mutation.
In both cases, these mutations rendered Tg incapable of leaving the ER. A major
ER chaperone immunoglobulin-binding protein (BiP), and a novel putative escort
chaperone endoplasmic reticulum protein 29 KDa (ERp29) were found to be
associated with Tg, which might be interpreted as the contribution of the quality
control machinery to the previously shown retention of Tg in the ER. We have
extended our earlier observations of ER chaperone induction with the
identification of the additional ER (ERp29, ERp72, calreticulin, protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI)), cytoplasmic (heat shock protein (HSP)70, HSP90) and
mitochondrial (mtHSP70) upregulated chaperones and folding enzymes. Activation of
the transcriptional arm of UPR, as judged by the appearance of the spliced
(active) form of X-box binding protein (XBP1) and processed activating
transcription factor 6 (ATF6) transcription factors was suggested to contribute
to the overexpression of the ER chaperones. The processing of ATF6 was observed
in both human and rat tissues with Tg mutations. Whereas, in human tissues, weak 
splicing of XBP1 mRNA was detected only in the C1264R mutant, all rat thyroids
including wild-type contained significant amounts of the spliced form of XBP1 as 
opposed to human liver and rat brain tissues, implying the existence of a
previously unknown tissue-specific regulation of XBP1 processing.

PMID: 15171721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Apr 30;219(1-2):1-7.

About GATA3, HNF3A, and XBP1, three genes co-expressed with the oestrogen
receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) in breast cancer.

Lacroix M(1), Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 127 Boulevard de Waterloo, B-1000
Bruxelles, Belgium. marc.lacroix@ulb.ac.be

In breast tumours and breast cancer cell (BCC) lines, microarray analyses have
revealed that a series of genes are expressed in close association with the
oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) gene, ESR1. Three of them, GATA3, HNF3A (also
known as FOXA1), and XBP1 encode transcription factors. Here, we present these
factors and we discuss their potential involvement in the ER-alpha-mediated
actions in BCC. We notably show the relations that exist, or that might exist,
between these factors and the oestrogen-inducible trefoil factor TFF1.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15149721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cancer Ther. 2004 Apr;3(4):489-97.

Induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress by ellipticine plant alkaloids.

Hägg M(1), Berndtsson M, Mandic A, Zhou R, Shoshan MC, Linder S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska, Karolinska
Institute and Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Anticancer drugs often show complex mechanisms of action, including effects on
multiple cellular targets. Detailed understanding of these intricate effects is
important for the understanding of cytotoxicity. In this study, we examined
apoptosis induction by ellipticines, a class of cytotoxic plant alkaloids known
to inhibit topoisomerase II. The potent ellipticine derivative 6-propanamine
ellipticine (6-PA-ELL) induced rapid apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells,
preceded by a conformational change in Bak and cytochrome c release. Experiments 
using knock-out mouse embryo fibroblasts established that Bak was of particular
importance for cytotoxicity. 6-PA-ELL increased the expression of the endoplasmic
reticulum chaperones GRP78/BiP and GRP94, suggesting induction of endoplasmic
reticulum stress. Induction of GRP78 expression was dependent on the endoplasmic 
reticulum stress response element (ERSE) of the GRP78 promoter. Examination of
different ellipticine derivatives revealed a correlation between pro-apoptotic
activity and the ability to induce GRP78 expression. Furthermore, 6-PA-ELL was
found to induce splicing of the mRNA encoding the XBP1 transcription factor,
characteristic of endoplasmic reticulum stress, and to induce activation of the
endoplasmic reticulum-specific caspase-12 in mouse colon cancer cells. We finally
demonstrate that 6-PA-ELL induces apoptotic signaling also in enucleated cells,
consistent with the existence of a cytoplasmic target for this compound. Our data
suggest that induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress may contribute to the
cytotoxicity of ellipticines.

PMID: 15078993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 30;317(2):390-6.

Discordance of UPR signaling by ATF6 and Ire1p-XBP1 with levels of target
transcripts.

Shang J(1), Lehrman MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas, Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA.

Accumulation of misfolded proteins within the lumen of the mammalian endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) activates the unfolded protein response (UPR). ATF6 and Ire1p are 
ER-associated proteins that control UPR-specific transcription systems in
mammals; UPR signaling involves cleavage of ATF6 and splicing of XBP1 mRNA
initiated by Ire1p. We tested the hypothesis that activation of ATF6 and/or Ire1p
determines the levels of mRNAs derived from target genes encoding GRP78/BiP and
EDEM. By subjecting dermal fibroblasts to multiple stresses, strong correlations 
were found between ATF6 activation and XBP1 splicing, and between GRP78/BiP mRNA 
and EDEM mRNA accumulation. Surprisingly, there was no reasonable correlation
between activation of either signal transducer with accumulation of either target
transcript. Thus, ATF6 and Ire1p signaling do not define the magnitude of
UPR-dependent mRNA increases, even though they may be necessary for gene
activation, suggesting the existence of additional stress-sensitive factors
acting as "coincidence detectors" for transcript accumulation.

PMID: 15063770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Cells. 2004 Mar;9(3):261-70.

The endoplasmic reticulum stress response is stimulated through the continuous
activation of transcription factors ATF6 and XBP1 in Ins2+/Akita pancreatic beta 
cells.

Nozaki Ji(1), Kubota H, Yoshida H, Naitoh M, Goji J, Yoshinaga T, Mori K, Koizumi
A, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

The dominant C96Y mutation of one of the two murine insulin genes, Ins2, causes
diabetes mellitus in 'Akita' mice. Here we established pancreatic islet beta cell
lines from heterozygous mice (Ins2+/Akita). Western blot analysis of endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) molecular chaperones indicated that Grp78, Grp94 and Orp150 are
significantly increased in Ins2+/Akita cells compared with wild-type (Ins2+/+)
cells. Reporter gene assays using the human GRP78 promoter with or without the ER
stress response element (ERSE) showed that Ins2+/Akita cells exhibit
significantly stronger ERSE-dependent transcriptional activity than Ins2+/+
cells. Transient over-expression of the Ins2 C96Y mutant in wild-type beta cells 
induces a stronger ERSE-dependent stress response than does wild-type Ins2
over-expression. The ERSE-binding transcription factor ATF6 is strongly activated
in Ins2+/Akita cells. The activity of a reporter containing the specific binding 
sequence of another ERSE-binding transcription factor, XBP1, is also enhanced in 
Ins2+/Akita cells. Levels of active forms of XBP1 mRNA and protein are both
markedly elevated in Ins2+/Akita cells. These results indicate that this cell
line is subject to continuous ER stress and that the Ins2 C96Y mutation induces
the expression of ER chaperones through the activation of ATF6 and XBP1.

PMID: 15005713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17158-64. Epub 2004 Feb 11.

Hepatitis C virus suppresses the IRE1-XBP1 pathway of the unfolded protein
response.

Tardif KD(1), Mori K, Kaufman RJ, Siddiqui A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Program in Molecular Biology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) gene expression disrupts normal endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) functions and induces ER stress. ER stress results from the accumulation of 
unfolded or misfolded proteins in the ER; cells can alleviate this stress by
degrading or refolding these proteins. The IRE1-XBP1 pathway directs both protein
refolding and degradation in response to ER stress. Like IRE1-XBP1, other
branches of the ER stress response mediate protein refolding. However, IRE1-XBP1 
can also specifically activate protein degradation. We show here that XBP1
expression is elevated in cells carrying HCV subgenomic replicons, but XBP1
trans-activating activity is repressed. This prevents the IRE1-XBP1
transcriptional induction of EDEM (ER degradation-enhancing
alpha-mannosidase-like protein). The mRNA expression of EDEM is required for the 
degradation of misfolded proteins. Consequently, misfolded proteins are stable in
cells expressing HCV replicons. HCV may suppress the IRE1-XBP1 pathway to
stimulate the synthesis of its viral proteins. IRE1alpha-null MEFs, a cell line
with a defective IRE1-XBP1 pathway, show elevated levels of HCV IRES-mediated
translation. Therefore, HCV may suppress the IRE1-XBP1 pathway to not only
promote HCV expression but also to contribute to the persistence of the virus in 
infected hepatocytes.

PMID: 14960590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Neurochem. 2004 Feb;88(4):983-92.

Brain trauma induces X-box protein 1 processing indicative of activation of the
endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response.

Paschen W(1), Yatsiv I, Shoham S, Shohami E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Nurology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, Koeln, Germany. paschen@mpin-koeln.mpg.de

Brain trauma was induced in mice using a closed head injury (CHI) model. At 1, 6 
or 24 h after trauma, brains were dissected into the cortex, striatum and
hippocampus. Changes in levels of processed X-box protein 1 (xbp1),
glucose-regulated protein 78 (grp78), growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene
153 (gadd153) and heat-shock protein 70 (hsp70) mRNA, indicating impaired
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and cytoplasmic functioning, were evaluated by
quantitative PCR. In the cortex, processed xbp1 mRNA levels rose to 2000% of
control 1 h after CHI, and stayed high throughout the experiments. In the
hippocampus and striatum, processed xbp1 mRNA levels rose in a delayed fashion,
peaking at 6 h (1000% of control) and 24 h after CHI (1500% of control)
respectively. Levels of grp78 mRNA were only slightly increased in the cortex 24 
h after CHI (150% of control), and were unchanged or transiently decreased in the
hippocampus and striatum. Levels of gadd153 mRNA did not change significantly
after trauma. A transient rise in hsp70 mRNA levels was observed only in the
cortex, peaking at 1 h after CHI (600% of control). Processing of xbp1 mRNA is a 
sign of activation of the unfolded protein response indicative of ER dysfunction.
The results suggest that brain trauma induces ER dysfunction, which spreads from 
the ipsilateral cortex to the hippocampus and striatum. These observations may
have clinical implications and should therefore be considered for future
investigations on therapeutic intervention of brain injury caused by
contusion-induced neurotrauma.

PMID: 14756820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):13953-61. Epub 2004 Jan 12.

Gene expression changes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum stress response
induced by microsomal cytochrome p450 overproduction.

Szczesna-Skorupa E(1), Chen CD, Liu H, Kemper B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Induction of drug-metabolizing microsomal cytochromes p450 (p450s) results in a
striking proliferation of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Overexpression
of P450s in yeast and cultured cells produces a similar response. The signals
mediating this process are not known but probably involve signal transduction
pathways involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR) or the ER overload
response (EOR). We have examined the temporal response of specific genes in these
pathways and genes globally to overexpression of p450 in cultured cells. Activity
of NFkappaB, an EOR component, was substantially increased by overexpression of
full-length p450 2C2 or a chimera with the 28-amino acid signal anchor sequence
of p450 2C2 in HepG2 cells, and the activation correlated temporally with the
accumulation of p450 in the cells. In the UPR pathway, activation of the
transcription factor XBP1 by IRE1 also correlated with the accumulation of p450
in the cells, and in contrast, maximum activation of the BiP/grp78 promoter
preceded the accumulation. Differential effects of expression of p450 on
apoptosis were observed in nonhepatic COS1 and hepatic HepG2 cells. In COS1
cells, apoptosis was induced, and this correlated with sustained activation of
the pro-apoptotic JNK pathway, induction of CHOP, and an absence of the increased
NFkappaB activity. In HepG2 cells, JNK was only transiently activated, and CHOP
expression was not induced. As assessed by DNA microarray analysis, up-regulation
of signaling genes was predominant including those involved in anti-apoptosis and
ER stress. These results suggest that both the EOR and UPR pathways are involved 
in the cellular response to induction of p450 expression and that in hepatic
cells genes are also induced to block apoptosis, which may be a physiologically
relevant response to prevent cell death during xenobiotic induced expression of
p450 in the liver.

PMID: 14718536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Feb;18(2):402-11. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

Identification of estrogen-responsive genes by complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid microarray and characterization of a novel early estrogen-induced gene:
EEIG1.

Wang DY(1), Fulthorpe R, Liss SN, Edwards EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, 200 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E5, Canada.

Estrogen receptors (ERs) are nuclear transcription factors that regulate gene
expression in response to estrogen and estrogen-like compounds. Identification of
estrogen-regulated genes in target cells is an essential step toward
understanding the molecular mechanisms of estrogen action. Using cDNA microarray 
examinations, 19 genes were identified as induced by 17 beta-estradiol in MCF-7
cells, 10 of which have been reported previously to be estrogen responsive or to 
be linked with ER status. Five known estrogen-regulated genes, E2IG4, IGFBP4,
SLC2A1, XBP1 and B4GALT1, and AFG3L1, responded quickly to estrogen treatment. A 
novel estrogen-responsive gene was identified and named EEIG1for early
estrogen-induced gene 1. EEIG1 was clearly induced by 17 beta-estradiol within 2 
h of treatment, and was widely responsive to a group of estrogenic compounds
including natural and synthetic estrogens and estrogenic environmental compounds.
EEIG1 was expressed in ER-positive but not in ER-negative breast cancer cell
lines. EEIG1 expression was repressed by antiestrogens 4-OH-tamoxifen and ICI
182,780 but not by protein synthesis inhibitors cycloheximide and puromycin.
These results provide evidence that some estrogenic compounds differentially
enhance the transcription of estrogen-regulated genes and suggest a role for
EEIG1 in estrogen action.

PMID: 14605097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Genet. 2003 Oct;35(2):171-5. Epub 2003 Aug 31.

Impaired feedback regulation of XBP1 as a genetic risk factor for bipolar
disorder.

Kakiuchi C(1), Iwamoto K, Ishiwata M, Bundo M, Kasahara T, Kusumi I, Tsujita T,
Okazaki Y, Nanko S, Kunugi H, Sasaki T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science
Institute, RIKEN, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The pathophysiology of bipolar disorder is still unclear, although family, twin
and linkage studies implicate genetic factors. Here we identified XBP1, a pivotal
gene in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, as contributing to the
genetic risk factor for bipolar disorder. Using DNA microarray analysis of
lymphoblastoid cells derived from two pairs of twins discordant with respect to
the illness, we found downregulated expression of genes related to ER stress
response in both affected twins. A polymorphism (-116C-->G) in the promoter
region of XBP1, affecting the putative binding site of XBP1, was significantly
more common in Japanese patients (odds ratio = 4.6) and overtransmitted to
affected offspring in trio samples of the NIMH Bipolar Disorder Genetics
Initiative. XBP1-dependent transcription activity of the -116G allele was lower
than that of the -116C allele, and in the cells with the G allele, induction of
XBP1 expression after ER stress was markedly reduced. Valproate, one of three
mood stabilizers, rescued the impaired response by inducing ATF6, the gene
upstream of XBP1. These results indicate that the -116C-->G polymorphism in XBP1 
causes an impairment of its positive feedback system and increases the risk of
bipolar disorder.

PMID: 12949534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Blood. 2003 Dec 15;102(13):4504-11. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Insights into the multistep transformation of MGUS to myeloma using microarray
expression analysis.

Davies FE(1), Dring AM, Li C, Rawstron AC, Shammas MA, O'Connor SM, Fenton JA,
Hideshima T, Chauhan D, Tai IT, Robinson E, Auclair D, Rees K, Gonzalez D,
Ashcroft AJ, Dasgupta R, Mitsiades C, Mitsiades N, Chen LB, Wong WH, Munshi NC,
Morgan GJ, Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Haematology and Oncology, Algernon Firth Bldg, School of
Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. faith@egu.leeds.ac.uk

To define specific pathways important in the multistep transformation process of 
normal plasma cells (PCs) to monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance
(MGUS) and multiple myeloma (MM), we have applied microarray analysis to PCs from
5 healthy donors (N), 7 patients with MGUS, and 24 patients with newly diagnosed 
MM. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using 125 genes with a large variation
across all samples defined 2 groups: N and MGUS/MM. Supervised analysis
identified 263 genes differentially expressed between N and MGUS and 380 genes
differentially expressed between N and MM, 197 of which were also differentially 
regulated between N and MGUS. Only 74 genes were differentially expressed between
MGUS and MM samples, indicating that the differences between MGUS and MM are
smaller than those between N and MM or N and MGUS. Differentially expressed genes
included oncogenes/tumor-suppressor genes (LAF4, RB1, and disabled homolog 2),
cell-signaling genes (RAS family members, B-cell signaling and NF-kappaB genes), 
DNA-binding and transcription-factor genes (XBP1, zinc finger proteins, forkhead 
box, and ring finger proteins), and developmental genes (WNT and SHH pathways).
Understanding the molecular pathogenesis of MM by gene expression profiling has
demonstrated sequential genetic changes from N to malignant PCs and highlighted
important pathways involved in the transformation of MGUS to MM.

PMID: 12947006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Calcium. 2003 Oct-Nov;34(4-5):365-83.

Endoplasmic reticulum: a primary target in various acute disorders and
degenerative diseases of the brain.

Paschen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neurology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, 50931 Koeln, Germany. paschen@mpin-koeln.mpg.de

Changes in neuronal calcium activity in the various subcellular compartments have
divergent effects on affected cells. In the cytoplasm and mitochondria, where
calcium activity is normally low, a prolonged excessive rise in free calcium
levels is believed to be toxic, in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), in contrast,
calcium activity is relatively high and severe stress is caused by a depletion of
ER calcium stores. Besides its role in cellular calcium signaling, the ER is the 
site where membrane and secretory proteins are folded and processed. These
calcium-dependent processes are fundamental to normal cell functioning. Under
conditions of ER dysfunction unfolded proteins accumulate in the ER lumen, a
signal responsible for activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and the 
ER-associated degradation (ERAD). UPR is characterized by activation of two
ER-resident kinases, PKR-like ER kinase (PERK) and IRE1. PERK induces
phosphorylation of the eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF2alpha), resulting in a
shut-down of translation at the initiation step. This stress response is needed
to block new synthesis of proteins that cannot be correctly folded, and thus to
protect cells from the effect of unfolded proteins which tend to form toxic
aggregates. IRE1, on the other hand, is turned after activation into an
endonuclease that cuts out a sequence of 26 bases from the coding region of xbp1 
mRNA. Processed xbp1 mRNA is translated into the respective protein, an active
transcription factor specific for ER stress genes such as grp78. In acute
disorders and degenerative diseases, the ER calcium pool is a primary target of
toxic metabolites or intermediates, such as oxygen free radicals, produced during
the pathological process. Affected neurons need to activate the entire UPR to
cope with the severe form of stress induced by ER dysfunction. This stress
response is however hindered under conditions where protein synthesis is
suppressed to such an extent that processed xbp1 mRNA is not translated into the 
processed XBP1 protein (XBP1(proc)). Furthermore, activation of ERAD is important
for the degradation of unfolded proteins through the ubiquitin/proteasomal
pathway, which is impaired in acute disorders and degenerative diseases,
resulting in further ER stress. ER functioning is thus impaired in two different 
ways: first by the direct action of toxic intermediates, produced in the course
of the pathological process, hindering vital ER reactions, and second by the
inability of cells to fully activate UPR and ERAD, leaving them unable to
withstand the severe form of stress induced by ER dysfunction.

PMID: 12909082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Apr;24(4):185-9.

[Study of hemin-induced gene expression in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen HC(1), Meng Q.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Molecular Biology, XiangYa School of Medicine, Central
South University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify hemin-induced gene expression in K562 cells.
METHODS: Poly A(+) RNAs were isolated from hemin-induced (tester) and non-induced
K562 cells (driver) respectively, and double-strand cDNAs were synthesized by
reverse transcription. The forward subtracted cDNA library was constructed by
using suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) techniques. The recombinant
plasmids were extracted and the positive clones were identified by EcoR I
digestion after the amplification and screening of the library. The inserts were 
amplified by PCR. The upregulated cDNA transcripts were identified by reverse dot
blot hybridization, DNA sequencing and homology analysis with GenBank database
"blast" respectively.
RESULTS: Fifteen upregulated clones were identified and most of them were
homologous to the mRNA sequences of protein with known function, including globin
epsilon1, glutathione S-transferase like glutathione transferase Omega
(GSTTLp28), selenoprotein X1 (SEPX1), triosephosphate isomerase (TPI1), ribosomal
protein L7 (RPL7), ribosomal protein S13 (RPS13), ferritin light polypeptide,
globin A gamma, RAD 51 homolog C(RAD51C), ferritin heavy polypeptide, X-box
binding protein (XBP1). A part of the hemin-induced cDNA clones exhibited
sequence similarities to that of the GenBank registered mRNA with unknown
function of their expressed proteins, including the cDNA clones of DKFZp434I116, 
hypothetical protein HSPC014 and NOL1R2 proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemin mainly induces the genes expression related to erythroid
differentiation, protein synthesis and metabolism in K562 cell. There results
provide comprehensive information useful for the differential gene expression in 
hemin-induced erythroid differentiation and for further function study of genes
involved in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 12864948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Hepatol. 2003 May;38(5):605-14.

Activation of the ATF6, XBP1 and grp78 genes in human hepatocellular carcinoma: a
possible involvement of the ER stress pathway in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Shuda M(1), Kondoh N, Imazeki N, Tanaka K, Okada T, Mori K, Hada A, Arai M,
Wakatsuki T, Matsubara O, Yamamoto N, Yamamoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute 
of Medical Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: We identified the glucose-regulated protein (grp) 78 as a
transformation-associated gene in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Grp78 is a
molecular chaperone involved in the unfolded protein response, the expression of 
which can be regulated by the transcription factors ATF6 and XBP1. Thus, we
investigated the regulatory mechanisms of the grp78 gene in liver malignancy.
METHODS: Expression of grp78, ATF6 and XBP1 was examined by Northern blot,
RT-PCR, immunoblot and immunohistochemical analyses. A reporter assay of the
grp78 promoter was also performed.
RESULTS: Elevation of grp78 and ATF6 mRNAs and the splicing of XBP1 mRNA,
resulting in the activation of XBP1 product, occurred in HCC tissues with
increased histological grading. Higher accumulation of the grp78 product in the
cytoplasm, concomitantly with marked nuclear localization of the activated ATF6
product (p50ATF6), was observed in moderately to poorly differentiated HCC
tissues. Cooperation between the distal DNA segment and the proximal endoplasmic 
reticulum stress response elements was essential for maximum transcription of the
grp78 promoter in HCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway mediated by ATF6 and by
IRE1-XBP1 systems seems essential for the transformation-associated expression of
the grp78 gene in HCCs.

PMID: 12713871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003 Apr;23(4):449-61.

Transient cerebral ischemia activates processing of xbp1 messenger RNA indicative
of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Paschen W(1), Aufenberg C, Hotop S, Mengesdorf T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neurology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, Gleuelerstr. 50, 50931 Köln, Germany. paschen@mpin-koeln.mpg.de

Cells respond to conditions associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
dysfunction with activation of the unfolded protein response, characterized by a 
shutdown of translation and induction of the expression of genes coding for ER
stress proteins. The genetic response is based on IRE1-induced processing of xbp1
messenger RNA (mRNA), resulting in synthesis of new XBP1proc protein that
functions as a potent transcription factor for ER stress genes. xbp1 processing
in models of transient global and focal cerebral ischemia was studied. A marked
increase in processed xbp1 mRNA levels during reperfusion was observed, most
pronounced (about 35-fold) after 1-h occlusion of the right middle cerebral
artery. The rise in processed xbp1 mRNA was not paralleled by a similar increase 
in XBP1proc protein levels because transient ischemia induces severe suppression 
of translation. As a result, mRNA levels of genes coding for ER stress proteins
were only slightly increased, whereas mRNA levels of heat-shock protein 70 rose
about 550-fold. Under conditions associated with ER dysfunction, cells require
activation of the entire ER stress-induced signal transduction pathway, to cope
with this severe form of stress. After transient cerebral ischemia, however, the 
block of translation may prevent synthesis of new XBP1proc protein and thus
hinder recovery from ischemia-induced ER dysfunction.

PMID: 12679722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 23;278(21):19367-77. Epub 2003 Feb 21.

Parkinsonian mimetics induce aspects of unfolded protein response in death of
dopaminergic neurons.

Holtz WA(1), O'Malley KL.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy and Neurobiology Department, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Genes associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) have suggested a role for
ubiquitin-proteasome dysfunction and aberrant protein degradation in this
disorder. Inasmuch as oxidative stress has also been implicated in PD, the
present study examined transcriptional changes mediated by the
Parkinsonism-inducing neurotoxins 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) and
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) in a dopaminergic cell line. Microarray
analysis of RNA isolated from toxin treated samples revealed that the
stress-induced transcription factor CHOP/Gadd153 was dramatically up-regulated by
both 6-OHDA and MPP+. Treatment with 6-OHDA also induced a large number of genes 
involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) such
as ER chaperones and elements of the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Reverse
transcription-PCR, Western blotting, and immunocytochemical approaches were used 
to quantify and temporally order the UPR pathways involved in neurotoxin-induced 
cell death. 6-OHDA, but not MPP+, significantly increased hallmarks of UPR such
as BiP, c-Jun, and processed Xbp1 mRNA. Both toxins increased the phosphorylation
of UPR proteins, PERK and eIF2 alpha, but only 6-OHDA increased phosphorylation
of c-Jun. Thus, 6-OHDA is capable of triggering multiple pathways associated with
UPR, whereas MPP+ exhibits a more restricted response. The involvement of UPR in 
these widely used neurotoxin models supports the role of ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway dysfunction in PD.

PMID: 12598533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Cell. 2003 Feb;4(2):265-71.

A time-dependent phase shift in the mammalian unfolded protein response.

Yoshida H(1), Matsui T, Hosokawa N, Kaufman RJ, Nagata K, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8304, Japan.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2003 Feb;4(2):144-6.

Unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) must be refolded
or degraded to maintain homeostasis of the ER. The ATF6 and IRE1-XBP1 pathways
are important for the refolding process in mammalian cells; activation of these
transcriptional programs culminates in induction of ER-localized molecular
chaperones and folding enzymes. We show here that degradation of misfolded
glycoprotein substrates requires transcriptional induction of EDEM (ER
degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein), and that this is mediated 
specifically by IRE1-XBP1 and not by ATF6. As XBP1 is produced after ATF6
activation, our results reveal a time-dependent transition in the mammalian
unfolded protein response: an ATF6-mediated unidirectional phase (refolding only)
is followed by an XBP1-mediated bidirectional phase (refolding plus degradation) 
as the response progresses.

PMID: 12586069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cell Calcium. 2003 Feb;33(2):83-9.

Loading neurons with BAPTA-AM activates xbp1 processing indicative of induction
of endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Paschen W(1), Hotop S, Aufenberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neurology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, Gleuelerstr 50, Cologne 50931, Köln, Germany. paschen@mpin.mphg.de

Loading cells with the calcium chelator BAPTA-AM is an analytical tool which has 
been used to suppress a rise in cytoplasmic calcium activity under various
experimental conditions and thus, to evaluate the role of elevated cytoplasmic
calcium levels in the process under investigation. BAPTA-AM may, however, not
only have an isolated effect on cytoplasmic processes but also on functions of
other subcellular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Under
conditions associated with ER dysfunction, the unfolded protein response is
activated which is characterized by suppression of translation and processing of 
xbp1 mRNA, resulting in activation of the expression of genes coding for ER
stress proteins. To investigate whether BAPTA-AM causes ER stress, primary
neuronal cell cultures were loaded with varying amounts of BAPTA-AM. Exposure of 
cells to BAPTA-AM induced a marked rise in processed xbp1 mRNA levels,
correlating with exposure times and BAPTA-AM concentrations in the medium used
for loading. The increase in processed xbp1 mRNA was associated with suppression 
of protein synthesis and induction of cell injury. The results of this study
indicate that loading primary neuronal cell cultures with BAPTA-AM activates xbp1
processing, implying that this calcium chelator does not have an isolated effect 
on cytoplasmic calcium activity but also an affect on ER function.

PMID: 12531184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Yeast. 2002 Oct;19(14):1221-31.

The kex2 gene from the dimorphic and human pathogenic fungus Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis.

Venancio EJ(1), Daher BS, Andrade RV, Soares CM, Pereira IS, Felipe MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Patológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Estadual de Londrina, 86051-970 Londrina, PR, Brasil.

Kexin-like protein is a component of the subtilase family of proteinases involved
in the processing of proproteins to their active forms. Kexin-like proteins are
also synthesized as a propeptide and this is involved in (auto)inhibition,
correct folding and subcellular sorting of proteins. The kexin-like protein was
described as the product of the kex2 gene for Aspergillus niger, Candida
albicans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Yarrowia lipolytica and other fungi.
Disruption of the kex2 gene in C. albicans and Y. lipolytica affects hyphae
production and induces morphological cell defects, strongly suggesting a possible
role of kexin-like proteins in dimorphism of human pathogenic fungi. In this
work, we report the nucleotide sequence of the kex2 gene cloned from the
dimorphic and human pathogenic fungus Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (Pbkex2). An 
open reading frame (ORF) of 2622 bp was identified in the complete sequence,
interrupted by only one intron of 93 bp. The 5' non-coding region contains
consensus sequences such as canonical TATA, CAAT boxes and putative motifs for
transcriptional factors binding sites, such as HSE-like regulating genes involved
in thermo-dependent processes; Xbp1, reported as a transcriptional factor that
may control genes involved in cell morphology; and StuAp, which may regulate
spore differentiation and pseudohyphal growth in fungi. In the 3' non-coding
region were observed the canonical motifs necessary for correct mRNA processing
and polyadenylation. The deduced protein sequence consists of 842 amino acid
residues, showing identity to kexin-like proteinases from A. niger (55%),
Emericella nidulans (53%) and C. albicans (48%). Comparative sequence analysis of
P. brasiliensis kexin-like protein reveals the presence of homologous regions
related to a signal peptide, a propeptide, a subtilisin-like catalytic domain, a 
P domain, a S/T rich region and a transmembrane domain. A putative Golgi
retrieval signal (YEFEMI) has also been found in the cytoplasmic tail. The
complete nucleotide sequence of Pbkex2 and its flanking regions have been
submitted to GenBank database under Accession No. AF486805.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12271458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 Aug 15;104(2):227-39.

Genes associated with pro-apoptotic and protective mechanisms are affected
differently on exposure of neuronal cell cultures to arsenite. No indication for 
endoplasmic reticulum stress despite activation of grp78 and gadd153 expression.

Mengesdorf T(1), Althausen S, Paschen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Neurology, Max-Planck-Institute for Neurological
Research, Gleuelerstrasse 50, Cologne, Germany.

The effect of arsenite exposure on cell viability, protein synthesis, energy
metabolism and the expression of genes coding for cytoplasmic (hsp70) and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER; gadd153, grp78, grp94) stress proteins was
investigated in primary neuronal cell cultures. Furthermore, signs of ER stress
were evaluated by investigating xbp1 mRNA processing. Arsenite levels of 30 and
100 microM induced severe cell injury. Protein synthesis was reduced to below 20%
of control in cultures exposed to 30 and 100 microM arsenite for 1 h, and it
remained markedly suppressed until 24 h of exposure. Arsenite induced a transient
inhibition of energy metabolism after 1 h of exposure, but energy state recovered
completely after 3 h. Arsenite exposure affected the expression and translation
of genes coding for HSP70 and GRP78, GRP94, GADD153 to different extents. While
hsp70 mRNA levels rose drastically, approximally 550-fold after 6 h exposure,
HSP70 protein levels did not change over the first 6 h. On the other hand,
gadd153 mRNA levels rose only approximately 14-fold after 6 h exposure, while
GADD153 protein levels were markedly increased after 3 and 6 h exposure. HSP70
protein levels were markedly increased and GADD153 protein levels decreased to
almost control levels in cultures left in arsenite solution for 24 h, i.e. when
only a small fraction of cells had escaped arsenite toxicity. Arsenite exposure
of neurons thus induced an imbalance between pro-apoptotic and
survival-activating pathways. Despite the marked increase in gadd153 mRNA levels,
we did not observe signs of xbp1 processing in arsenite exposed cultures,
indicating that arsenite did not produce ER stress.

PMID: 12225878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2002 Sep 15;100(6):2175-86.

A molecular compendium of genes expressed in multiple myeloma.

Claudio JO(1), Masih-Khan E, Tang H, Gonçalves J, Voralia M, Li ZH, Nadeem V,
Cukerman E, Francisco-Pabalan O, Liew CC, Woodgett JR, Stewart AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Therapeutics, Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 2M9
Canada.

We have created a molecular resource of genes expressed in primary malignant
plasma cells using a combination of cDNA library construction, 5' end single-pass
sequencing, bioinformatics, and microarray analysis. In total, we identified 9732
nonredundant expressed genes. This dataset is available as the Myeloma Gene Index
(www.uhnres.utoronto.ca/akstewart_lab).Predictably, the sequenced profile of
myeloma cDNAs mirrored the known function of immunoglobulin-producing,
high-respiratory rate, low-cycling, terminally differentiated plasma cells.
Nevertheless, approximately 10% of myeloma-expressed sequences matched only
entries in the database of Expressed Sequence Tags (dbEST) or the high-throughput
genomic sequence (htgs) database. Numerous novel genes of potential biologic
significance were identified. We therefore spotted 4300 sequenced cDNAs on glass 
slides creating a myeloma-enriched microarray. Several of the most highly
expressed genes identified by sequencing, such as a novel putative disulfide
isomerase (MGC3178), tumor rejection antigen TRA1, heat shock 70-kDa protein 5,
and annexin A2, were also differentially expressed between myeloma and B lymphoma
cell lines using this myeloma-enriched microarray. Furthermore, a defined subset 
of 34 up-regulated and 18 down-regulated genes on the array were able to
differentiate myeloma from nonmyeloma cell lines. These not only include genes
involved in B-cell biology such as syndecan, BCMA, PIM2, MUM1/IRF4, and XBP1, but
also novel uncharacterized genes matching sequences only in the public databases.
In summary, our expressed gene catalog and myeloma-enriched microarray contains
numerous genes of unknown function and may complement other commercially
available arrays in defining the molecular portrait of this hematopoietic
malignancy. GenBank Accession numbers include BF169967-BF176369,
BF185966-BF185969, and BF177280-BF177455.

PMID: 12200383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Curr Opin Immunol. 2002 Apr;14(2):216-23.

Transcriptional control of B-cell development.

Schebesta M(1), Heavey B, Busslinger M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7,
A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Significant progress has recently been made in our understanding of how
transcription factors such as PU.1, Notch1, E2A, EBF, Pax5, Bcl6, Blimp1 and XBP1
control different developmental decisions during the onset and terminal phase of 
B-lymphopoiesis. One emerging theme is that negative regulatory networks play an 
important role in suppressing alternative gene programs and their corresponding
cell fates throughout B-cell development.

PMID: 11869895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes Dev. 2002 Feb 15;16(4):452-66.

IRE1-mediated unconventional mRNA splicing and S2P-mediated ATF6 cleavage merge
to regulate XBP1 in signaling the unfolded protein response.

Lee K(1), Tirasophon W, Shen X, Michalak M, Prywes R, Okada T, Yoshida H, Mori K,
Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

All eukaryotic cells respond to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by signaling an adaptive pathway termed the unfolded
protein response (UPR). In yeast, a type-I ER transmembrane protein kinase,
Ire1p, is the proximal sensor of unfolded proteins in the ER lumen that initiates
an unconventional splicing reaction on HAC1 mRNA. Hac1p is a transcription factor
required for induction of UPR genes. In higher eukaryotic cells, the UPR also
induces site-2 protease (S2P)-mediated cleavage of ER-localized ATF6 to generate 
an N-terminal fragment that activates transcription of UPR genes. To elucidate
the requirements for IRE1alpha and ATF6 for signaling the mammalian UPR, we
identified a UPR reporter gene that was defective for induction in IRE1alpha-null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and S2P-deficient Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. 
We show that the endoribonuclease activity of IRE1alpha is required to splice
XBP1 (X-box binding protein) mRNA to generate a new C terminus, thereby
converting it into a potent UPR transcriptional activator. IRE1alpha was not
required for ATF6 cleavage, nuclear translocation, or transcriptional activation.
However, ATF6 cleavage was required for IRE1alpha-dependent induction of UPR
transcription. We propose that nuclear-localized IRE1alpha and
cytoplasmic-localized ATF6 signaling pathways merge through regulation of XBP1
activity to induce downstream gene expression. Whereas ATF6 increases the amount 
of XBP1 mRNA, IRE1alpha removes an unconventional 26-nucleotide intron that
increases XBP1 transactivation potential. Both processing of ATF6 and
IRE1alpha-mediated splicing of XBP1 mRNA are required for full activation of the 
UPR.

PMCID: PMC155339
PMID: 11850408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cell. 2001 Dec 28;107(7):893-903.

Complementary signaling pathways regulate the unfolded protein response and are
required for C. elegans development.

Shen X(1), Ellis RE, Lee K, Liu CY, Yang K, Solomon A, Yoshida H, Morimoto R,
Kurnit DM, Mori K, Kaufman RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a transcriptional and translational
intracellular signaling pathway activated by the accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We have used C. elegans 
as a genetic model system to dissect UPR signaling in a multicellular organism.
C. elegans requires ire-1-mediated splicing of xbp-1 mRNA for UPR gene
transcription and survival upon ER stress. In addition, ire-1/xbp-1 acts with
pek-1, a protein kinase that mediates translation attenuation, in complementary
pathways that are essential for worm development and survival. We propose that
UPR transcriptional activation by ire-1 as well as translational attenuation by
pek-1 maintain ER homeostasis. The results demonstrate that the UPR and ER
homeostasis are essential for metazoan development.

PMID: 11779465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell. 2001 Dec 28;107(7):881-91.

XBP1 mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by IRE1 in response to ER stress to
produce a highly active transcription factor.

Yoshida H(1), Matsui T, Yamamoto A, Okada T, Mori K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8304, Japan.

In yeast, the transmembrane protein kinase/endoribonuclease Ire1p activated by
endoplasmic reticulum stress cleaves HAC1 mRNA, leading to production of the
transcription factor Hac1p that activates the unfolded protein response (UPR). In
mammals, no Hac1p counterpart has yet been discovered despite the presence of
Ire1p homologs in the endoplasmic reticulum. Instead, the transcription factor
ATF6 specific to the mammalian UPR is regulated by intramembrane proteolysis.
Here, we identified the transcription factor XBP1, a target of ATF6, as a
mammalian substrate of such an unconventional mRNA splicing system and showed
that only the spliced form of XBP1 can activate the UPR efficiently. Our results 
reveal features of the UPR conserved during evolution and clarify the
relationship between IRE1- and ATF6-dependent pathways.

PMID: 11779464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3714-24.

Xbp1-mediated repression of CLB gene expression contributes to the modifications 
of yeast cell morphology and cell cycle seen during nitrogen-limited growth.

Miled C(1), Mann C, Faye G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie d'Orsay, Centre Universitaire, F-91405 Orsay, France.

Yeast cells undergo morphological transformations in response to diverse
environmental signals. One such event, called pseudohyphal differentiation,
occurs when diploid yeast cells are partially starved for nitrogen on a solid
agar medium. The nitrogen-starved cells elongate, and a small fraction form
filaments that penetrate the agar surface. The molecular basis for the changes in
cell morphology and cell cycle in response to nitrogen limitation are poorly
defined, in part because the heterogeneous growth states of partially starved
cells on agar media are not amenable to biochemical analysis. In this work, we
used chemostat cultures to study the role of cell cycle regulators with respect
to yeast differentiation in response to nitrogen limitation under controlled,
homogeneous culture conditions. We found that Clb1, Clb2, and Clb5 cyclin levels 
are reduced in nitrogen-limited chemostat cultures compared to levels in
rich-medium cultures, whereas the Xbp1 transcriptional repressor is highly
induced under these conditions. Furthermore, the deletion of XBP1 prevents the
drop in Clb2 levels and inhibits cellular elongation in nitrogen-limited
chemostat cultures as well as inhibiting pseudohyphal growth on nitrogen-limited 
agar media. Deletion of the CLB2 gene restores an elongated morphology and
filamentation to the xbp1Delta mutant in response to nitrogen limitation.
Transcriptional activation of the XBP1 gene and the subsequent repression of CLB 
gene expression are thus key responses of yeast cells to nitrogen limitation.

PMCID: PMC87007
PMID: 11340165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):478-87.

CLN1 and its repression by Xbp1 are important for efficient sporulation in
budding yeast.

Mai B(1), Breeden L.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Division of Basic Sciences, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Xbp1, a transcriptional repressor of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with homology to
Swi4 and Mbp1, is induced by stress and starvation during the mitotic cycle. It
is also induced late in the meiotic cycle. Using RNA differential display, we
find that genes encoding three cyclins (CLN1, CLN3, and CLB2), CYS3, and SMF2 are
downregulated when Xbp1 is overexpressed and that Xbp1 can bind to sequences in
their promoters. During meiosis, XBP1 is highly induced and its mRNA appears at
the same time as DIT1 mRNA, but its expression remains high for up to 24 h. As
such, it represents a new class of meiosis-specific genes. Xbp1-deficient cells
are capable of forming viable gametes, although ascus formation is delayed by
several hours. Furthermore, Xbp1 target genes are normally repressed late in
meiosis, and loss of XBP1 results in their derepression. Interestingly, we find
that a deletion of CLN1 also reduces the efficiency of sporulation and delays the
meiotic program but that sporulation in a Deltacln1 Deltaxbp1 strain is not
further delayed. Thus, CLN1 may be Xbp1's primary target in meiotic cells. We
hypothesize that CLN1 plays a role early in the meiotic program but must be
repressed, by Xbp1, at later stages to promote efficient sporulation.

PMCID: PMC85107
PMID: 10611226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6491-501.

Xbp1, a stress-induced transcriptional repressor of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
Swi4/Mbp1 family.

Mai B(1), Breeden L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

We have identified Xbp1 (XhoI site-binding protein 1) as a new DNA-binding
protein with homology to the DNA-binding domain of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
cell cycle regulating transcription factors Swi4 and Mbp1. The DNA recognition
sequence was determined by random oligonucleotide selection and confirmed by gel 
retardation and footprint analyses. The consensus binding site of Xbp1,
GcCTCGA(G/A)G(C/A)g(a/g), is a palindromic sequence, with an XhoI restriction
enzyme recognition site at its center. This Xbpl binding site is similar to
Swi4/Swi6 and Mbp1/Swi6 binding sites but shows a clear difference from these
elements in one of the central core bases. There are binding sites for Xbp1 in
the G1 cyclin promoter (CLN1), but they are distinct from the Swi4/Swi6 binding
sites in CLN1, and Xbp1 will not bind to Swi4/Swi6 or Mbp1/Swi6 binding sites.
The XBP1 promoter contains several stress-regulated elements, and its expression 
is induced by heat shock, high osmolarity, oxidative stress, DNA damage, and
glucose starvation. When fused to the LexA DNA-binding domain, Xbp1 acts as
transcriptional repressor, defining it as the first repressor in the Swi4/Mbp1
family and the first potential negative regulator of transcription induced by
stress. Overexpression of XBP1 results in a slow-growth phenotype, lengthening of
G1, an increase in cell volume, and a repression of G1 cyclin expression. These
observations suggest that Xbp1 may contribute to the repression of specific
transcripts and cause a transient cell cycle delay under stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC232502
PMID: 9343412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Sep 25;18(18):5578.

BanI polymorphism at the XBP1 locus.

Fontaine B(1), Hanson MP, Liou HC, Glimcher LH, Rouleau GA, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurogenetics Laboratory, Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114.

PMCID: PMC332271
PMID: 1977120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


