
1. J Biochem. 2016 Mar 31. pii: mvw025. [Epub ahead of print]

Long noncoding RNA POU6F2-AS2 is associated with esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Liu J(1), Sun X(2), Zhu H(1), Qin Q(1), Yang X(1), Sun X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of Radiotherapy, The 81 Hospital
of PLA, Nanjing 210002, China. (3)Department of Radiotherapy, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China
xchensun@sina.com.

Esophageal carcinoma is one of the most lethal cancer types in the world,
especially in some part of China. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma is a major
subtype, which has been shown to be associated with unhealthy diet habit,
smoking, environmental carcinogens etc. The esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) often progress slowly, however, it is often diagnosed at an advanced
stage. Thus it is imperative to elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in
the initiation and progression of ESCC. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) has emerged 
as a novel functional player transcribed from the genome. Here we describe a
novel lncRNAPOU6F2-AS2specifically expressed in ESCC. POU6F2-AS2 is involved in
the DNA damage response and regulates cells survival after ionizing radiation.
POU6F2-AS2 interacts with Ybx1 protein and regulates its chromatin localization. 
Our current study represents the first description of an ESCC associated lncRNA
that modulates DNA repair.

© The Authors 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27033944  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7573. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncogenic epithelial cell-derived exosomes containing Rac1 and PAK2 induce
angiogenesis in recipient endothelial cells.

Gopal SK(1), Greening DW(1), Hanssen EG(2), Zhu HJ(3), Simpson RJ(1), Mathias
RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular
Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Bio21 Institute,
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of
Surgery, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The metastatic cascade describes the escape of primary tumour cells to distant
secondary sites. Cells at the leading tumour edge are thought to undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), to enhance their motility and invasion
for spreading. Whether EMT cells directly promote tumour angiogenesis, and the
role of exosomes (30-150 nm extracellular vesicles) remains largely unknown. We
examined the functional effects of exosomes from MDCK cells, MDCK cells stably
expressing YBX1 (MDCKYBX1, intermediate EMT), and Ras-transformed MDCK cells
(21D1 cells, complete EMT). 2F-2B cell motility and tube formation (length and
branching) was significantly increased following supplementation with MDCKYBX1 or
21D1 exosomes, but not MDCK exosomes. Next, Matrigel™ plugs containing
exosome-supplemented 2F-2B cells were subcutaneously injected into mice. Systemic
perfusion was only observed for plugs supplemented with MDCKYBX1 or 21D1
exosomes. Comparative proteomics revealed that 21D1 exosomes contained
VEGF-associated proteins, while MDCKYBX1 exosomes were enriched with activated
Rac1 and PAK2. To validate, 2F-2B cells and HUVECs were pre-treated with PAK
inhibitors prior to exosome supplementation. PAK inhibition nullified the effects
of MDCKYBX1 exosomes by reducing the tube length and branching to baseline
levels. By contrast, the effects of 21D1 exosomes were not significantly
decreased. Our results demonstrate for the first time that oncogenic cells
undergoing EMT can communicate with endothelial cells via exosomes, and establish
exosomal Rac1/PAK2 as angiogenic promoters that may function from early stages of
the metastatic cascade.

PMID: 26919098  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncogenesis. 2016 Jan 18;5:e187. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.51.

Uncoupling of EGFR-RAS signaling and nuclear localization of YBX1 in colorectal
cancer.

Roßner F(1,)(2), Gieseler C(1), Morkel M(1), Royer HD(3), Rivera M(4), Bläker
H(1,)(2), Dietel M(1), Schäfer R(1,)(2), Sers C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)DKTK, German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research, Partner site Berlin
and DKFZ, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Institute of
Human Genetics and Anthropology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany. (4)EPO, Experimental Pharmacology & Oncology Berlin-Buch
GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

The transcription factor YBX1 can act as a mediator of signals transmitted via
the EGFR-RAS-MAPK axis. YBX1 expression has been associated with tumor
progression and prognosis in multiple types of cancer. Immunohistochemical
studies have revealed dependency between YBX1 expression and individual EGFR
family members. We analyzed YBX1 and EGFR family proteins in a colorectal cancer 
(CRC) cohort and provide functional analyses of YBX1 in the context of
EGFR-RAS-MAPK signaling. Immunohistochemistry for YBX1 and EGFR family receptors 
with two antibodies for YBX1 and EGFR were performed and related to
clinicopathological data. We employed Caco2 cells expressing an inducible KRASV12
gene to determine effects on localization and levels of YBX1. Mouse xenografts of
Caco2-KRASV12 cells were used to determine YBX1 dynamics in a tissue context. The
two different antibodies against YBX1 showed discordant immunohistochemical
stainings in cell culture and clinical specimens. Expression of YBX1 and EGFR
family members were not correlated in CRC. Analysis of Caco2 xenografts displayed
again heterogeneity of YBX1 staining with both antibodies. Our results suggest
that YBX1 is controlled via complex regulatory mechanisms involving tumor stroma 
interaction and signal transduction processes. Our study highlights that YBX1
antibodies have different specificities, advocating their use in a combined
manner.

PMCID: PMC4728680
PMID: 26779809  [PubMed]


4. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2015;36(6):730-3.

Identification of cervical cancer markers using cDNA subtraction approach.

Liu Y, Man SH, Liu X, Ding XY, Xiao WL.

PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION: Cervical cancer markers are not well known for accurate
detection of the disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, cervical cancer samples were
collected from the 42 patients in the Department of Surgery and Medicine of
Weifang People's Hospital and Medical College, Shandong, China. The cDNA
subtraction approach was performed to find out the specific transcripts, which
are responsible for cervical cancer. The specific differentially expressed
transcripts were identified by Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis
and the results were validated by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Following differentially expressed specific transcripts, such as ID-1,
Hif 1a, and the Y-box were usefully employed as a marker to accurately detect
cervical cancer. CONCLUSION. The identified markers are promising in the accurate
detection of cervical cancer in terms of its molecular basis and management of
the disease.

PMID: 26775362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;44(8):594-9.

[Correlation of Twist and YB-1 up-regulation and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition during tumorigenesis and progression of cervical carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Li M(1), Guan H, Hu X(2), Wang Y, Wei Q, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Longhua New District People's Hospital, Shenzhen
518109, China. (2)Cancer Institute, Guangdong Medical University, Dongguan
523808, China; E-mail: 10028303731@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinicopathological significance of Twist and YB-1 
up-regulation in cervical cancer, and to correlate the expression of the two
genes with E-cadherin, a marker of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT).
METHODS: A total of 202 tissue samples were collected during January 2008 to
December 2013, including 50 cases of normal cervical tissues, 100 cases of
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and 52 cases of squamous cell carcinoma 
(SCC). Twist, YB-1 and E-cadherin expression was investigated by MaxVision.
RESULTS: Increased expression levels of Twist and YB-1 were found and correlated 
with the malignant transformation of cervical epithelium, histological
progression and metastasis of cervical cancer. In addition, Twist and YB-1
overexpression was also associated with aberrant expression of E-cadherin.
Regression analysis revealed that Twist expression was an independent factor for 
the histological progression of cervical cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: It is suggested that Twist and YB-1 overexpression is significantly 
linked to cervical cancer tumorigenesis and progression, likely related to EMT
through (YB-1)-Twist-(E-cadherin) pathway. Twist and YB-1 may be markers for
determining the metastatic potential of cervical cancer.

PMID: 26705185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39980-94. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5387.

The 5'-untranslated region of p16INK4a melanoma tumor suppressor acts as a
cellular IRES, controlling mRNA translation under hypoxia through YBX1 binding.

Bisio A(1), Latorre E(2), Andreotti V(3), Bressac-de Paillerets B(4), Harland
M(5), Scarra GB(3), Ghiorzo P(3), Spitale RC(6), Provenzani A(2), Inga A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Networks, Centre for Integrative Biology, CIBIO,
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Genomic Screening, Centre
for Integrative Biology, CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Genetics of Rare Hereditary Cancers, DiMI, University of Genoa, 
Italy and IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy. (4)Service de Génétique,
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (5)Section of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Leeds Institute of Cancer and Pathology, University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK. (6)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California,
Irvine, CA, USA.

CDKN2A/p16INK4a is an essential tumor suppressor gene that controls cell cycle
progression and replicative senescence. It is also the main melanoma
susceptibility gene. Here we report that p16INK4a 5'UTR mRNA acts as a cellular
Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES). The potential for p16INK4a 5'UTR to drive
cap-independent translation was evaluated by dual-luciferase assays using
bicistronic and monocistronic vectors. Results of reporters' relative activities 
coupled to control analyses for actual bicistronic mRNA transcription, indicated 
that the wild type p16INK4a 5'UTR could stimulate cap-independent translation.
Notably, hypoxic stress and the treatment with mTOR inhibitors enhanced the
translation-stimulating property of p16INK4a 5'UTR. RNA immunoprecipitation
performed in melanoma-derived SK-Mel-28 and in a patient-derived lymphoblastoid
cell line indicated that YBX1 can bind the wild type p16INK4a mRNA increasing its
translation efficiency, particularly during hypoxic stress. Modulation of YBX1
expression further supported its involvement in cap-independent translation of
the wild type p16INK4a but not a c.-42T>A variant. RNA SHAPE assays revealed
local flexibility changes for the c.-42T>A variant at the predicted YBX1 binding 
site region. Our results indicate that p16INK4a 5'UTR contains a cellular IRES
that can enhance mRNA translation efficiency, in part through YBX1.

PMCID: PMC4741874
PMID: 26498684  [PubMed - in process]


7. Mol Cell. 2015 Oct 1;60(1):118-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.08.014. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

DDX6 Orchestrates Mammalian Progenitor Function through the mRNA Degradation and 
Translation Pathways.

Wang Y(1), Arribas-Layton M(2), Chen Y(1), Lykke-Andersen J(2), Sen GL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0869, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; UCSD Stem Cell Program,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA. (2)Division of
Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0869, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; UCSD
Stem Cell Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, 
USA. Electronic address: gsen@ucsd.edu.

In adult tissues, stem and progenitor cells must balance proliferation and
differentiation to maintain homeostasis. How this is done is unclear. Here, we
show that the DEAD box RNA helicase, DDX6 is necessary for maintaining adult
progenitor cell function. DDX6 loss results in premature differentiation and
decreased proliferation of epidermal progenitor cells. To maintain self-renewal, 
DDX6 associates with YBX1 to bind the stem loops found in the 3' UTRs of
regulators of proliferation/self-renewal (CDK1, EZH2) and recruit them to EIF4E
to facilitate their translation. To prevent premature differentiation of
progenitor cells, DDX6 regulates the 5' UTR of differentiation inducing
transcription factor, KLF4 and degrades its transcripts through association with 
mRNA degradation proteins. Our results demonstrate that progenitor function is
maintained by DDX6 complexes through two distinct pathways that include the
degradation of differentiation-inducing transcripts and by promoting the
translation of self-renewal and proliferation mRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592480 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26412305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(22):11584-602. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01513-15. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Y-Box Binding Protein 1 Stabilizes Hepatitis C Virus NS5A via
Phosphorylation-Mediated Interaction with NS5A To Regulate Viral Propagation.

Wang WT(1), Tsai TY(2), Chao CH(1), Lai BY(1), Wu Lee YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan Department of Biological Science and Technology, College of
Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life
Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan Department of Biological 
Science and Technology, College of Biological Science and Technology, National
Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan yhwulee@nctu.edu.tw.

Replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is dependent on virus-encoded proteins and
numerous cellular factors. DDX3 is a well-known host cofactor of HCV replication.
In this study, we investigated the role of a DDX3-interacting protein, Y-box
binding protein 1 (YB-1), in the HCV life cycle. Both YB-1 and DDX3 interacted
with the viral nonstructural protein NS5A. During HCV infection, YB-1 partially
colocalized with NS5A and the HCV replication intermediate double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) in HCV-infected Huh-7.5.1 cells. Despite sharing the same interacting
partners, YB-1 participated in HCV RNA replication but was dispensable in
steady-state HCV RNA replication, different from the action of DDX3. Moreover,
knockdown of YB-1 in HCV-infected cells prevented infectious virus production and
reduced the ratio of hyperphosphorylated (p58) to hypophosphorylated (p56) forms 
of NS5A, whereas DDX3 silencing did not affect the ratio of the p58 and p56
phosphoforms of NS5A. Interestingly, silencing of YB-1 severely reduced NS5A
protein stability in NS5A-ectopically expressing, replicon-containing, and
HCV-infected cells. Furthermore, mutations of serine 102 of YB-1 affected both
YB-1-NS5A interaction and NS5A-stabilizing activity of YB-1, indicating that this
Akt phosphorylation site of YB-1 plays an important role in stabilizing NS5A.
Collectively, our results support a model in which the event of YB-1
phosphorylation-mediated interaction with NS5A results in stabilizing NS5A to
sustain HCV RNA replication and infectious HCV production. Overall, our study may
reveal a new aspect for the development of novel anti-HCV drugs.IMPORTANCE:
Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection induces liver cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma. The viral nonstructural protein NS5A co-opting various 
cellular signaling pathways and cofactors to support viral genome replication and
virion assembly is a new strategy for anti-HCV drug development. NS5A
phosphorylation is believed to modulate switches between different stages of the 
HCV life cycle. In this study, we identified the cellular protein YB-1 as a novel
NS5A-interacting protein. YB-1 is a multifunctional protein participating in
oncogenesis and is an oncomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We found that
YB-1 protects NS5A from degradation and likely regulates NS5A phosphorylation
through its phosphorylation-dependent interaction with NS5A, which might be
controlled by HCV-induced signaling pathways. Our observations suggest a model in
which HCV modulates NS5A level and the ratio of the p58 and p56 phosphoforms for 
efficient viral propagation via regulation of cellular signaling inducing YB-1
phosphorylation. Our finding may provide new aspects for developing novel
anti-HCV drugs.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645663
PMID: 26355086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29396-412. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5120.

Critical role of phosphorylation of serine 165 of YBX1 on the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
in colon cancer.

Prabhu L(1), Mundade R(1), Wang B(2), Wei H(1), Hartley AV(1), Martin M(1),
McElyea K(3), Temm CJ(3), Sandusky G(3), Liu Y(4,)(5), Lu T(1,)(4,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (2)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (3)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. (4)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Medical Research and
Library Building, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (5)Center for Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics, Health Information and Translational Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, 
USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Y-box binding protein 1 [YBX1] is a multifunctional protein known to facilitate
many of the hallmarks of cancer. Elevated levels of YBX1 protein are highly
correlated with cancer progression, making it an excellent marker in cancer. The 
connection between YBX1 and the important nuclear factor <U+03BA>B [NF-<U+03BA>B] has never
been reported. Here, we show that overexpression of wild type YBX1 [WT-YBX1]
activates NF-<U+03BA>B, suggesting that YBX1 is a potential NF-<U+03BA>B activator.
Furthermore, using mass spectrometry analysis we identified novel phosphorylation
of serine 165 [S165] on YBX1. Overexpression of the S165A-YBX1 mutant in either
HEK293 cells or colon cancer HT29 cells showed dramatically reduced NF-<U+03BA>B
activating ability as compared with that of WT-YBX1, confirming that S165
phosphorylation is critical for the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B by YBX1. We also show
that expression of the S165A-YBX1 mutant dramatically decreased the expression of
NF-<U+03BA>B-inducible genes, reduced cell growth, and compromised tumorigenic ability
as compared with WT-YBX1. Taken together, we provide the first evidence that YBX1
functions as a tumor promoter via NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and phosphorylation of S165
of YBX1 is critical for this function. Therefore, our important discovery may
lead to blocking S165 phosphorylation as a potential therapeutic strategy to
treat colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4745735
PMID: 26318844  [PubMed - in process]


10. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Aug 20. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10539. [Epub ahead of print]

Nanog RNA binding proteins YBX1 and ILF3 affect pluripotency of embryonic stem
cells.

Guo C(1,)(2,)(3), Xue Y(1,)(2,)(3), Yang G(1,)(3), Yin S(2), Shi W(2), Cheng
Y(2), Yan X(1,)(2,)(3), Fan S(2), Zhang H(2), Zeng F(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Children's Hospital,
Shanghai, Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Institute of Medical Science,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Embryo Molecular Biology, Ministry of Health of China & Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Embryo and Reproduction Engineering, Shanghai, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

Nanog is a well-known transcription factor that plays fundamental roles in stem
cell self-renewal and maintaining pluripotent cell identity. There remains a
large data gap with respect to the spectrum of the key pluripotency transcription
factors' interaction partners. Limited information is available concerning
Nanog-associated RNA binding proteins (RBPs), and the intrinsic protein-RNA
interactions characteristic of the regulatory activities of Nanog. Herein we used
an improved affinity protocol to purify Nanog-interacting RBPs from mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and 49 RBPs of Nanog were identified. Among them,
the interaction of YBX1 and ILF3 with Nanog mRNA were further confirmed by in
vitro assays such as Western Blot, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), and ex vivo
methods such as Immunofluorescence staining and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization
(FISH), MS2 in vivo Biotin Tagged RNA Affinity Purification (MS2-BioTRAP).
Interestingly, RNAi studies revealed that YBX1 and ILF3 positively affected the
expression of Nanog and other pluripotency-related genes. Particularly,
down-regulation of YBX1 or ILF3 resulted in high expression of mesoderm markers. 
Thus, a reduction in the expression of YBX1 and ILF3 controls the expression of
pluripotency-related genes in ESCs, suggesting their roles in further regulation 
of the pluripotent state of ESCs.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26289635  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Sep 30;43(17):8516-28. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv779. Epub 2015
Aug 3.

Genome-wide analysis of YB-1-RNA interactions reveals a novel role of YB-1 in
miRNA processing in glioblastoma multiforme.

Wu SL(1), Fu X(2), Huang J(3), Jia TT(1), Zong FY(1), Mu SR(1), Zhu H(1), Yan
Y(4), Qiu S(5), Wu Q(6), Yan W(6), Peng Y(5), Chen J(4), Hui J(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 201602, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai
Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital Affiliated with Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Shanghai Institute of Neurosurgery, Chang Zheng Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200003, China. (5)Department of Neurology, 
The Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120,
China. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China. (7)State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China jyhui@sibcb.ac.cn.

Altered miRNA expression is believed to play a crucial role in a variety of human
cancers; however, the mechanisms leading to the dysregulation of miRNA expression
remain elusive. In this study, we report that the human Y box-binding protein
(YB-1), a major mRNA packaging protein, is a novel modulator of miRNA processing 
in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Using individual nucleotide-resolution
crosslinking immunoprecipitation coupled to deep sequencing (iCLIP-seq), we
performed the first genome-wide analysis of the in vivo YB-1-RNA interactions and
found that YB-1 preferentially recognizes a UYAUC consensus motif and binds to
the majority of coding gene transcripts including pre-mRNAs and mature mRNAs.
Remarkably, our data show that YB-1 also binds extensively to the terminal loop
region of pri-/pre-miR-29b-2 and regulates the biogenesis of miR-29b-2 by
blocking the recruitment of microprocessor and Dicer to its precursors.
Furthermore, we show that down-regulation of miR-29b by YB-1, which is
up-regulated in GBM, is important for cell proliferation. Together, our findings 
reveal a novel function of YB-1 in regulating non-coding RNA expression, which
has important implications in tumorigenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4787835
PMID: 26240386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):5475-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv274. Epub 2015 Jul 
14.

Mutations within the LINC-HELLP non-coding RNA differentially bind ribosomal and 
RNA splicing complexes and negatively affect trophoblast differentiation.

van Dijk M(1), Visser A(2), Buabeng KM(2), Poutsma A(2), van der Schors RC(3),
Oudejans CB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands and m.vdijk@vumc.nl. (2)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands and. (3)Center for
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

LINC-HELLP, showing chromosomal linkage with the pregnancy-specific HELLP
syndrome in Dutch families, reduces differentiation from a proliferative to an
invasive phenotype of first-trimester extravillous trophoblasts. Here we show
that mutations in LINC-HELLP identified in HELLP families negatively affect this 
trophoblast differentiation either by inducing proliferation rate or by causing
cell cycle exit as shown by a decrease in both proliferation and invasion. As
LincRNAs predominantly function through interactions with proteins, we identified
the directly interacting proteins using chromatin isolation by RNA purification
followed by protein mass spectrometry. We found 22 proteins predominantly
clustering in two functional networks, i.e. RNA splicing and the ribosome. YBX1, 
PCBP1, PCBP2, RPS6 and RPL7 were validated, and binding to these proteins was
influenced by the HELLP mutations carried. Finally, we show that the LINC-HELLP
transcript levels are significantly upregulated in plasma of women in their first
trimester of pregnancy compared with non-pregnant women, whereas this
upregulation seems absent in a pilot set of patients later developing pregnancy
complications, indicative of its functional significance in vivo.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26173455  [PubMed - in process]


13. Anticancer Res. 2015 Aug;35(8):4397-401.

Transcriptional Regulation of the p16 Tumor Suppressor Gene.

Kotake Y(1), Naemura M(2), Murasaki C(2), Inoue Y(2), Okamoto H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Chemistry, Faculty of
Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki University, Fukuoka, Japan
ykotake@fuk.kindai.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental
Chemistry, Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

The p16 tumor suppressor gene encodes a specific inhibitor of cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) 4 and 6 and is found altered in a wide range of human cancers. p16
plays a pivotal role in tumor suppressor networks through inducing cellular
senescence that acts as a barrier to cellular transformation by oncogenic
signals. p16 protein is relatively stable and its expression is primary regulated
by transcriptional control. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins associate with the p16 
locus in a long non-coding RNA, ANRIL-dependent manner, leading to repression of 
p16 transcription. YB1, a transcription factor, also represses the p16
transcription through direct association with its promoter region. Conversely,
the transcription factors Ets1/2 and histone H3K4 methyltransferase MLL1 directly
bind to the p16 locus and mediate p16 induction during replicative and premature 
senescence. In the present review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms by which
these factors regulate p16 transcription.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26168478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0130318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130318.
eCollection 2015.

The Cold Shock Domain of YB-1 Segregates RNA from DNA by Non-Bonded Interactions.

Kljashtorny V(1), Nikonov S(2), Ovchinnikov L(2), Lyabin D(2), Vodovar N(3),
Curmi P(4), Manivet P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, 142290, Russia; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM), UMR 829, Laboratoire Structure-Activité des Biomolécules Normales et
Pathologiques, Bd François Mitterrand, 91025 Evry Cedex, France; Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), UMRS 942, Hôpital
Lariboisière, 41 boulevard de la Chapelle, 75475 Paris cedex 10, France;
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de paris (APHP), Hôpital Lariboisière, Service de
Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire, Paris, France. (2)Institute of Protein
Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region, 142290, Russia. 
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), UMRS 942, 
Hôpital Lariboisière, 41 boulevard de la Chapelle, 75475 Paris cedex 10, France. 
(4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), UMR 829,
Laboratoire Structure-Activité des Biomolécules Normales et Pathologiques, Bd
François Mitterrand, 91025 Evry Cedex, France. (5)Institut National de la Santé
et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), UMRS 942, Hôpital Lariboisière, 41
boulevard de la Chapelle, 75475 Paris cedex 10, France; Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de paris (APHP), Hôpital Lariboisière, Service de Biochimie et 
de Biologie Moléculaire, Paris, France; UBCS (Unité de Biologie Clinique
Structurale)-Centre de Ressources Biologiques BB-0033-00064, 2 rue Ambroise Paré,
75475 Paris cedex 10, France.

The human YB-1 protein plays multiple cellular roles, of which many are dictated 
by its binding to RNA and DNA through its Cold Shock Domain (CSD). Using
molecular dynamics simulation approaches validated by experimental assays, the
YB1 CSD was found to interact with nucleic acids in a sequence-dependent manner
and with a higher affinity for RNA than DNA. The binding properties of the YB1
CSD were close to those observed for the related bacterial Cold Shock Proteins
(CSP), albeit some differences in sequence specificity. The results provide
insights in the molecular mechanisms whereby YB-1 interacts with nucleic acids.

PMCID: PMC4493011
PMID: 26147853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2015 Apr-Jun;29(2):485-91.

THE INFLUENCE AND REGULATORY MECHANISM OF Y-BOX BINDING PROTEIN 1 IN OSTEOSARCOMA
AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE.

Zhou WP(1), Liu X(2), Yang Y(3), Liu YF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (2)Blood Bank Center, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (3)Geriatrics Department, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.
(4)Biological Treatment Center, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China.

This study quantified the expression of Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) by the
immunohistochemical method based on pathological paraffin block specimens of
aspiration biopsy from patients with osteosarcoma to explore the influence and
regulatory mechanism of YB-1 in osteosarcoma and its significance. Patients were 
divided into two groups with high and low expressed YB-1, and results showed that
7 cases (13.7%) and 18 cases (26.1%) were in level III, and 44 cases (86.3%) and 
51 cases (76.9%) were in level IV respectively, and patients with high YB-1
expression quantity had higher malignant tumor degree (p=0.03). Moreover, the
tumor necrosis rate induced by chemotherapy in the two groups were 21 cases
(41.2%) and 38 cases (51.8%), respectively. By survival analysis, it was found
that a 5-year overall survival rate of patients with high YB-1 expression and low
YB-1 expression were 61.2% and 76.6%, respectively (p = 0.054), and 5-year event 
free survival rates were 52.5% and 72.4%, respectively (p = 0.033). Furthermore, 
metastasis rate of high YB-1 expression and low YB-1 expression were 41.8% and
22.7%, respectively (p = 0.036), indicating that patients with high YB-1
expression had higher pulmonary metastasis rate. Through further study, we
discovered that possibly miR-382 plays a regulatory role in YB-1 gene in
osteosarcoma.

PMID: 26122241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Pathol. 2015 Aug;185(8):2181-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.04.008. Epub
2015 Jun 6.

Twist contributes to proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition-induced fibrosis by regulating YB-1 in human peritoneal mesothelial
cells.

He L(1), Che M(2), Hu J(1), Li S(3), Jia Z(4), Lou W(5), Li C(5), Yang J(5), Sun 
S(6), Wang H(7), Chen X(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China; State Key Laboratory of
Cancer Biology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Nephrology, Xijing
Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China; State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Xijing Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China;
Department of Medicine, No. 273 Hospital of PLA, Korla, Xinjiang, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China;
Department of Nephrology, the Central Hospital of Xi'an, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China. (4)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China;
Department of Nephrology, the First Hospital of Xi'an, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China. (5)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
ningsun@fmmu.edu.cn. (7)Department of Nephrology, Xijing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: whm@medmail.com.cn. (8)Department of Nephrology, Xijing
Hospital, the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, People's
Republic of China; Department of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney
Diseases, Chinese PLA General Hospital and Medical College, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

Twist is overexpressed in high glucose (HG) damage of human peritoneal
mesothelial cells (HPMCs) in vitro. Herein, we further identified its precise
function related to fibrosis of peritoneal membranes (PMs). The overexpression
and activation of Twist and YB-1 (official name, YBX1) and a transformed
fibroblastic phenotype of HPMCs were found to be positively related to
epithelial-mesenchymal transition progress and PM fibrosis ex vivo in 93 patients
who underwent continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (PD), and also in
HG-induced immortal HPMCs and an animal model of PD. Evidence from chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter assays supported that YBX1 is
transcriptionally regulated by the direct binding of Twist to E-box.
Overexpression of Twist and YB-1 led to an increase in epithelial-mesenchymal
transition, proliferation, and cell cycle progress of HPMCs, which might
contribute to PM fibrosis. In contrast, the silencing of Twist or YB-1 inhibited 
HG-induced growth and cell cycle progression of HPMCs; this led to a
down-regulation in the expression of cyclin Ds and cyclin-dependent kinases,
finally inhibiting PM fibrosis. Twist contributes to PM fibrosis during PD
treatment, mainly through regulation of YB-1.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26055210  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13718-30.

YBX1/YB-1 induces partial EMT and tumourigenicity through secretion of angiogenic
factors into the extracellular microenvironment.

Gopal SK(1), Greening DW(1), Mathias RA(1), Ji H(1), Rai A(1), Chen M(1), Zhu
HJ(2), Simpson RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La 
Trobe University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Surgery, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) describes a morphogenetic program which
confers mesenchymal cell properties, such as reduced cell-cell contact and
increased cell migration and invasion, to epithelial cells. Here we investigate
the role of the pleiotropic transcription/splicing factor and RNA-binding protein
nuclease-sensitive element-binding protein 1 (YBX1/YB-1) in increasing the
oncogenic potential of epithelial MDCK cells. Characterization of MDCK cells
expressing YBX1 (MDCKYBX1 cells) revealed a partial EMT phenotype, including
cytosolic relocalization of E-cadherin, increased cell scattering, and
anchorage-independent growth. Subcutaneous injection of parental MDCK cells into 
NOD/SCID mice did not form tumours. Critically, MDCKYBX1 cells established viable
tumour xenografts, and immuno-histochemical staining indicated murine
vascularization by CD31+ endothelial cells. We analysed the total secretome
(containing soluble and extracellular vesicles) of MDCKYBX1 cells to investigate 
regulation of the tumour microenvironment. YBX1 expression elevated release of
secreted factors known to enhance angiogenesis (TGF-ß, CSF-1, NGF, VGF, ADAM9 and
ADAM17), compared to MDCK cells. Importantly, treatment with MDCKYBX1
cell-derived secretome increased recipient 2F-2B endothelial cell motility. This 
defines YBX1 as an oncogenic enhancer that can regulate tumour angiogenesis via
release of secreted modulators into the extracellular microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4537044
PMID: 25980435  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cancer Cell. 2015 May 11;27(5):682-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.04.003.

Translational Activation of HIF1a by YB-1 Promotes Sarcoma Metastasis.

El-Naggar AM(1), Veinotte CJ(2), Cheng H(3), Grunewald TG(4), Negri GL(1),
Somasekharan SP(5), Corkery DP(2), Tirode F(6), Mathers J(5), Khan D(5), Kyle
AH(7), Baker JH(7), LePard NE(7), McKinney S(5), Hajee S(5), Bosiljcic M(8),
Leprivier G(5), Tognon CE(5), Minchinton AI(7), Bennewith KL(8), Delattre O(6),
Wang Y(3), Dellaire G(9), Berman JN(10), Sorensen PH(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 2B5, Canada; Department of Molecular Oncology,
British Columbia Cancer Research Center, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS B3K 6R8, Canada.
(3)Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
V5Z 1M9, Canada. (4)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of
Pathology, LMU Munich, Thalkirchner Strasse 36, 80337 Munich, Germany.
(5)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Center,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. (6)INSERM U830, Laboratoire de génétique et
biologie des cancers, Institut Curie, 75248 Paris, France. (7)Department of
Integrative Oncology, Radiation Biology Unit, British Columbia Cancer Research
Center, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. (8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 2B5, Canada;
Department of Integrative Oncology, Radiation Biology Unit, British Columbia
Cancer Research Center, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. (9)Department of
Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada. (10)Department of
Pediatrics, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS B3K 6R8, Canada; Department of
Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada; Department of
Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada. (11)Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC 
V6T 2B5, Canada; Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer
Research Center, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. Electronic address:
psor@mail.ubc.ca.

Metastatic dissemination is the leading cause of death in cancer patients, which 
is particularly evident for high-risk sarcomas such as Ewing sarcoma,
osteosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Previous research identified a crucial role
for YB-1 in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis of
epithelial malignancies. Based on clinical data and two distinct animal models,
we now report that YB-1 is also a major metastatic driver in high-risk sarcomas. 
Our data establish YB-1 as a critical regulator of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a
(HIF1a) expression in sarcoma cells. YB-1 enhances HIF1a protein expression by
directly binding to and activating translation of HIF1A messages. This leads to
HIF1a-mediated sarcoma cell invasion and enhanced metastatic capacity in vivo,
highlighting a translationally regulated YB-1-HIF1a axis in sarcoma metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25965573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Sci Rep. 2015 May 11;5:10159. doi: 10.1038/srep10159.

lncRNA GAS5 enhances G1 cell cycle arrest via binding to YBX1 to regulate p21
expression in stomach cancer.

Liu Y(1), Zhao J(2), Zhang W(2), Gan J(1), Hu C(1), Huang G(1), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China. (3)1] Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China [2] Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which have evolved as important gene expression
modulators, are involved in human malignancies. The down-regulation of lncRNA
growth arrest specific transcript 5 (GAS5) has been reported in several cancers, 
however, the underlying mechanism of lncRNA GAS5 in stomach cancer is poorly
understood. In this study, we found that lncRNA GAS5 had lower expression in
stomach cancer tissues than the normal counterparts. lncRNA GAS5 was shown to
interact with Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), and lncRNA GAS5 knockdown was shown
to accelerate YBX1 protein turnover without affecting YBX1 transcription. lncRNA 
GAS5 down-regulation reduced the YBX1 protein level, which decreased
YBX1-transactivated p21 expression and abolished G1 phase cell cycle arrest in
stomach cancer. These results delineate a novel mechanism of lncRNA GAS5 in
suppressing stomach carcinogenesis, and the lncRNA GAS5/YBX1/p21 pathway we
discovered may provide useful targets for developing lncRNA-based therapies for
stomach cancer.

PMCID: PMC4426700
PMID: 25959498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell. 2015 May 7;161(4):790-802. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.053.

Endogenous tRNA-Derived Fragments Suppress Breast Cancer Progression via YBX1
Displacement.

Goodarzi H(1), Liu X(1), Nguyen HC(1), Zhang S(1), Fish L(1), Tavazoie SF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065, USA. (2)Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: stavazoie@mail.rockefeller.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 Jun;15(6):320.

Upon exposure to stress, tRNAs are enzymatically cleaved, yielding distinct
classes of tRNA-derived fragments (tRFs), yielding distinct classes of tRFs. We
identify a novel class of tRFs derived from tRNA(Glu), tRNA(Asp), tRNA(Gly), and 
tRNA(Tyr) that, upon induction, suppress the stability of multiple oncogenic
transcripts in breast cancer cells by displacing their 3' untranslated regions
(UTRs) from the RNA-binding protein YBX1. This mode of post-transcriptional
silencing is sequence specific, as these fragments all share a common motif that 
matches the YBX1 recognition sequence. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function
studies, using anti-sense locked-nucleic acids (LNAs) and synthetic RNA mimetics,
respectively, revealed that these fragments suppress growth under
serum-starvation, cancer cell invasion, and metastasis by breast cancer cells.
Highly metastatic cells evade this tumor-suppressive pathway by attenuating the
induction of these tRFs. Our findings reveal a tumor-suppressive role for
specific tRNA-derived fragments and describe a molecular mechanism for their
action. This transcript displacement-based mechanism may generalize to other
tRNA, ribosomal-RNA, and sno-RNA fragments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4457382
PMID: 25957686  [PubMed - in process]


21. RNA. 2015 Jun;21(6):1159-72. doi: 10.1261/rna.045559.114. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Noncoding RNAs that associate with YB-1 alter proliferation in prostate cancer
cells.

Liu TT(1), Arango-Argoty G(1), Li Z(1), Lin Y(1), Kim SW(1), Dueck A(2), Ozsolak 
F(3), Monaghan AP(4), Meister G(2), DeFranco DB(5), John B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA. (2)University of
Regensburg, Biochemistry I, 93053 Regensburg, Bavaria, Germany. (3)Helicos
BioSciences Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (4)Department of
Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15260, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, USA.

The highly conserved, multifunctional YB-1 is a powerful breast cancer prognostic
indicator. We report on a pervasive role for YB-1 in which it associates with
thousands of nonpolyadenylated short RNAs (shyRNAs) that are further processed
into small RNAs (smyRNAs). Many of these RNAs have previously been identified as 
functional noncoding RNAs (http://www.johnlab.org/YB1). We identified a novel,
abundant, 3'-modified short RNA antisense to Dicer1 (Shad1) that colocalizes with
YB-1 to P-bodies and stress granules. The expression of Shad1 was shown to
correlate with that of YB-1 and whose inhibition leads to an increase in cell
proliferation. Additionally, Shad1 influences the expression of additional
prognostic markers of cancer progression such as DLX2 and IGFBP2. We propose that
the examination of these noncoding RNAs could lead to better understanding of
prostate cancer progression.

© 2015 Liu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

PMCID: PMC4436668 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25904138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):7159-66. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3417-z. Epub 2015
Apr 17.

Overexpression of YB1 and EZH2 are associated with cancer metastasis and poor
prognosis in renal cell carcinomas.

Wang Y(1), Chen Y(2), Geng H(3), Qi C(4), Liu Y(2), Yue D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin Medical
University Second Hospital, Tianjin, 300211, China. (2)School of Laboratory
Medicine, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300203, China. (3)Research Center 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Children's Hospital of Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang,
050031, China. (5)School of Laboratory Medicine, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, 300203, China. danyue0705@sina.cn.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancers in adults,
and metastasis represents the major cause of mortality of RCC patients. The Y-box
binding protein 1 (YB1) is a multifunctional oncoprotein in various malignancies.
Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a polycomb histone methyltransferase, is a
key epigenetic modifier implicated in various cancer metastasis. However, the
expression patterns and clinical correlations of both YB1 and EZH2 in RCC remain 
largely unclear. In this study, the expression of YB1 and EZH2 were examined
using immunohistochemistry staining in a study cohort including 165 RCC and 80
tumor adjacent normal tissues. RCC tissues showed a significant higher nuclear
expression of YB1 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and EZH2 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) as compared with the normal
counterparts. In addition, YB1 and EZH2 nuclear overexpression were found to be
positively associated with RCC stage (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), Fuhrman tumor
grade (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044), and metastasis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009).
Overall survival analysis indicated patients with YB1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004, HR 5.656
(2.006-10.944)) and/or EZH2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006, HR 4.551 (2.124-9.438)) nuclear
overexpression correlated with poor survival. More interestingly, YB1 and EZH2
nuclear expression was correlated (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Further studies demonstrated that 
EZH2 expression was significantly downregulated in YB1 knockdown RCC cell lines. 
Functionally, YB1 knockdown inhibited RCC invasion in vitro. In conclusion, YB1
and EZH2 expression was correlated and associated with RCC incidence, tumor
stage, grade, metastasis, and survival.

PMID: 25877750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9086-98.

Inhibition of the HER2-YB1-AR axis with Lapatinib synergistically enhances
Enzalutamide anti-tumor efficacy in castration resistant prostate cancer.

Shiota M(1), Bishop JL(1), Takeuchi A(1), Nip KM(1), Cordonnier T(1), Beraldi
E(1), Kuruma H(1), Gleave ME(1,)(2), Zoubeidi A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Department of
Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.

Incurable castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) is driven by androgen
receptor (AR) activation. Potent therapies that prevent AR signaling, such as
Enzalutamide (ENZ), are mainstay treatments for CRPC; however patients eventually
progress with ENZ resistant (ENZR) disease. In this study, we investigated one
mechanism of ENZ resistance, and tried to improve therapeutic efficiency of ENZ. 
We found HER2 expression is increased in ENZR tumors and cell lines, and is
induced by ENZ treatment of LNCaP cells. ENZ-induced HER2 overexpression was
dependent on AKT-YB1 activation and modulated AR activity. HER2 dependent AR
activation in LNCaP and ENZR cells was effectively blocked by treatment with the 
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor Lapatinib, which reduced cell viability and increased
apoptosis. Despite efficacy in vitro, in vivo monotherapy with Lapatinib did not 
prevent ENZR tumor growth. However, combination treatment of Lapatinib with ENZ
most effectively induced cell death in LNCaP cells in vitro and was more
effective than ENZ alone in preventing tumor growth in an in vivo model of CRPC. 
These results suggest that while HER2 overexpression and subsequent AR activation
is a targetable mechanism of resistance to ENZ, therapy using Lapatinib is only a
rational therapeutic approach when used in combination with ENZ in CRPC.

PMCID: PMC4496204
PMID: 25871401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Biol. 2015 Mar 30;208(7):913-29. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201411047. Epub 2015 Mar
23.

YB-1 regulates stress granule formation and tumor progression by translationally 
activating G3BP1.

Somasekharan SP(1), El-Naggar A(1), Leprivier G(2), Cheng H(3), Hajee S(2),
Grunewald TG(4), Zhang F(3), Ng T(3), Delattre O(4), Evdokimova V(2), Wang Y(3), 
Gleave M(3), Sorensen PH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Department of Urologic
Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4,
Canada Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada. (2)Department of Molecular Oncology,
British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3,
Canada. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Department of
Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia
V6T 1Z4, Canada. (4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM) Unit 830, Genetics and Biology of Cancers, Institute Curie Research
Center, 75248 Paris, France. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 
and Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada Department of Molecular Oncology, British
Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada
psor@mail.ubc.ca.

Under cell stress, global protein synthesis is inhibited to preserve energy. One 
mechanism is to sequester and silence mRNAs in ribonucleoprotein complexes known 
as stress granules (SGs), which contain translationally silent mRNAs,
preinitiation factors, and RNA-binding proteins. Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1)
localizes to SGs, but its role in SG biology is unknown. We now report that YB-1 
directly binds to and translationally activates the 5' untranslated region (UTR) 
of G3BP1 mRNAs, thereby controlling the availability of the G3BP1 SG nucleator
for SG assembly. YB-1 inactivation in human sarcoma cells dramatically reduces
G3BP1 and SG formation in vitro. YB-1 and G3BP1 expression are highly correlated 
in human sarcomas, and elevated G3BP1 expression correlates with poor survival.
Finally, G3BP1 down-regulation in sarcoma xenografts prevents in vivo SG
formation and tumor invasion, and completely blocks lung metastasis in mouse
models. Together, these findings demonstrate a critical role for YB-1 in SG
formation through translational activation of G3BP1, and highlight novel
functions for SGs in tumor progression.

© 2015 Somasekharan et al.

PMCID: PMC4384734
PMID: 25800057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Jul;13(7):1119-29. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0165-T.
Epub 2015 Mar 17.

CHCHD2 Is Coamplified with EGFR in NSCLC and Regulates Mitochondrial Function and
Cell Migration.

Wei Y(1), Vellanki RN(2), Coyaud É(3), Ignatchenko V(3), Li L(4), Krieger JR(1), 
Taylor P(1), Tong J(1), Pham NA(2), Liu G(5), Raught B(6), Wouters BG(7),
Kislinger T(6), Tsao MS(8), Moran MF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Hospital For Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Campbell Family Institute for Cancer Research,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Program 
in Molecular Structure and Function, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of
Medical Oncology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)Campbell 
Family Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (8)Campbell Family
Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (9)Program in
Molecular Structure and Function, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Department of 
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
m.moran@utoronto.ca.

Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix domain-containing 2, a mitochondrial protein,
encoded by CHCHD2 is located at chromosome 7p11.2 and proximal to the EGFR gene. 
Here, bioinformatic analyses revealed that CHCHD2 is consistently coamplified
with EGFR in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). In addition, CHCHD2 and EGFR 
protein expression levels were positively correlated and upregulated relative to 
normal lung in NSCLC tumor-derived xenografts. Knockdown of CHCHD2 expression in 
NSCLC cells attenuated cell proliferation, migration, and mitochondrial
respiration. CHCHD2 protein-protein interactions were assessed by the
complementary approaches of affinity purification mass spectrometry and in vivo
proximity ligation. The CHCHD2 interactome includes the apparent hub proteins
C1QBP (a mitochondrial protein) and YBX1 (an oncogenic transcription factor), and
an overlapping set of hub-associated proteins implicated in cell
regulation.IMPLICATIONS: CHCHD2 influences mitochondrial and nuclear functions
and contributes to the cancer phenotype associated with 7p11.2 amplification in
NSCLC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25784717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Anticancer Res. 2015 Mar;35(3):1715-21.

Cyclin A correlates with YB1, progression and resistance to chemotherapy in human
epithelial ovarian cancer.

Cybulski M(1), Jarosz B(2), Nowakowski A(3), Jeleniewicz W(4), Kutarska E(5),
Bednarek W(6), Stepulak A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland marek.cybulski.69@gmail.com marekc@bg.umlub.pl.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery and Children's Neurosurgery, Medical University of 
Lublin, Lublin, Poland. (3)Department of Gynecology and Oncologic Gynecology,
Military Medical Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland. (5)Third
Department of Gynecologic Oncology, St. John's Cancer Center Lublin, Lublin,
Poland. (6)First Department of Oncologic Gynecology and Gynecology, Medical
University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Cyclin A is a cell-cycle regulatory gene and its overexpression
promotes tumor cell growth. Y-Box-binding protein 1 (YB1) is a
transcription/translation factor involved in tumor growth, invasion, and drug
resistance. We investigated whether an association exists between protein
products of these genes in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) specimens and
clinicopathological parameters, patient response and EOC sensitivity to
platinum-based first-line chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Cyclin A and YB1 expression were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in 54 human primary EOC tissues. Immunolabeling of both
proteins was graded according to their staining intensity (scale 0-3) and the
proportion of immunostained cancer cells (scale 0-4) to obtain a staining index
(SI; value=0-12).
RESULTS: Significantly higher cyclin A immunostaining (SI=4) in EOC specimens was
discovered in patients with advanced (International Federation of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO) III and IV, p=0.003), poorly differentiated (G3, p<0.001)
tumors, and tumors of those with residual disease>1 cm (p=0.001). YB1
immunostaining was significantly higher in EOCs from patients with suboptimal
debulking (p=0.025). Over-expression of cyclin A (SI=9) in EOCs was significantly
linked with poorer patient response (p=0.001) and higher resistance of tumors to 
platinum-based first-line chemotherapy (p=0.007), while immunolabeling of YB1 in 
EOCs was not significantly associated with either of these variables (p>0.05).
Cyclin A expression was significantly and positively correlated with that of YB1 
(R=0.588, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Increased cyclin A expression in EOC is related to a more aggressive 
tumor behavior and predicts the response of patients to first-line platinum-based
chemotherapy.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25750333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 5;5:8768. doi: 10.1038/srep08768.

Centrosome maturation requires YB-1 to regulate dynamic instability of
microtubules for nucleus reassembly.

Kawaguchi A(1), Asaka MN(1), Matsumoto K(2), Nagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan. (2)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN, 
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Microtubule formation from the centrosome increases dramatically at the onset of 
mitosis. This process is termed centrosome maturation. However, regulatory
mechanisms of microtubule assembly from the centrosome in response to the
centrosome maturation are largely unknown. Here we found that YB-1, a cellular
cancer susceptibility protein, is required for the centrosome maturation.
Phosphorylated YB-1 accumulated in the centrosome at mitotic phase. By YB-1
knockdown, microtubules were found detached from the centrosome at telophase and 
an abnormal nuclear shape called nuclear lobulation was found due to defective
reassembly of nuclear envelope by mis-localization of non-centrosomal
microtubules. In conclusion, we propose that YB-1 is important for the assembly
of centrosomal microtubule array for temporal and spatial regulation of
microtubules.

PMCID: PMC4350100
PMID: 25740062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mech Dev. 2015 May;136:40-52. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.02.003. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

AUF-1 and YB-1 independently regulate ß-globin mRNA in developing erythroid cells
through interactions with poly(A)-binding protein.

van Zalen S(1), Lombardi AA(1), Jeschke GR(1), Hexner EO(1), Russell JE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology-Oncology), Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine (Hematology-Oncology), Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Electronic address: jeruss@mail.med.upenn.edu.

The normal expression of ß-globin protein in mature erythrocytes is critically
dependent on post-transcriptional events in erythroid progenitors that ensure the
high stability of ß-globin mRNA. Previous work has revealed that these regulatory
processes require AUF-1 and YB-1, two RNA-binding proteins that assemble an mRNP 
ß-complex on the ß-globin 3'UTR. Here, we demonstrate that the ß-complex
organizes during the erythropoietic interval when both ß-globin mRNA and protein 
accumulate rapidly, implicating the importance of this regulatory mRNP to normal 
erythroid differentiation. Subsequent functional analyses link ß-complex assembly
to the half-life of ß-globin mRNA in vivo, providing a mechanistic basis for this
regulatory activity. AUF-1 and YB-1 appear to serve a redundant
post-transcriptional function, as both ß-complex assembly and ß-globin mRNA
levels are reduced by coordinate depletion of the two factors, and can be
restored by independent rescue with either factor alone. Additional studies
demonstrate that the ß-complex assembles more efficiently on polyadenylated
transcripts, implicating a model in which the ß-complex enhances the binding of
PABPC1 to the poly(A) tail, inhibiting mRNA deadenylation and consequently
effecting the high half-life of ß-globin transcripts in erythroid progenitors.
These data specify a post-transcriptional mechanism through which AUF1 and YB1
contribute to the normal development of erythropoietic cells, as well as to
non-hematopoietic tissues in which AUF1- and YB1-based regulatory mRNPs have been
observed to assemble on heterologous mRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4390516 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25720531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Dec 1;7(12):8715-23. eCollection 2014.

High expression of Y-box-binding protein 1 is associated with local recurrence
and predicts poor outcome in patients with colorectal cancer.

Yan X(1), Yan L(1), Zhou J(2), Liu S(2), Shan Z(1), Jiang C(2), Tian Y(1), Jin
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 600, Yi-Shan Road, Shanghai 200233, China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Soochow University 1, Shi-Zi Road, Suzhou 215006,
China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and fatal malignancies
worldwide. Novel prognostic biomarkers are urgently warranted to help improve the
treatment of CRC. Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) has been identified as a
multifunctional oncoprotein in various malignancies. Our previous study has
suggested that YB-1 may promote malignant progression of CRC cells in vitro.
However, its clinical and prognostic significance in CRC patients remains
unclear. In this study, the expression of YB-1 was examined in 32 fresh CRC
tissues using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and in
170 paraffin-embedded CRC tissues using immunohistochemistry. The result of
qRT-PCR demonstrated mRNA expression of YB-1 was increased in 26 of 32 (81.25%)
of CRC patients. The statistical analysis based on immunohistochemical staining
suggested that YB-1 expression was significantly correlated with tumor
differentiation, tumor invasion, lymph node metastasis and Dukes' classification 
(all P<0.05). Furthermore, we found that patients with high YB-1 expression had a
poorer prognosis and were more likely to undergo local recurrence, compared to
those with low YB-1 expression. We also identified that YB-1 expression, together
with lymph node metastasis and Dukes' classification were independent prognostic 
factors for CRC patients. In conclusion, our study for the first time
demonstrated the clinical and prognostic significance of YB-1 in CRC and
suggested that YB-1 is of great potential to be an attractive therapeutic target 
as well as prognostic biomarker for CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC4314019
PMID: 25674237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 6;458(2):347-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.114. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

YB-1 overexpression promotes a TGF-ß1-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition
via Akt activation.

Ha B(1), Lee EB(1), Cui J(1), Kim Y(1), Jang HH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute,
Gachon University, Incheon 406-799, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Incheon
406-799, Republic of Korea; Gachon Medical Research Institute, Gil Medical
Center, Gachon University, Incheon, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
hhjang@gachon.ac.kr.

The Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a transcription/translation regulatory
protein, and the expression thereof is associated with cancer aggressiveness. In 
the present study, we explored the regulatory effects of YB-1 during the
transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in lung adenocarcinoma cells. Downregulation of YB-1 increased
E-cadherin promoter activity, and upregulation of YB-1 decreased promoter
activity, suggesting that the YB-1 level may be correlated with the EMT. TGF-ß1
induced YB-1 expression, and TGF-ß1 translocated cytosolic YB-1 into the nucleus.
YB-1 overexpression promoted TGF-ß1-induced downregulation of epithelial markers,
upregulation of mesenchymal markers, and cell migration. Moreover, YB-1
overexpression enhanced the expression of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors
via TGF-ß1-induced Akt activation. Our findings afford new insights into the role
played by YB-1 in the TGF-ß1 signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25645014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep;230(9):2067-74. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24934.

Y-box Binding Protein-1 Is Part of a Complex Molecular Network Linking <U+0394>Np63a to 
the PI3K/akt Pathway in Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Troiano A(1), Lomoriello IS(1), di Martino O(1), Fusco S(2), Pollice A(1), Vivo
M(1), La Mantia G(1), Calabrò V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Naples 'Federico II,', Naples, Italy.
(2)Center for Advanced Biomaterials for Health Care@CRIB, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, Naples, Italy.

Cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) typically lack somatic
oncogene-activating mutations and most of them contain p53 mutations. However,
the presence of p53 mutations in skin premalignant lesions suggests that these
represent early events during tumor progression and additional alterations may be
required for SCC development. SCC cells frequently express high levels of <U+0394>Np63a 
and Y-box binding 1 (YB-1 or YBX1) oncoproteins. Here, we show that knockdown of 
YB-1 in spontaneously immortalized HaCaT and non-metastatic SCC011 cells led to a
dramatic decrease of <U+0394>Np63a, cell detachment and death. In highly metastatic
SCC022 cells, instead, YB-1 silencing induces PI3K/AKT signaling hyperactivation 
which counteracts the effect of YB-1 depletion and promotes cell survival. In
summary, our results unveil a functional cross-talk between YB-1, <U+0394>Np63a and the 
PI3K/AKT pathway critically governing survival of squamous carcinoma cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25639555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Mol Recognit. 2015 Feb;28(2):117-23. doi: 10.1002/jmr.2435. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Inhibition of abasic site cleavage in bubble DNA by multifunctional protein YB-1.

Fomina EE(1), Pestryakov PE, Kretov DA, Zharkov DO, Ovchinnikov LP, Curmi PA,
Lavrik OI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of
Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.

Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is widely known to participate in a multiple DNA
and RNA processing events in the living cell. YB-1 is also regarded as a putative
component of DNA repair. This possibility is supported by relocalization of YB-1 
into the nucleus following genotoxic stress. Increased affinity of YB-1 for
damaged DNA, especially in its single-stranded form, and its functional
interaction with proteins responsible for the initiation of apurinic/apyrimidinic
(AP) site repair, namely, AP endonuclease 1 and DNA glycosylase NEIL1, suggest
that YB-1 could be involved in the repair of AP sites as a regulatory protein.
Here we show that YB-1 has a significant inhibitory effect on the cleavage of AP 
sites located in single-stranded DNA and in DNA bubble structures. Such
interference may be considered as a possible mechanism to prevent single-stranded
intermediates of DNA replication, transcription and repair from being converted
into highly genotoxic DNA strand breaks, thus allowing the cell to coordinate
different DNA processing mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25605055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Jun;128(11):761-74. doi: 10.1042/CS20140606.

Smad7 regulates compensatory hepatocyte proliferation in damaged mouse liver and 
positively relates to better clinical outcome in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Feng T(1), Dzieran J(1), Gu X(2), Marhenke S(3), Vogel A(3), Machida K(4), Weiss 
TS(5), Ruemmele P(6), Kollmar O(7), Hoffmann P(8), Grässer F(8), Allgayer H(9),
Fabian J(1), Weng HL(1), Teufel A(10), Maass T(10), Meyer C(1), Lehmann U(11),
Zhu C(12), Mertens PR(12), Gao CF(2), Dooley S(1), Meindl-Beinker NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Molecular Hepatology Alcohol Associated Diseases, Dept. of Medicine II,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.
(2)†Department of Laboratory Medicine, Eastern Hepatobiliary Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (3)‡Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Endocrinology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(4)§Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Southern California
Research Center for ALPD and Cirrhosis, Los Angeles, CA, U.S.A. (5)¦Department of
Pediatrics and Juvenile Medicine, Center for Liver Cell Research, University of
Regensburg Hospital, Regensburg, Germany. (6)¶Institute of Pathology, University 
of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (7)**Department of General, Visceral,
Vascular and Pediatric Surgery, University of Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(8)††Saarland University Medical School, Institute of Virology, Homburg/Saar,
Germany. (9)‡‡Department of Experimental Surgery, University of Heidelberg,
Mannheim and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)§§Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin I, Universitätsklinikum
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (11)¦¦Institute of Pathology, Medical School
Hannover, Hannover, Germany. (12)¶¶Department of Nephrology and Hypertension,
Diabetes and Endocrinology, Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) is cytostatic towards damage-induced
compensatory hepatocyte proliferation. This function is frequently lost during
hepatocarcinogenesis, thereby switching the TGF-ß role from tumour suppressor to 
tumour promoter. In the present study, we investigate Smad7 overexpression as a
pathophysiological mechanism for cytostatic TGF-ß inhibition in liver damage and 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Transgenic hepatocyte-specific Smad7
overexpression in damaged liver of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH)-deficient 
mice increased compensatory proliferation of hepatocytes. Similarly, modulation
of Smad7 expression changed the sensitivity of Huh7, FLC-4, HLE and HLF HCC cell 
lines for cytostatic TGF-ß effects. In our cohort of 140 HCC patients, Smad7
transcripts were elevated in 41.4% of HCC samples as compared with adjacent
tissue, with significant positive correlation to tumour size, whereas low Smad7
expression levels were significantly associated with worse clinical outcome.
Univariate and multivariate analyses indicate Smad7 levels as an independent
predictor for overall (P<0.001) and disease-free survival (P=0.0123). Delineating
a mechanism for Smad7 transcriptional regulation in HCC, we identified cold-shock
Y-box protein-1 (YB-1), a multifunctional transcription factor. YB-1 RNAi reduced
TGF-ß-induced and endogenous Smad7 expression in Huh7 and FLC-4 cells
respectively. YB-1 and Smad7 mRNA expression levels correlated positively
(P<0.0001). Furthermore, nuclear co-localization of Smad7 and YB-1 proteins was
present in cancer cells of those patients. In summary, the present study provides
a YB-1/Smad7-mediated mechanism that interferes with
anti-proliferative/tumour-suppressive TGF-ß actions in a subgroup of HCC cells
that may facilitate aspects of tumour progression.

PMID: 25602745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 24;33:112. doi: 10.1186/s13046-014-0112-7.

Y-box binding protein 1 enhances DNA topoisomerase 1 activity and sensitivity to 
camptothecin via direct interaction.

Wu Y(1,)(2), Wang KY(3), Li Z(4), Liu YP(5), Izumi H(6), Uramoto H(7), Nakayama
Y(8), Ito K(9), Kohno K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, the First Hospital, China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China. cmuwuying@hotmail.co. (2)The President Laboratory, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.
cmuwuying@hotmail.co. (3)Shared-Use Research Center, School of Medicine,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. 
kywang@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, the First Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China. lancetgemini@gmail.com. (5)Department 
of Medical Oncology, the First Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang,
China. cmuliuyunpeng@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Occupational Pneumology,
Institute of Industrial Ecological Science, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.
h-izumi@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. 
hidetaka@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp. (8)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan. 
nakayama@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp. (9)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Shinshu 
University, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan. kenito@shinshu-u.ac.jp. (10)The President
Laboratory, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu,
Fukuoka, Japan. k-kohno@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) possesses pleiotropic functions
through its interactions with various cellular proteins, and its high expression 
levels make it a potential useful prognostic biomarker for cancer cells.
Eukaryotic DNA topoisomerases, such as DNA topoisomerase 1 (TOPO1) and DNA
topoisomerase 2 (TOPO2), are the essential DNA metabolism regulators that usually
overexpressed in cancer cells, and multiple proteins have been reported to
regulate the enzyme activity and the clinical efficacy of their inhibitors. The
present study unraveled the interaction of YB-1 with TOPO1, and further
investigated the related function and potential mechanisms during the
interaction.
METHODS: The direct association of TOPO1 with specific domain of YB-1 was
explored by co-immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays. The interaction
function was further clarified by DNA relaxation assays, co-immunoprecipitation
and WST-8 assays with in vitro gain- and loss- of function models.
RESULTS: We found that YB-1 interacts directly with TOPO1 (but not with TOPO2)
and promotes TOPO1 catalytic activity. Interactions between YB-1 and TOPO1
increased when cancer cells were treated with the TOPO1 inhibitor, camptothecin
(CPT), but not with the TOPO2 inhibitor, adriamycin (ADM). Furthermore, we found 
that the interaction is prevented by pretreatment with the antioxidant agent,
N-acetyl cysteine, and that YB-1 downregulation renders cells resistant to CPT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that nuclear YB-1 serves as an intracellular
promoter of TOPO1 catalytic activity that enhances CPT sensitivity through its
direct interaction with TOPO1.

PMCID: PMC4308875
PMID: 25539742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Gene Ther. 2015 Jan;22(1):30-43. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2014.67. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

An armed, YB-1-dependent oncolytic adenovirus as a candidate for a combinatorial 
anti-glioma approach of virotherapy, suicide gene therapy and chemotherapeutic
treatment.

Kostova Y(1), Mantwill K(1), Holm PS(1), Anton M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Experimental Oncology and Therapy Research, Klinikum rechts der 
Isar der Technischen Universität München, Munich, Germany.

We investigated the novel recombinant oncolytic adenovirus Ad-delo-sr39TK-RGD,
armed with a mutant herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase (HSV1-sr39TK) as
a suicide gene, and explored its antitumor efficacy in combination with
HSV1-sr39TK/ganciclovir (GCV) gene therapy and temozolomide (TMZ).
Ad-delo-sr39TK-RGD is an E1-mutated conditionally replicating adenovirus
dependent on the human Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1). Thus, we utilized the YB-1
dependency of the vector to target human glioma cells in vitro, using
two-dimensional cell culture and three-dimensional multicellular spheroids, and
demonstrated the strong replication competence and oncolytic potential of the
virus. The cytotoxicity mediated by HSV1-sr39TK and its prodrug GCV enhanced the 
oncolytic effect even at <0.1<U+2009>µg<U+2009>ml(-1) GCV and induced cell killing of > 95%
after adding GCV 0-1 days following infection. An increased bystander effect of
viral replication and GCV in co-cultured infected and uninfected cells was
observed. Co-administrating Ad-delo-sr39TK-RGD with TMZ and GCV, spheroid growth 
was reduced drastically. Gamma counting of infected spheroids demonstrated
successful accumulation of the radiotracer (18)F-labeled
9-[4-fluoro-3-(hydroxymethyl)butyl]guanine mediated by HSV1-sr39TK. Hence, our
results show that the combination of YB-1-dependent virotherapy with suicide
genes and TMZ effectively induces glioma cell killing and may allow for in vivo
non-invasive imaging within a limited time frame.

PMID: 25501992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Nov 11;13(4):9453-62. doi: 10.4238/2014.November.11.10.

Comparison of gene regulatory networks of benign and malignant breast cancer
samples with normal samples.

Chen DB(1), Yang HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China
daobaochen001@hotmail.com. (2)Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang Province, China.

The aim of this study was to explain the pathogenesis and deterioration process
of breast cancer. Breast cancer expression profile data GSE27567 was downloaded
from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, and breast cancer-related genes 
were extracted from databases, including Cancer-Resource and Online Mendelian
Inheritance In Man (OMIM). Next, h17 transcription factor data were obtained from
the University of California, Santa Cruz. Database for Annotation, Visualization,
and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)-enrichment analysis was applied and
gene-regulatory networks were constructed by double-two-way t-tests in 3 states, 
including normal, benign, and malignant. Furthermore, network topological
properties were compared between 2 states, and breast cancer-related bub genes
were ranked according to their different degrees between each of the two states. 
A total of 2380 breast cancer-related genes and 215 transcription factors were
screened by exploring databases; the genes were mainly enriched in their
functions, such as cell apoptosis and proliferation, and pathways, such as p53
signaling and apoptosis, which were related with carcinogenesis. In addition,
gene-regulatory networks in the 3 conditions were constructed. By comparing their
network topological properties, we found that there is a larger transition of
differences between malignant and benign breast cancer. Moreover, 8 hub genes
(YBX1, ZFP36, YY1, XRCC5, XRCC4, ZFHX3, ZMAT3, and XPC) were identified in the
top 10 genes ranked by different degrees. Through comparative analysis of
gene-regulation networks, we identified the link between related genes and the
pathogenesis of breast cancer. However, further experiments are needed to confirm
our results.

PMID: 25501155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Proteome Res. 2015 Feb 6;14(2):804-13. doi: 10.1021/pr500847p. Epub 2014 Dec
26.

C1QBP negatively regulates the activation of oncoprotein YBX1 in the renal cell
carcinoma as revealed by interactomics analysis.

Wang Y(1), Yue D, Xiao M, Qi C, Chen Y, Sun D, Zhang N, Chen R.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy;
Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences; Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin 
Medical University Second Hospital & School of Medical Laboratory, Tianjin
Medical University , 22 Qixiangtai Road, Heping District, Tianjin 300070, China.

The Y-box-binding protein 1 (YBX1) plays a critical role in tumorigenesis by
promoting cell proliferation, overriding cell-cycle check points, and enhancing
genomic instability. In this study, the interactome of YBX1 in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) was analyzed by coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry to
better understand its function and regulatory mechanism. A total of 129 proteins 
were identified as potential YBX1 binding partners. The interaction between the
complement component 1, q subcomponent binding protein (C1QBP), and YBX1 was
further confirmed by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting. Knockdown of C1QBP
enhanced the phosphorylation of YBX1and its nuclear translocation, indicating
that C1QBP negatively regulated YBX1 activation. The clinical significance of
these two proteins was analyzed in the tissues from 52 RCC patients by
immunohistochemistry. Expression of YBX1 was markedly elevated in the carcinoma
tissues, and its nuclear expression was associated with histological T stage and 
metastasis. Meanwhile, the level of C1QBP in the carcinoma tissues was
significantly lower than that in the adjacent healthy tissues, which was
negatively correlated with the nuclear localization of YBX1 in the RCC tissues (P
= 0.011). These data suggest that C1QBP is a novel regulator of YBX1, and the
expression of C1QBP and the nuclear expression of YBX1 could both be used as
independent prognostic makers for cancer progression in the RCC patients. The
proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier
PXD001493.

PMID: 25497084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):207-20.

Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 2A suppresses the expression of HER2
via a pathway involving TWIST and YB-1 in Epstein-Barr virus-associated gastric
carcinomas.

Zhang YW(1), Zhao XX(1), Tan C(2), Zhang ZG(1), Jiang Y(1), Chen JN(1), Wei
HB(3), Xue L(4), Li HG(2), Du H(5), Shao CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Sun
Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province,
China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (4)Department of
Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhongshan
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China. (5)Department of Pathology, Guangzhou First
Municipal People's Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

To explore HER2 expression in Epstein-Barr virus-associated gastric carcinoma
(EBVaGC) and the possible mechanisms causing down-regulation of HER2 expression
in EBVaGC, we first evaluated HER2 and LMP2A expression on a
clinicopathological-features matched cohort including 78 EBVaGC and 216
EBV-negative gastric carcinoma (EBVnGC) cases by immunohistochemistry. Cases with
high HER2 expression in EBVaGC were significantly less than in EBVnGC (5.1%
versus 23.7%; p<0.001), and none of the 34 LMP2A+ EBVaGC showed high HER2
expression. Further, overexpressing LMP2A in EBV-negative SGC7901 cells
significantly decreased HER2, TWIST and YB-1 mRNA by 36.1%±8.1%, 87.6%±14.0% and 
83.8%±5.7%, and protein by 44%, 57% and 49%, respectively. Additionally, the
nucleus/cytoplasm ratios of TWIST and YB-1 were also decreased by 85% and 80%,
respectively. Silencing LMP2A by siRNA in EBV-positive SNU719 cells for 48 h
significantly increased HER2, TWIST and YB-1 mRNA to 276.7%±14.6%, 1284.8%±38.2% 
and 332.0%±15.5% and protein to 212%, 457% and 232%, respectively. The
nucleus/cytoplasm ratios of TWIST and YB-1 were up-regulated by 4.00- and
3.57-fold, respectively, following LMP2A down-regulation. Moreover,
LMP2A+/HER2low EBVaGC cases presented the best overall survival compared with
LMP2A-/HER2low and LMP2A-/HER2high cases (p=0.003, log-rank test). These results 
suggest that LMP2A may suppress the HER2 expression through the TWIST/YB-1 axis
in EBVaGC.

PMCID: PMC4381589
PMID: 25402957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e112754. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112754.
eCollection 2014.

Differential control of interleukin-6 mRNA levels by cellular distribution of
YB-1.

Kang S(1), Lee TA(1), Ra EA(1), Lee E(1), Choi Hj(1), Lee S(1), Park B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems biology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology,
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.

Cytokine production is essential for innate and adaptive immunity against
microbial invaders and must be tightly controlled. Cytokine messenger RNA (mRNA) 
is in constant flux between the nucleus and the cytoplasm and in transcription,
splicing, or decay; such processes must be tightly controlled. Here, we report a 
novel function of Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) in modulating interleukin-6
(IL-6) mRNA levels in a cell type-specific manner. In lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated macrophages, YB-1 interacts with IL-6 mRNA and actively
transports it to the extracellular space by YB-1-enriched vesicles, resulting in 
the proper maintenance of intracellular IL-6 mRNA levels. YB-1 secretion occurs
in a cell type-specific manner. Whereas macrophages actively secret YB-1,
dendritic cells maintain it predominantly in the cytoplasm even in response to
LPS. Intracellular YB-1 has the distinct function of regulating IL-6 mRNA
stability in dendritic cells. Moreover, because LPS differentially regulates the 
expression of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) in macrophages and dendritic cells,
this stimulus might control YB-1 acetylation differentially in both cell types.
Taken together, these results suggest a unique feature of YB-1 in controlling
intracellular IL-6 mRNA levels in a cell type-specific manner, thereby leading to
functions that are dependent on the extracellular and intracellular distribution 
of YB-1.

PMCID: PMC4232504
PMID: 25398005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Sci Rep. 2014 Oct 30;4:6841. doi: 10.1038/srep06841.

HnRNP C, YB-1 and hnRNP L coordinately enhance skipping of human MUSK exon 10 to 
generate a Wnt-insensitive MuSK isoform.

Nasrin F(1), Rahman MA(1), Masuda A(1), Ohe K(1), Takeda J(1), Ohno K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurogenetics, Center for Neurological Diseases and Cancer, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

Muscle specific receptor tyrosine kinase (MuSK) is an essential postsynaptic
transmembrane molecule that mediates clustering of acetylcholine receptors
(AChR). MUSK exon 10 is alternatively skipped in human, but not in mouse.
Skipping of this exon disrupts a cysteine-rich region (Fz-CRD), which is
essential for Wnt-mediated AChR clustering. To investigate the underlying
mechanisms of alternative splicing, we exploited block-scanning mutagenesis with 
human minigene and identified a 20-nucleotide block that contained exonic
splicing silencers. Using RNA-affinity purification, mass spectrometry, and
Western blotting, we identified that hnRNP C, YB-1 and hnRNP L are bound to MUSK 
exon 10. siRNA-mediated knockdown and cDNA overexpression confirmed the additive,
as well as the independent, splicing suppressing effects of hnRNP C, YB-1 and
hnRNP L. Antibody-mediated in vitro protein depletion and scanning mutagenesis
additionally revealed that binding of hnRNP C to RNA subsequently promotes
binding of YB-1 and hnRNP L to the immediate downstream sites and enhances exon
skipping. Simultaneous tethering of two splicing trans-factors to the target
confirmed the cooperative effect of YB-1 and hnRNP L on hnRNP C-mediated exon
skipping. Search for a similar motif in the human genome revealed nine
alternative exons that were individually or coordinately regulated by hnRNP C and
YB-1.

PMCID: PMC4213890
PMID: 25354590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Oct 7;13(4):8153-62. doi: 10.4238/2014.October.7.10.

Identifying differential expression genes and single nucleotide variations using 
RNA-seq in metastatic melanoma.

Liu D(1), Zhao ZG(1), Jiao ZL(2), Li HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China. (2)Department
of Dermatology, Clinic of Navy Headquarters, Beijing, China. (3)Department of
Dermatology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China HengjinLi@hotmail.com.

Melanoma is a malignant tumor and one of the most frequent metastatic cancers.
This study was conducted to identify differential expression genes (DEGs) and
single nucleotide variations (SNVs) in metastatic melanoma. We analyzed
microarray data of GSE23056 downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus,
including two normal samples (skinN1 and skinN2) and 2 metastatic melanoma
samples (skinT and lymphT). We not only compared DEGs in metastatic melanoma
samples with normal samples (lymphT_skinN and skinT_skinN), but also compared
DEGs between two metastatic melanoma types (lymphT_skinT). SNVs were identified
by using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner and Cufflinks in metastatic melanoma samples
using RNA-seq. Sequence Alignment/Map tools and the ANNOVAR software were used to
analyze and annotate SNVs. We identified 18 significantly common DEGs in
lymphT_skinN and skinT_skinN and one common gene, YBX1, in lymphT_skinN,
skinT_skinN, and lymphT_skinT. We identified 49,534, 48,118, 63,812, and 33,096
SNVs in skinN1, skinN2, skinT, and lymphT, respectively. Twenty-nine SNVs were
located in exonic regions of two DEGs, HLA-B and TSPAN10. SNVs that exist only in
tumors were located in MARVELD1, SLC16A3, and VAV3. The DEGs screened in our
study are potential biomarkers for metastatic melanoma therapy.

PMID: 25299200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Ther. 2015 Jan;23(1):89-98. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.197. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

miR-382 inhibits osteosarcoma metastasis and relapse by targeting Y box-binding
protein 1.

Xu M(1), Jin H(2), Xu CX(3), Sun B(4), Song ZG(5), Bi WZ(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The General Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA. (4)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School
of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing,
China. (5)Department of Pathology, The General Hospital of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, Beijing, China.

Lung metastasis and relapse in osteosarcoma (OS) patients indicate poor
prognosis. Here, we identified significantly decreased expression of miR-382 in
highly metastatic OS cell lines and relapsed OS samples compared to their
parental cell lines and primary OS samples, respectively. In addition, our
clinical data showed that the miR-382 expression level was inversely associated
with relapse and positively associated with metastasis-free survival in OS
patients. The overexpression of miR-382 suppressed epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and metastasis. This overexpression also decreased the cancer
stem cell (CSC) population and function in OS cells. In contrast, inhibition of
miR-382 stimulated EMT and metastasis and increased CSC population in OS cells.
In addition, our in vivo experiments showed that the overexpression of miR-382
inhibited CSC-induced tumor formation, and the combination of miR-382 with
doxorubicin prevented disease relapse in OS patients. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that miR-382 exerted its tumor-suppressing potential by directly
targeting Y box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) in OS. Taken together, our findings
suggest that miR-382 functions as a tumor suppressor function and that the
overexpression of miR-382 is a novel strategy to inhibit tumor metastasis and
prevent CSC-induced relapse in OS.

PMCID: PMC4426807
PMID: 25292190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1843(12):2913-25. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.09.007. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

DERA is the human deoxyribose phosphate aldolase and is involved in stress
response.

Salleron L(1), Magistrelli G(2), Mary C(3), Fischer N(2), Bairoch A(4), Lane
L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Protein Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address: lisa.salleron@unige.ch.
(2)NovImmune SA, Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland. (3)Department of Human Protein
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Human Protein Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; CALIPHO GroupSIB-Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 
Geneva, Switzerland. (5)Department of Human Protein Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; CALIPHO GroupSIB-Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address:
lydie.lane@isb-sib.ch.

Deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase (EC 4.1.2.4), which converts
2-deoxy-d-ribose-5-phosphate into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and acetaldehyde,
belongs to the core metabolism of living organisms. It was previously shown that 
human cells harbor deoxyribose phosphate aldolase activity but the protein
responsible of this activity has never been formally identified. This study
provides the first experimental evidence that DERA, which is mainly expressed in 
lung, liver and colon, is the human deoxyribose phosphate aldolase. Among human
cell lines, the highest DERA mRNA level and deoxyribose phosphate aldolase
activity were observed in liver-derived Huh-7 cells. DERA was shown to interact
with the known stress granule component YBX1 and to be recruited to stress
granules after oxidative or mitochondrial stress. In addition, cells in which
DERA expression was down-regulated using shRNA formed fewer stress granules and
were more prone to apoptosis after clotrimazole stress, suggesting the importance
of DERA for stress granule formation. Furthermore, the expression of DERA was
shown to permit cells in which mitochondrial ATP production was abolished to make
use of extracellular deoxyinosine to maintain ATP levels. This study unraveled a 
previously undescribed pathway which may allow cells with high
deoxyribose-phosphate aldolase activity, such as liver cells, to minimize or
delay stress-induced damage by producing energy through deoxynucleoside
degradation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25229427  [PubMed - in process]


44. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2720-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2545. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Knockdown of Y-box-binding protein-1 inhibits the malignant progression of HT-29 
colorectal adenocarcinoma cells by reversing epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Yan XB(1), Zhu QC(1), Chen HQ(1), Peng JY(1), Chao HL(1), Du HX(1), Wang ZG(1),
Jin ZM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Sixth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200233, P.R. China.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) has been identified as an oncoprotein in various
malignancies. The aim of this study was to investigate the biological role of
YB-1 and its association with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
colorectal cancer (CRC). The expression of YB-1 and three EMT-related proteins
(E-cadherin, N-cadherin and vimentin) was analyzed in 80 CRC and matched normal
tissue samples, by immunohistochemistry. The results indicated that the
expression of YB-1 was higher in CRC tissue samples than that in matched normal
controls and was significantly correlated with tumor differentiation, tumor
invasion, lymph node metastasis and distant metastases. Furthermore, analysis
showed that YB-1 expression was negatively correlated with E-cadherin and
positively correlated with N-cadherin and vimentin expression. In vitro assays
showed that knockdown of YB-1 inhibited the proliferation, apoptosis resistance, 
invasion and migration of the HT-29 CRC cell line. Of note, following knockdown
of YB-1, E-cadherin expression was elevated whereas N-cadherin and vimentin
expression was reduced. Taken together, these results suggest that YB-1 promotes 
the malignant progression of CRC in part through the induction of EMT, and YB-1
may therefore be a potential novel target for CRC treatment.

PMID: 25201740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov;54(11):1252-63. doi: 10.1002/mc.22197. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

GOLPH3 promotes glioblastoma cell migration and invasion via the mTOR-YB1 pathway
in vitro.

Zhang X(1,)(2), Ding Z(3), Mo J(3), Sang B(3), Shi Q(1,)(2), Hu J(1,)(2), Xie
S(1,)(2), Zhan W(1,)(2), Lu D(3), Yang M(3), Bian W(3), Zhou X(1,)(2), Yu
R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou,
Jiangsu, China. (2)Insititute of Nervous System Diseases, Xuzhou Medical College,
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. (3)The Graduate School, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou,
Jiangsu, China.

The identification of genes involved in carcinogenesis and tumor progression is
of great interest, since these genes might be possible as candidates for new
tumor targeted therapy strategies. Our previous study shows that Golgi
phosphoprotein 3 (GOLPH3) is involved in glioma cell migration and invasion, the 
critical characteristics of malignant gliomas. In this study, we explored the
mechanism of GOLPH3 affecting cell migration and invasion and found that GOLPH3
promotes glioblastoma (GBM) cell migration and invasion via the mammalian target 
of rapamycin(mTOR)-Y-box binding protein-1 (YB1) pathway in vitro. Both the
protein levels of GOLPH3 and YB1 were up-regulated in human glioma tissues and
they exhibited direct correlation with each other. In addition, down-regulation
of GOLPH3 inhibited glioma cell migration and invasion, while over-expression of 
GOLPH3 enhanced them. Meanwhile, GOLPH3 down-regulation led to a significant
decrease of YB1 level as well as mTOR activity, both required for glioma cell
migration and invasion. On the contrary, YB1 level and mTOR activity increased
after GOLPH3 over-expression. YB1 down-regulation or mTOR ATP site inhibitor
INK128 treatment inhibited cell migration and invasion, similar to the effect of 
GOLPH3 down-regulation. Furthermore, over-expression of GOLPH3 induced glioma
cell migration and invasion was blocked by INK128 and YB1 down-regulation. Taken 
together, these results show that GOLPH3 promotes glioblastoma cell migration and
invasion via the mTOR-YB1pathway, indicating that GOLPH3-mTOR-YB1 pathway might
be a new therapeutic target for glioma treatment.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25156912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Gene Ther. 2014 Nov;25(11):929-41. doi: 10.1089/hum.2014.041. Epub 2014 Sep
11.

Establishment of a novel cell line for the enhanced production of recombinant
adeno-associated virus vectors for gene therapy.

Satkunanathan S(1), Wheeler J, Thorpe R, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)NIBSC/Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency , Hertfordshire EN6 
3QG, United Kingdom .

Adeno-associated viral (AAV) vectors show great promise because of their
excellent safety profile; however, pre-existing immune responses have
necessitated the administration of high titer AAV, posing a significant challenge
to the advancement of gene therapy involving AAV vectors. Recombinant AAV vectors
contain minimum viral proteins necessary for their assembly and gene delivery
functions. During the process of AAV assembly and production, AAV vectors
acquire, inherently and submissively, various cellular proteins, but the identity
of these proteins is poorly characterized. We reason that by identifying host
cell proteins inherently associated with AAV vectors we may better understand the
contribution of cellular components to AAV vector assembly and, ultimately, may
improve the production of AAV vectors for gene therapy. In this study, three
serotypes of recombinant AAV, namely AAV2, AAV5, and AAV8, were investigated. We 
used liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods
to identify protein composition in purified AAV vectors, confirmed protein
identities using western blotting, and explored the potential function of
selected proteins in AAV vector production using small hairpin (shRNA) methods.
Using LC-MS/MS, we identified 44 AAV-associated cellular proteins including Y-box
binding protein (YB1). We showed for the first time that the establishment of a
novel producer cell line by introducing an shRNA sequence down-regulating YB1
resulted in up to 45- and 9-fold increase in physical vector genome titers of
AAV2 and AAV8, respectively, and up to 7-fold increase in AAV2 transduction
vector genome titers. Our results revealed that YB1 gene knockdown promoted AAV2 
rep expression and vector DNA production and reduced the number of empty
particles in AAV2 products, suggesting that YB1 plays an important role in AAV
vector assembly by competition with adenovirus E2A and AAV capsid proteins for
binding to the inverted terminal repeat (ITR) sequence. The significance and
implications of our findings in future improvement of AAV production are
discussed.

PMCID: PMC4236031
PMID: 25072415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Virol. 2014 Sep;88(18):10340-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00984-14. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Host factors that interact with the pestivirus N-terminal protease, Npro, are
components of the ribonucleoprotein complex.

Jefferson M(1), Donaszi-Ivanov A(1), Pollen S(2), Dalmay T(2), Saalbach G(3),
Powell PP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia,
Norwich, Norfolk, United Kingdom. (2)Biological Sciences, University of East
Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom. (3)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park,
Colney, Norwich, United Kingdom. (4)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical
School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, Norfolk, United Kingdom
p.powell@uea.ac.uk.

The viral N-terminal protease N(pro) of pestiviruses counteracts cellular
antiviral defenses through inhibition of IRF3. Here we used mass spectrometry to 
identify a new role for N(pro) through its interaction with over 55 associated
proteins, mainly ribosomal proteins and ribonucleoproteins, including RNA
helicase A (DHX9), Y-box binding protein (YBX1), DDX3, DDX5, eIF3, IGF2BP1,
multiple myeloma tumor protein 2, interleukin enhancer binding factor 3 (IEBP3), 
guanine nucleotide binding protein 3, and polyadenylate-binding protein 1
(PABP-1). These are components of the translation machinery, ribonucleoprotein
particles (RNPs), and stress granules. Significantly, we found that stress
granule formation was inhibited in MDBK cells infected with a noncytopathic
bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) strain, Kyle. However, ribonucleoproteins
binding to N(pro) did not inhibit these proteins from aggregating into stress
granules. N(pro) interacted with YBX1 though its TRASH domain, since the mutant
C112R protein with an inactive TRASH domain no longer redistributed to stress
granules. Interestingly, RNA helicase A and La autoantigen relocated from a
nuclear location to form cytoplasmic granules with N(pro). To address a proviral 
role for N(pro) in RNP granules, we investigated whether N(pro) affected RNA
interference (RNAi), since interacting proteins are involved in RISC function
during RNA silencing. Using glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
silencing with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) followed by Northern blotting of
GAPDH, expression of N(pro) had no effect on RNAi silencing activity, contrasting
with other viral suppressors of interferon. We propose that N(pro) is involved
with virus RNA translation in the cytoplasm for virus particle production, and
when translation is inhibited following stress, it redistributes to the
replication complex.IMPORTANCE: Although the pestivirus N-terminal protease,
N(pro), has been shown to have an important role in degrading IRF3 to prevent
apoptosis and interferon production during infection, the function of this unique
viral protease in the pestivirus life cycle remains to be elucidated. We used
proteomic mass spectrometry to identify novel interacting proteins and have shown
that N(pro) is present in ribosomal and ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs),
indicating a translational role in virus particle production. The virus itself
can prevent stress granule assembly from these complexes, but this inhibition is 
not due to N(pro). A proviral role to subvert RNA silencing through binding of
these host RNP proteins was not identified for this viral suppressor of
interferon.

Copyright © 2014 Jefferson et al.

PMCID: PMC4178888
PMID: 24965446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 1;289(31):21401-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.562991. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Calcineurin-mediated YB-1 dephosphorylation regulates CCL5 expression during
monocyte differentiation.

Alidousty C(1), Rauen T(1), Hanssen L(1), Wang Q(2), Alampour-Rajabi S(3),
Mertens PR(4), Bernhagen J(3), Floege J(1), Ostendorf T(1), Raffetseder U(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital
RWTH-Aachen, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52057 Aachen, Germany. (2)the Department of
Rheumatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, China. (3)the Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute
of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, University Hospital RWTH-Aachen,
Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52057 Aachen, Germany, and. (4)the Department of Nephrology,
Hypertension, Diabetes, and Endocrinology, Otto-von-Guericke-University, 39120
Magdeburg, Germany. (5)From the Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology,
University Hospital RWTH-Aachen, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52057 Aachen, Germany,
uraffetseder@ukaachen.de.

Y-box (YB) protein-1 serves as a master regulator in gene transcription and mRNA 
translation. YB-1 itself is regulated at various levels, e.g. through
post-translational modifications. In our previous work, we identified RANTES/CCL5
as a transcriptional target of YB-1. We previously demonstrated that YB-1 protein
is transiently up-regulated during monocyte/macrophage differentiation evidenced 
in monocytic cells (THP-1 cells) that were differentiated using phorbol myristate
acetate (PMA). Here we provide evidence that YB-1 phosphorylation, specifically
at its serine residue 102 (Ser-102), increases early on in THP-1 cells following 
PMA treatment as well as in differentiated primary human monocytes. This process 
is mediated through the Akt signaling pathway. Ser-102-phosphorylated YB-1
displays stronger binding affinity and trans-activating capacity at the CCL5 gene
promoter. Notably, Ser-102-phosphorylated YB-1 disappears at later stages of the 
monocyte/macrophage differentiation process. We demonstrate that serine-threonine
phosphatase calcineurin (CN) dephosphorylates YB-1 preventing it from binding to 
and trans-activating the CCL5 promoter. Co-immunoprecipitation assays prove a
direct YB-1/CN interaction. Furthermore, analyses in kidney tissues from mice
that were treated with the CN inhibitor cyclosporine A revealed an in vivo effect
of CN on the YB-1 phosphorylation status. We conclude that YB-1 phosphorylation
at Ser-102 is an important prerequisite for CCL5 promoter activation during
macrophage differentiation. Our findings point to a critical role of YB-1 in the 
resolution of inflammatory processes which may largely be due to CN-mediated
dephosphorylation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4118104
PMID: 24947514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Oct;21(10):1522-34. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.79. Epub 2014
Jun 13.

p53-directed translational control can shape and expand the universe of p53
target genes.

Zaccara S(1), Tebaldi T(2), Pederiva C(1), Ciribilli Y(1), Bisio A(1), Inga A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Networks, Centre for Integrative Biology, CIBIO,
University of Trento, Trento, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Translational Genomics,
Centre for Integrative Biology, CIBIO, University of Trento, Trento, Italy.

The increasing number of genome-wide transcriptome analyses focusing on
p53-induced cellular responses in many cellular contexts keeps adding to the
already numerous p53-regulated transcriptional networks. To investigate
post-transcriptional controls as an additional dimension of p53-directed gene
expression responses, we performed a translatome analysis through polysomal
profiling on MCF7 cells upon 16 hours of doxorubicin or nutlin-3a treatment. The 
comparison between the transcriptome and the translatome revealed a considerable 
level of uncoupling, characterized by genes whose transcription variations did
not correlate with translation variations. Interestingly, uncoupled genes were
associated with apoptosis, DNA and RNA metabolism and cell cycle functions,
suggesting that post-transcriptional control can modulate classical p53-regulated
responses. Furthermore, even for well-established p53 targets that were
differentially expressed both at the transcriptional and translational levels,
quantitative differences between the transcriptome, subpolysomal and polysomal
RNAs were evident. As we searched mechanisms underlying gene expression
uncoupling, we identified the p53-dependent modulation of six RNA-binding
proteins, where hnRNPD (AUF1) and CPEB4 are direct p53 transcriptional targets,
whereas SRSF1, DDX17, YBX1 and TARDBP are indirect targets (genes modulated
preferentially in the subpolysomal or polysomal mRNA level) modulated at the
translational level in a p53-dependent manner. In particular, YBX1 translation
appeared to be reduced by p53 via two different mechanisms, one related to mTOR
inhibition and the other to miR-34a expression. Overall, we established p53 as a 
master regulator of translational control and identified new p53-regulated genes 
affecting translation that can contribute to p53-dependent cellular responses.

PMCID: PMC4158691
PMID: 24926617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 9;14:328. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-328.

YB-1 regulates Sox2 to coordinately sustain stemness and tumorigenic properties
in a phenotypically distinct subset of breast cancer cells.

Jung K, Wu F, Wang P, Ye X, Abdulkarim BS, Lai R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Edmonton, AB, Canada. rlai@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: Sox2, a transcription factor and an embryonic stem cell marker, has
been implicated in the pathogenesis of breast cancer (BC). YB-1 is another
transcription factor that has been shown to promote stemness in BC cells.
METHODS: Western blotting, quantitative PCR, and siRNAs were used to query the
regulatory relationships between YB-1, Sox2, and their downstream targets.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to detect YB-1 interactions at the Sox2
promoter. Mammosphere and soft agar assays were used to assess the phenotypic
consequences of YB-1 knockdown.
RESULTS: Here, we report that YB-1 regulates Sox2. YB-1 was found to bind to the 
SOX2 promoter and down-regulate its expression in MCF7 and ZR751. The regulatory 
interaction between YB-1 and Sox2 was drastically different between the two
phenotypically distinct cell subsets, purified based on their differential
response to a Sox2 reporter. They are referred to as the reporter unresponsive
(RU) cells and the reporter responsive (RR) cells. Upon siRNA knockdown of YB-1, 
RU cells showed an increase in Sox2 expression but no change in Sox2 reporter
activity; in contrast, RR cells exhibited increased expression and reporter
activity of Sox2. Correlating with these findings, YB-1 knockdown induced a
differential response in the expression of genes known to be regulated by both
Sox2 and YB-1 (e.g. CCND1 and ITGA6). For instance, in response to YB-1
knockdown, CCND1 and ITGA6 expression were decreased or unchanged in RU cells but
paradoxically increased in RR cells. Compared to RU cells, RR cells were
significantly more resistant to the suppression of mammosphere formation due to
YB-1 knockdown. Importantly, mammospheres derived from parental MCF7 cells
treated with YB-1 siRNA knockdown exhibited higher expression levels of SOX2 and 
its downstream targets.
CONCLUSIONS: To conclude, in a subset of BC cells, namely RR cells, YB-1
regulates Sox2 to coordinately maintain stemness and tumorigenic properties.

PMCID: PMC4025193
PMID: 24885403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Biochem. 2014 Sep;47(13-14):1262-4. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2014.05.004. 
Epub 2014 May 14.

Inverse correlation of ribosomal protein S27A and multifunctional protein YB-1 in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gunasekaran VP(1), Ganeshan M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli 620024, India. Electronic address:
vinothprasannagm@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli 620024, India.
Electronic address: mathan@bdu.ac.in.

OBJECTIVE: The detection of possible correlation between ribosomal protein RPS27A
and multifunctional YB-1 expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
DESIGN AND METHODS: Tissue microarray slides containing totally 80 cores with 19 
tissues of HCC, 1 tissue of hepatocholangiocarcinoma, 10 tissues of liver
cirrhosis and 10 normal liver tissues in duplicates were analyzed for expression 
of RPS27A and YB-1 by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Among each of 10 LC and normal liver tissues all (100%) showed RPS27A
positive expression but only 11 out of 19 HCC tissues (57.89%) showed RPS27A
positive expression with significant difference compared (P<0.05) with both LC
and normal tissues. We found positive expression of YB-1 in 17 tissues out of 19 
HCC tissues (89.47%) but only 4 tissues out of each 10 LC as well as normal liver
tissues showed positive expression with significant (P<0.01) difference compared 
to HCC tissues. A statistically significant inverse weak correlation (rho=-0.293)
between YB-1 expression and RPS27A expression was found.
CONCLUSION: The present investigation concludes that the ribosomal protein RPS27A
was down-regulated in viral induced HCC patients. RPS27A expression was found to 
have a weak inverse correlation with overexpression of multifunctional protein
YB-1 in HCC tissues. This study opens up a new window for YB-1-RPS27A axis in
HCC.

Copyright © 2014 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24833360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biomark Med. 2014;8(4):581-8. doi: 10.2217/bmm.14.4.

Association between higher expression of YB-1 and poor prognosis in early-stage
extranodal nasal-type natural killer/T-cell lymphoma.

Zhao Z(1), Liao Y, Li J, Wu J, Zhang Y, Feng G, Tan B, Reng S, Zhang Z, Feng X,
Wang J, Du X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mian Yang Central Hospital, Sichuan, People's Republic
of China.

AIM: A recent study shows that YB-1-related biomarkers affect the prognosis of
patients with natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTCL). The aim of this study was
to determine whether there is an association between YB-1 expression and the
prognosis of patients with early-stage extranodal nasal-type NKTCL.
MATERIALS & METHODS: To clarify the roles of YB-1 in early-stage extranodal
nasal-type NKTCL, we used immunohistochemical studies to examine YB-1 expression 
in 36 early-stage extranodal nasal-type NKTCL specimens.
RESULTS: Subsequently, YB-1 expression was correlated with clinicopathologic
parameters. Higher expression of YB-1 was associated with an increased potential 
for relapse, poor disease-free survival and reduced overall survival.
DISCUSSION: Higher expression of YB-1 could be an independent risk factor for
poor prognosis in patients with early-stage extranodal nasal-type NKTCL.
Understanding the biology of YB-1-mediated pathways may lead to novel therapeutic
strategies for early-stage extranodal nasal-type NKTCL.

PMID: 24796623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Feb;79(2):131-8. doi: 10.1134/S0006297914020060.

Search for ligand of N-acetylglucosaminyl-N-acetylmuramyl dipeptide using its
peptide mimetic.

Savinov GV(1), Shepelyakovskaya AO, Boziev KhM, Brovko FA, Laman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Pushchino Branch of Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic
Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region, 142290, Russia.
gsawinow@gmail.com.

The method for searching for ligands exerting an adjuvant effect is described.
The method involves isolation of polysomes using an immobilized peptide mimetic
of N-acetylglucosaminyl-N-acetylmuramyl dipeptide (GMDP) - RN-peptide. After the 
affinity chromatography and washing, RN-peptide complexes with the target
sequences were dissociated with guanidine hydrochloride. The obtained mRNA was
used for cDNA synthesis and subsequent cloning in an expression vector. Further
studies showed the effectiveness of this method. Clones interacting with the
peptide were selected using biotinylated RN-peptide. It was found that all clones
encode a sequence identical to the protein YB-1. Recombinant antibodies against
protein YB-1 were selected from a phage display human scFv library. Using these
antibodies, we determined the binding constant of RN-peptide to protein YB-1.
Competitive analysis showed that RN-peptide and GMDP compete for the same portion
of YB-1 at molar ratio 1 : 12.

PMID: 24794728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Cells. 2014 Jun;19(6):504-16. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12150. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

YB-1 promotes transcription of cyclin D1 in human non-small-cell lung cancers.

Harada M(1), Kotake Y, Ohhata T, Kitagawa K, Niida H, Matsuura S, Funai K,
Sugimura H, Suda T, Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan; Second
Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.

Cyclin D1, an oncogenic G1 cyclin, and YB-1, a transcription factor involved in
cell growth, are both over-expressed in several human cancers. In human lung
cancer, the functional association between YB-1 and cyclin D1 has never been
elucidated. In this study, we show YB-1 is involved in the transcription of
cyclin D1 in human lung cancer. Depletion of endogenous YB-1 by siRNA inhibited
progression of G1 phase and down-regulated both the protein and mRNA levels of
cyclin D1 in human lung cancer cells. Forced over-expression of YB-1 with a
cyclin D1 reporter plasmid increased luciferase activity, and ChIP assay results 
showed YB-1 bound to the cyclin D1 promoter. Moreover, the amount of YB-1 mRNA
positively correlated with cyclin D1 mRNA levels in clinical non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) specimens. Immunohistochemical analysis also indicated YB-1
expression correlated with cyclin D1 expression in NSCLC specimens. In addition, 
most of the cases expressing both cyclin D1 and CDC6, another molecule controlled
by YB-1, had co-existing YB-1 over-expression. Together, our results suggest that
aberrant expression of both cyclin D1 and CDC6 by YB-1 over-expression may
collaboratively participate in lung carcinogenesis.

© 2014 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2014 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24774443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncotarget. 2014 May 15;5(9):2462-74.

YB-1 expression promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer 
that is inhibited by a small molecule fisetin.

Khan MI(1), Adhami VM, Lall RK, Sechi M, Joshi DC, Haidar OM, Syed DN, Siddiqui
IA, Chiu SY, Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays an important role in prostate
cancer (PCa) metastasis. The transcription/translation regulatory Y-box binding
protein-1 (YB-1) is known to be associated with cancer metastasis. We observed
that YB-1 expression increased with tumor grade and showed an inverse
relationship with E-cadherin in a human PCa tissue array. Forced YB-1 expression 
induced a mesenchymal morphology that was associated with down regulation of
epithelial markers. Silencing of YB-1 reversed mesenchymal features and decreased
cell proliferation, migration and invasion in PCa cells. YB-1 is activated
directly via Akt mediated phosphorylation at Ser102 within the cold shock domain 
(CSD). We next identified fisetin as an inhibitor of YB-1 activation.
Computational docking and molecular dynamics suggested that fisetin binds on the 
residues from ß1 - ß4 strands of CSD, hindering Akt's interaction with YB-1.
Calculated free binding energy ranged from -11.9845 to -9.6273 kcal/mol. Plasmon 
Surface Resonance studies showed that fisetin binds to YB-1 with an affinity of
approximately 35 µM, with both slow association and dissociation. Fisetin also
inhibited EGF induced YB-1 phosphorylation and markers of EMT both in vitro and
in vivo. Collectively our data suggest that YB-1 induces EMT in PCa and identify 
fisetin as an inhibitor of its activation.

PMCID: PMC4058019
PMID: 24770864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Prostate. 2014 Jun;74(8):829-38. doi: 10.1002/pros.22799. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Targeting ribosomal S6 kinases/Y-box binding protein-1 signaling improves
cellular sensitivity to taxane in prostate cancer.

Shiota M(1), Itsumi M, Yokomizo A, Takeuchi A, Imada K, Kashiwagi E, Inokuchi J, 
Tatsugami K, Uchiumi T, Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Taxanes are the only cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents proved to
prolong the survival in patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer.
However, because of intrinsic and acquired resistances to taxanes, their
therapeutical efficiencies are modest, bringing only a few months of survival
benefit. Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) promotes cancer cell resistance to
various anticancer treatments, including taxanes. Here, we aimed to elucidate the
mechanism of taxane resistance by YB-1 and examined overcoming resistance by
targeting YB-1 signaling.
METHODS: Gene and protein expression levels were evaluated by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis, respectively. We
evaluated the sensitivity of prostate cancer cells to taxanes using cytotoxicity 
assays.
RESULTS: Natural taxane paclitaxel from Taxus brevifolia activated the
Raf-1/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway, leading to an
activation of ribosomal S6 kinases (RSK)/YB-1 signaling. Activated Raf-1/ERK
pathway was blunted by YB-1 knockdown in prostate cancer cells, indicating
regulation between Raf-1/ERK signaling and YB-1. In addition, ERK or RSK was
activated in taxane-resistant prostate cancer cells, resulting in YB-1
activation. YB-1 knockdown as well as RSK inhibition using RSK-specific siRNA or 
the small molecule inhibitor SL0101 successfully blocked activation of YB-1,
leading to suppression of prostate cancer growth and sensitization to paclitaxel.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings indicate that RSK/YB-1 signaling
contributes to taxane resistance, and implicate the therapeutics targeting
RSK/YB-1 signaling such as RSK inhibitor as a promising novel therapy against
prostate cancer, especially in combination with taxane.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24729449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Prostate. 2014 Jun;74(8):869-79. doi: 10.1002/pros.22805. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Interleukin-17 promotes development of castration-resistant prostate cancer
potentially through creating an immunotolerant and pro-angiogenic tumor
microenvironment.

Zhang Q(1), Liu S, Zhang Q, Xiong Z, Wang AR, Myers L, Melamed J, Tang WW, You Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural & Cellular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-17 (IL-17) has been demonstrated to promote formation and
growth of hormone-naïve prostate adenocarcinoma in mice. IL-17's role in
development of castration-resistant prostate cancer is unknown. In the present
study, we investigated IL-17's role in castration-resistant prostate cancer in a 
mouse model.
METHODS: IL-17 receptor C (IL-17RC) deficient mice were interbred with Pten
conditional mutant mice to produce RC(+) mice that maintained IL-17RC expression 
and RC(-) mice that were IL-17RC deficient. Male RC(+) and RC(-) mice were
Pten-null and were castrated at 16 weeks of age when invasive prostate cancer had
already formed. At 30 weeks of age, all male mice were analyzed for the prostate 
phenotypes.
RESULTS: RC(-) mice displayed prostates that were smaller than RC(+) mice.
Approximately 23% of prostatic glands in RC(-) mice, in contrast to 65% of
prostatic glands in RC(+) mice, developed invasive adenocarcinomas. Compared to
castrate RC(+) mice, castrate RC(-) mouse prostate had lower rates of cellular
proliferation and higher rates of apoptosis as well as lower levels of MMP7,
YBX1, MTA1, and UBE2C proteins. In addition, castrate RC(-) mouse prostate had
less angiogenesis, which was associated with decreased levels of COX-2 and VEGF. 
Moreover, castrate RC(-) mouse prostate had fewer inflammatory cells including
lymphocytes, myeloid-derived suppressor cells, and macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our findings suggest that IL-17 promotes development
of invasive prostate adenocarcinomas under castrate conditions, potentially
through creating an immunotolerant and pro-angiogenic tumor microenvironment.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4063299
PMID: 24691769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1437-50. doi: 10.1002/stem.1707.

YB-1 transforms human mammary epithelial cells through chromatin remodeling
leading to the development of basal-like breast cancer.

Davies AH(1), Reipas KM, Pambid MR, Berns R, Stratford AL, Fotovati A, Firmino N,
Astanehe A, Hu K, Maxwell C, Mills GB, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Experimental Medicine
Program, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

There is growing evidence that cancer-initiation could result from epigenetic
changes. Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a transcription/translation factor
that promotes the formation of tumors in transgenic mice; however, the underlying
molecular events are not understood. To explore this in a human model system,
YB-1 was expressed in mammary epithelial cells under the control of a
tetracycline-inducible promoter. The induction of YB-1 promoted phenotypes
associated with malignancy in three-dimensional breast acini cultures. This was
attributed to YB-1 enhancing the expression and activity of the histone
acetyltransferase p300 leading to chromatin remodeling. Specifically, this
relaxation of chromatin allowed YB-1 to bind to the BMI1 promoter. The induction 
of BMI1 engaged the Polycomb complex resulting in histone H2A ubiquitylation and 
repression of the CDKN2A locus. These events manifested functionally as enhanced 
self-renewal capacity that occurred in a BMI1-dependent manner. Conversely, p300 
inhibition with anacardic acid prevented YB-1 from binding to the BMI1 promoter
and thereby subverted self-renewal. Despite these early changes, full malignant
transformation was not achieved until RSK2 became overexpressed concomitant with 
elevated human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) activity. The
YB-1/RSK2/hTERT expressing cells formed tumors in mice that were molecularly
subtyped as basal-like breast cancer. We conclude that YB-1 cooperates with p300 
to allow BMI1 to over-ride p16(INK4a) -mediated cell cycle arrest enabling
self-renewal and the development of aggressive breast tumors.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4321723
PMID: 24648416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Mar;132(3):703-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.01.045. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Nuclear Y-box-binding protein-1 is a poor prognostic marker and related to
epidermal growth factor receptor in uterine cervical cancer.

Nishio S(1), Ushijima K(2), Yamaguchi T(3), Sasajima Y(4), Tsuda H(4), Kasamatsu 
T(5), Kage M(3), Ono M(6), Kuwano M(7), Kamura T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kurume University School of Medicine,
Asahi-machi 67, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
shinshin@med.kurume-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Asahi-machi 67, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Kurume University Hospital, Asahi-machi 67, Kurume,
Fukuoka 830-0011, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratories, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
(5)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tsukiji
5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (6)Department of Pharmaceutical Oncology, 
Graduates School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Maedashi 3-5-1,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (7)Laboratory of Molecular Cancer Biology,
Department of Clinical Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Maedashi 3-5-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a member of the cold shock protein
family and functions in transcription and translation. Many studies indicate that
YB-1 is strongly expressed in tumor cells and is considered a marker of tumor
aggressiveness and clinical prognosis. Overexpression of epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) has been associated with poor outcomes in cervical cancer.
Clinical trials of EGFR family-base therapy are currently being initiated in
cervical cancer. Nuclear YB-1 expression correlates with EGFR expression in
various types of cancer. However, the clinical significance of nuclear YB-1
expression in different settings, the correlation with EGFR, and the prognostic
implications of YB-1 expression in cervical cancer remain elusive.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Nuclear YB-1 expression was immunohistochemically analyzed 
in tissue specimens obtained from 204 patients with cervical cancer who underwent
surgery. Associations of nuclear YB-1 expression with clinicopathological factors
such as survival, EGFR expression, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2) expression were investigated.
RESULTS: Nuclear YB-1 expression was found in 41 (20.2%) of 204 cases of cervical
cancer and correlated with disease stage, tumor diameter, stromal invasion, and
lymph-node metastasis. Nuclear YB-1 expression also correlated with EGFR
expression (P=0.0114) as well as HER2 expression (P=0.0053). Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis showed that nuclear YB-1 expression was significantly
associated with poor progression-free survival (P=0.0033) and overall survival
(P=0.0003), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Nuclear YB-1 expression is a prognostic marker and correlates with
EGFR expression in cervical cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24486603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e85591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085591. eCollection
2014.

Genomic analyses reveal broad impact of miR-137 on genes associated with
malignant transformation and neuronal differentiation in glioblastoma cells.

Tamim S(1), Vo DT(1), Uren PJ(2), Qiao M(1), Bindewald E(3), Kasprzak WK(3),
Shapiro BA(4), Nakaya HI(5), Burns SC(1), Araujo PR(1), Nakano I(6), Radek AJ(7),
Kuersten S(7), Smith AD(2), Penalva LO(8).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America. (2)Molecular
and Computational Biology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (3)Basic 
Science Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Center for Cancer Research Nanobiology
Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland, 
United States of America. (4)Center for Cancer Research Nanobiology Program,
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, California. (5)Department of
Clinical Analyses and Toxicology, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (6)Department of Neurological
Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio, United States of America. (7)Epicentre (An Illumina Company), Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America. (8)Children's Cancer Research Institute,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas,
United States of America ; Department of Cellular and Structural Biology,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas,
United States of America.

miR-137 plays critical roles in the nervous system and tumor development; an
increase in its expression is required for neuronal differentiation while its
reduction is implicated in gliomagenesis. To evaluate the potential of miR-137 in
glioblastoma therapy, we conducted genome-wide target mapping in glioblastoma
cells by measuring the level of association between PABP and mRNAs in cells
transfected with miR-137 mimics vs. controls via RIPSeq. Impact on mRNA levels
was also measured by RNASeq. By combining the results of both experimental
approaches, 1468 genes were found to be negatively impacted by miR-137--among
them, 595 (40%) contain miR-137 predicted sites. The most relevant targets
include oncogenic proteins and key players in neurogenesis like c-KIT, YBX1,
AKT2, CDC42, CDK6 and TGFß2. Interestingly, we observed that several identified
miR-137 targets are also predicted to be regulated by miR-124, miR-128 and miR-7,
which are equally implicated in neuronal differentiation and gliomagenesis. We
suggest that the concomitant increase of these four miRNAs in neuronal stem cells
or their repression in tumor cells could produce a robust regulatory effect with 
major consequences to neuronal differentiation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3899048
PMID: 24465609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncology. 2014;86(2):109-16. doi: 10.1159/000356874. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Clinical significance of epithelial-mesenchymal transition-associated markers in 
malignant pleural mesothelioma.

Iwanami T(1), Uramoto H, Nakagawa M, Shimokawa H, Yamada S, Kohno K, Tanaka F.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of Occupational
and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Epithelioid tumors with aggressive behavior have been reported; however, the
epithelioid type of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) has a less aggressive
behavior. Few studies have evaluated the prognostic value of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers in MPM. We hypothesized that
mesenchymal characteristics might predominate in the tumors. Tumor specimens were
collected from 33 consecutive patients. We analyzed the EMT expression levels in 
tumor samples by an immunohistochemical analysis. Positive expression of
E-cadherin, <U+03B3>-catenin, vimentin, fibronectin, Twist and YB-1 was observed in 25, 
14, 21, 1, 19 and 18 patients, respectively. No significant association between
these markers and the clinicopathological characteristics was found. <U+03B3>-Catenin
demonstrated a trend towards decreased expression in sarcomatoid tumors compared 
to epithelioid tumors. On the other hand, a trend was noted towards higher
expression of vimentin, Twist and YB-1 in sarcomatoid tumors. The survival curves
demonstrated that the patients with negative <U+03B3>-catenin and positive Twist
staining had a tendency to have a worse prognosis. Although the individual
proteins might not significantly affect the progression of MPM, the combination
of <U+03B3>-catenin and Twist staining can predict the prognosis of patients with MPM.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24457449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jan 20;14:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-33.

High prevalence of Y-box protein-1/p18 fragment in plasma of patients with
malignancies of different origin.

Tacke F, Galm O, Kanig N, Yagmur E, Brandt S, Lindquist JA, Eberhardt CS,
Raffetseder U, Mertens PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Leipziger Str, 44, 39120 Magdeburg,
Germany. peter.mertens@med.ovgu.de.

BACKGROUND: Expression of the cold shock protein Y-box protein 1 (YB-1) is
associated with deleterious outcome in various malignant diseases. Our group
recently showed that the detection of an 18 kDa YB-1 fragment (YB-1/p18) in human
plasma identifies patients with malignant diseases. We now tested the prevalence,
clinical, and diagnostic value of YB-1/p18 detection in common tumors.
METHODS: A newly established monoclonal YB-1 antibody was used to detect YB-1/p18
by immunoblotting in plasma samples from 151 unselected tumor patients, alongside
established tumor markers and various diagnostic measures, during evaluation for 
a cancerous disease and in follow-up studies after therapeutic interventions.
RESULTS: Circulating YB-1/p18 was detected in 78% of patients having a tumor
disease. YB-1/p18 positivity was highly prevalent in all examined malignancies,
including lung cancer (32/37; 87%), breast cancer (7/10; 70%), cancer of unknown 
primary (CUP; 5/5, 100%) or hematological malignancies (42/62; 68%). Positivity
for YB-1/p18 was independent of other routine laboratory parameters, tumor stage,
or histology. In comparison to 13 established tumor markers (cancer antigens
15-3, 19-9, 72-4, and 125; carcinoembryonic antigen; cytokeratin fragments 21-1; 
neuron-specific enolase; alpha-fetoprotein; beta-2-microglobulin; squamous cell
carcinoma antigen; thymidine kinase; tissue polypeptide antigen;
pro-gastrin-releasing peptide), YB-1/p18 detection within serum samples was the
most sensitive general parameter identifying malignant disorders. YB-1/p18
concentrations altered during therapeutic interventions, but did not predict
prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma YB-1/p18 detection has a high specific prevalence in
malignancies, thereby providing a novel tool for cancer screening independent of 
the tumor origin.

PMCID: PMC3909385
PMID: 24443788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014 Mar 15;306(6):F569-76. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00270.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

HuR and other turnover- and translation-regulatory RNA-binding proteins:
implications for the kidney.

Pullmann R Jr(1), Rabb H.

Author information: 
(1)1830 E. Monument St., Suite 416, Baltimore, MD 21205-2196. hrabb1@jhmi.edu.

The posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression occurs through cis RNA
regulatory elements by the action of trans factors, which are represented by
noncoding RNAs (especially microRNAs) and turnover- and translation-regulatory
(TTR) RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). These multifactorial proteins are a group of
heterogeneous RBPs primarily implicated in controlling the decay and translation 
rates of target mRNAs. TTR-RBPs usually shuttle between cellular compartments
(the nucleus and cytoplasm) in response to various stimuli and undergo
posttranslational modifications such as phosphorylation or methylation to ensure 
their proper subcellular localization and function. TTR-RBPs are emerging as key 
regulators of a wide variety of genes influencing kidney physiology and
pathology. This review summarizes the current knowledge of TTR-RBPs that
influence renal metabolism. We will discuss the role of TTR-RBPs as regulators of
kidney ischemia, fibrosis and matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, membrane
transport, immunity, vascular tone, hypertension, and acid-base balance as well
as anemia, bone mineral disease, and vascular calcification.

PMID: 24431206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):769-80. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2234. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Prostaglandin E2 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma cell invasion through
upregulation of YB-1 protein expression.

Zhang H(1), Cheng S(1), Zhang M(1), Ma X(1), Zhang L(1), Wang Y(1), Rong R(1), Ma
J(1), Xia S(1), Du M(1), Shi F(1), Wang J(1), Yang Q(1), Bai X(1), Leng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, P.R. China.

Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been implicated in hepatocellular carcinoma cell
invasion. Recently, it was reported that Y box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) is
closely correlated with malignancy. This study was designed to examine the
mechanisms by which PGE2 increases YB-1 expression and promotes HCC cell
invasion. PGE2 greatly enhanced HCC cell invasion through upregulation of the
YB-1 protein, and the EP1 receptor is mainly responsible for this regulation. Src
and EGFR were both activated by PGE2, which in turn increased the phosphorylation
levels of p44/42 MAPK. Src, EGFR and p44/42 MAPK were all involved in
PGE2-induced YB-1 expression. Chemical inhibitors and RNAi analysis all confirmed
the role of mTOR complex 1 in YB-1 expression induced by PGE2. Furthermore, YB-1 
was able to regulate the expression of a series of EMT-associated genes, which
indicated that YB-1 could have the potential to control the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process in HCC cells. These findings reveal
that PGE2 upregulated YB-1 expression through the EP1/Src/EGFR/p44/42 MAPK/mTOR
pathway, which greatly enhanced HCC cell invasion. This study for the first time 
describes the mechanisms through which PGE2 regulates YB-1 expression and
promotes HCC cell invasion.

PMID: 24378923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cell Signal. 2014 Apr;26(4):784-96. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.12.005. Epub 2013
Dec 27.

Activation of NADPH oxidase subunit NCF4 induces ROS-mediated EMT signaling in
HeLa cells.

Kim YM(1), Cho M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Jeju National University, Jeju
690-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: biochem310@jejunu.ac.kr.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Jeju National University, Jeju
690-756, Republic of Korea; Institute of Medical Science, Jeju National
University, Jeju 690-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
moonjcho@jejunu.ac.kr.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a critical biological process
characterized by morphological and behavioral changes in cells. The regulatory
and signaling mechanisms of both developmental and pathological EMT have been
investigated. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a role in early EMT, but the
exact mechanism by which ROS are involved is unclear. We investigated
ROS-mediated EMT in human HeLa cells. Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß)
treatments lead to dramatic NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2) inductions in HeLa cells;
antioxidant treatment prevented TGF-ß-driven EMT. Over-expression of the p40phox 
subunit (NCF4) led to activation of the NOX2 complex and ROS production. We
showed that NOX2 and NOX5 mRNA was increased, along with increased expression of 
several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) in response to NCF4 expression.
Moreover, these changes were reversible upon ROS scavenging. Down-regulation of
E-cadherin and up-regulation of Snail, Slug and vimentin occurred at the
transcriptional level. We also showed that new EMT regulator, YB-1 is a
downstream target in ROS-induced EMT. Together, these data suggest that ROS
switching is necessary for increased EMT but is not required for the
morphological changes that accompany EMT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 12;8(12):e82166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082166.
eCollection 2013.

YBX1 is a modulator of MIA/CD-RAP-dependent chondrogenesis.

Schmid R(1), Meyer K(2), Spang R(2), Schittek B(3), Bosserhoff AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Functional Genomics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany. (3)Institute of Dermatology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

MIA/CD-RAP is a small, secreted protein involved in cartilage differentiation and
melanoma progression. We recently revealed that p54(nrb) acts as a mediator of
MIA/CD-RAP action to promote chondrogenesis and the progression of malignant
melanoma. As the molecular mechanism of MIA/CD-RAP action in cartilage has not
been defined in detail until now, we aimed to understand the regulation of
p54(nrb) transcription in chondrogenesis. We concentrated on the previously
described MIA/CD-RAP-dependent regulatory region in the p54(nrb) promoter and
characterized the transcriptional regulation of p54(nrb) by MIA/CD-RAP in
cartilage. A series of truncated p54(nrb) promoter constructs and mutagenesis
analysis revealed that the transcription factor YBX1, which has not been
investigated in chondrogenesis thus far, is the mediator of MIA/CD-RAP dependent 
activation of p54(nrb) transcription. A systematic analysis of genes carrying
this binding site in their promoter region revealed further potential
MIA/CD-RAP-regulated genes that have been implicated in cartilage
differentiation. In summary, we described the effects of MIA/CD-RAP on
transcriptional regulation in chondrocytes. Understanding the regulation of
p54(nrb) via YBX1 contributes to the understanding of chondrogenesis. Uncovering 
new downstream effectors that function via the activation of YBX1 supports the
important role of MIA/CD-RAP in these processes.

PMCID: PMC3861381
PMID: 24349210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Vopr Onkol. 2013;59(5):623-8.

[Connection of intracellular protein YB-1 localization in cell cultures of human 
tumors with multidrug resistance].

[Article in Russian]

Rybalkina EIu, Stromskaia TP, Ovchinnikov LP, Stavrovskaia AA.

In this study, we investigated how the protein YB-1 influenced on the expression 
of genes coding ABC transporters and on drug resistance in several cell lines, in
which originally gene MDR1, coding P-glycoprotein, was not expressed. These
populations were significantly different in the presence of mRNA YB-1 and the
nature of the intracellular localization of the protein YB-1. However incubation 
of cells in all studied populations in the culture medium with serum after
starvation led to translocation of YB-1 in the cell nucleus. The increase of the 
number of cells with nuclear localization of YB-1 correlated with increased
amount of mRNA YB-1. Processing of cells with drug LY-294,002 by PI3K/Akt
inhibitor prevented the translocation of the protein YB-1 into the nuclei of
cells, and the cells became more sensitive to the toxic action. Thus, we observed
that the signaling pathways involved in control of cell proliferation, in
particular a signaling cascade PI3K/Akt were involved in the control of the
intracellular localization of YB-1 in cell populations of ovarian cancer,
melanoma and human prostate cancer. In these cells the nuclear localization of
YB-1 correlated with an expression of MDR and MRP1 DCRP genes and with a
sensitivity of cells to a number of drugs.

PMID: 24260892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e80171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080171.
eCollection 2013.

Links between the oncoprotein YB-1 and small non-coding RNAs in breast cancer.

Blenkiron C(1), Hurley DG, Fitzgerald S, Print CG, Lasham A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand ; Department of Surgery, University of Auckland, Auckland, 
New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: The nucleic acid-binding protein YB-1, a member of the cold-shock
domain protein family, has been implicated in the progression of breast cancer
and is associated with poor patient survival. YB-1 has sequence similarity to
LIN28, another cold-shock protein family member, which has a role in the
regulation of small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs) including microRNAs (miRNAs).
Therefore, to investigate whether there is an association between YB-1 and
sncRNAs in breast cancer, we investigated whether sncRNAs were bound by YB-1 in
two breast cancer cell lines (luminal A-like and basal cell-like), and whether
the abundance of sncRNAs and mRNAs changed in response to experimental reduction 
of YB-1 expression.
RESULTS: RNA-immunoprecipitation with an anti-YB-1 antibody showed that several
sncRNAs are bound by YB-1. Some of these were bound by YB-1 in both breast cancer
cell lines; others were cell-line specific. The small RNAs bound by YB-1 were
derived from various sncRNA families including miRNAs such as let-7 and miR-320, 
transfer RNAs, ribosomal RNAs and small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNA). Reducing YB-1
expression altered the abundance of a number of transcripts encoding miRNA
biogenesis and processing proteins but did not alter the abundance of mature or
precursor miRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: YB-1 binds to specific miRNAs, snoRNAs and tRNA-derived fragments
and appears to regulate the expression of miRNA biogenesis and processing
machinery. We propose that some of the oncogenic effects of YB-1 in breast cancer
may be mediated through its interactions with sncRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3832415
PMID: 24260353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA. 2014 Jan-Feb;5(1):95-110. doi: 10.1002/wrna.1200. Epub
2013 Nov 11.

YB-1 protein: functions and regulation.

Lyabin DN(1), Eliseeva IA, Ovchinnikov LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, Russia.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1, YBX1) is a member of the family of DNA- and
RNA-binding proteins with an evolutionarily ancient and conserved cold shock
domain. It falls into a group of intrinsically disordered proteins that do not
follow the classical rule 'one protein-one function' but introduce a novel
principle stating that a disordered structure suggests many functions. YB-1
participates in a wide variety of DNA/RNA-dependent events, including DNA
reparation, pre-mRNA transcription and splicing, mRNA packaging, and regulation
of mRNA stability and translation. At the cell level, the multiple activities of 
YB-1 are manifested as its involvement in cell proliferation and differentiation,
stress response, and malignant cell transformation. WIREs RNA 2014, 5:95-110.
doi: 10.1002/wrna.1200 CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have declared no
conflicts of interest for this article. For further resources related to this
article, please visit the WIREs website.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24217978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. FEBS Lett. 2013 Dec 11;587(24):3995-4000. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.10.036.
Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Loss of CDH1 up-regulates epidermal growth factor receptor via phosphorylation of
YBX1 in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Liu X(1), Su L, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Cells and Developmental Biology, 
Shandong University School of Life Sciences, Jinan, China.

Although loss of CDH1 promotes cancer metastasis by disrupting cell-cell adhesion
and inducing transcriptional changes, the functional pathways involved in the
loss of CDH1 affecting EGFR expression in lung cancer cells still remain largely 
unknown. In this study, we report that down-regulation of CDH1 promoted EGFR
transcription through activation of YBX1. Furthermore, knockdown of CDH1
activated the AKT signaling pathway, and inhibition of AKT suppressed the
phosphorylation of YBX1 and the up-regulation of EGFR induced by CDH1 loss. These
data demonstrate that loss of CDH1 induces EGFR expression via phospho-YBX1,
which is activated through the AKT signaling pathway.

© 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jan;31(1):342-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2836. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Proteomic analysis reveals that MAEL, a component of nuage, interacts with stress
granule proteins in cancer cells.

Yuan L(1), Xiao Y, Zhou Q, Yuan D, Wu B, Chen G, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China.

The Maelstrom (MAEL) gene is a cancer-testis (or cancer-germline) gene, which is 
predominantly expressed in germline cells under normal conditions, but is
aberrantly expressed in a range of human cancer cells. In germline cells, MAEL is
found predominantly in the nuage, where it plays an essential role in piRNA
biogenesis and piRNA-mediated silencing of transposons. However, the role of MAEL
in cancer has not been elucidated. We performed immunoprecipitation and
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis to investigate the interactome of MAEL, and identified 14 
components of stress granules (SGs) as potential binding partners of MAEL in
MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer and SW480 colorectal cancer cells. The
interactions between MAEL and 8 of these SG components (PABPC1, YBX1, KHSRP,
SYNCRIP, DDX39, ELAV1, EIF4A1 and EIF3F) were confirmed by anti-tag
immunoprecipitation. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that MAEL co-localizes
with the SG marker PABPC1 in SGs during oxidative stress. Nuages and SGs are the 
cytoplasmic RNA granules of germline cells and stressed somatic cells,
respectively, and both serve as a platform for small RNA-mediated gene silencing.
It is, therefore, suggested that MAEL may be involved in miRNA-mediated gene
silencing in SGs, as it does in the nuage. This finding should be valuable toward
understanding the function of MAEL in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 24189637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Cells. 2013 Nov;18(11):999-1006. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12093. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

YB1 binds to and represses the p16 tumor suppressor gene.

Kotake Y(1), Ozawa Y, Harada M, Kitagawa K, Niida H, Morita Y, Tanaka K, Suda T, 
Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Chemistry, Faculty of
Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kinki University, 11-6 Kayanomori,
Iizuka, Fukuoka, 820-8555, Japan.

Y box binding protein 1 (YB1) has multiple functions associated with drug
resistance, cell proliferation and metastasis through transcriptional and
translational regulation. Increased expression of YB1 is closely related to tumor
growth and aggressiveness. We showed that YB1 protein levels were decreased
through replicative and premature senescence and were correlated with increased
expression levels of p16(INK) (4A) tumor suppressor gene. Depletion of YB1 was
associated with increased levels of p16 in human and murine primary cells. Forced
expression of YB1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in decreased expression
of p16 and increased cell proliferation. Senescence-associated expression of
ß-galactosidase was repressed in YB1-over-expressing cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that YB1 directly associates with the p16
promoter. Taken together, all our findings indicate that YB1 directly binds to
and represses p16 transcription, subsequently resulting in the promotion of cell 
growth and prevention of cellular senescence.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24165022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 2014 Oct 23;33(43):5065-77. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.450. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

YB-1 disrupts mismatch repair complex formation, interferes with MutSa
recruitment on mismatch and inhibits mismatch repair through interacting with
PCNA.

Chang YW(1), Mai RT(2), Fang WH(3), Lin CC(1), Chiu CC(1), Wu Lee YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)1] Institute of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of Biological Science and Technology, College of
Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is highly expressed in tumors and it participates 
in various cellular processes. Previous studies indicated that YB-1 binds to
mispaired DNA and interacts with several mismatch repair (MMR)-related factors.
However, its role in the MMR system remains undefined. Here, we found that YB-1
represses mutS homolog 6 (MSH6)-containing MMR complex formation and reduces
MutSa mismatch binding activity by disrupting interactions among MMR-related
factors. In an effort to elucidate how YB-1 exerts this inhibitory effect, we
have identified two functional proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA)-interacting protein (PIP)-boxes that mediate YB-1/PCNA interaction and
locate within the C-terminal region of YB-1. This interaction is critical for the
regulatory role of YB-1 in repressing MutSa mismatch binding activity, disrupting
MutSa/PCNA/G/T heteroduplex ternary complex formation and inhibiting in vitro MMR
activity. The differential regulation of 3' and 5' nick-directed MMR activity by 
YB-1 was also observed. Moreover, YB-1 overexpression is associated with the
alteration of microsatellite pattern and the enhancement of
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)-induced and spontaneous mutations.
Furthermore, upregulation of other PIP-box-containing proteins, such as myeloid
cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) and inhibitor of growth protein 1b (ING1b), has no impact
on MMR complex formation and mutation accumulation, thus revealing the
significant effect of YB-1 on regulating the MMR system. In conclusion, our study
suggests that YB-1 functions as a PCNA-interacting factor to exert its regulatory
role on the MMR process and involves in the induction of genome instability,
which may partially account for the oncogenic potential of YB-1.

PMID: 24141788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Jan;21(1):161-71. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.135. Epub 2013
Oct 18.

Remodelling of a polypyrimidine tract-binding protein complex during apoptosis
activates cellular IRESs.

King HA(1), Cobbold LC, Pichon X, Pöyry T, Wilson LA, Booden H, Jukes-Jones R,
Cain K, Lilley KS, Bushell M, Willis AE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Toxicology Unit, Lancaster Road, Leicester LE1 9HN,
UK.

Post-transcriptional control of gene expression is mediated by the interaction of
RNA-binding proteins with their cognate mRNAs that specifically regulate their
stability, localization and translation. mRNA-binding proteins are
multifunctional and it has been proposed therefore that a combinatorial
RNA-binding protein code exists that allows specific protein sub-complexes to
control cytoplasmic gene expression under a range of pathophysiological
conditions. We show that polypyrimidine tract-binding protein (PTB) is central to
one such complex that forms in apoptotic cells. Thus, during apoptosis initiated 
by TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand there is a change in the repertoire of
RNA-binding proteins with which PTB interacts. We show that altering the cellular
levels of PTB and its binding partners, either singly or in combination, is
sufficient to directly change the rates of apoptosis with increased expression of
PTB, YBX1, PSF and NONO/p54(nrb) accelerating this process. Mechanistically, we
show that these proteins post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression, and
therefore apoptotic rates, by interacting with and stimulating the activity of
RNA elements (internal ribosome entry segments) found in mRNAs that are
translated during apoptosis. Taken together, our data show that PTB function is
controlled by a set of co-recruited proteins and importantly provide further
evidence that it is possible to dictate cell fate by modulating cytoplasmic gene 
expression pathways alone.

PMCID: PMC3857619
PMID: 24141718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Cycle. 2013 Dec 15;12(24):3791-803. doi: 10.4161/cc.26670. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

The proteolytic YB-1 fragment interacts with DNA repair machinery and enhances
survival during DNA damaging stress.

Kim ER(1), Selyutina AA(2), Buldakov IA(1), Evdokimova V(3), Ovchinnikov LP(1),
Sorokin AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research; Russian Academy of Sciences; Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, Russian Federation. (2)Institute of Protein Research; Russian Academy of 
Sciences; Pushchino, Moscow Region, Russian Federation; University of Tartu;
Institute of Technology; Tartu, Estonia. (3)Institute of Protein Research;
Russian Academy of Sciences; Pushchino, Moscow Region, Russian Federation;
Department of Molecular Oncology; British Columbia Cancer Research Centre;
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is a DNA/RNA-binding nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling protein whose regulatory effect on many DNA and RNA-dependent events is
determined by its localization in the cell. We have shown previously that YB-1 is
cleaved by 20S proteasome between E219 and G220, and the truncated N-terminal
YB-1 fragment accumulates in the nuclei of cells treated with DNA damaging drugs.
We proposed that appearance of truncated YB-1 in the nucleus may predict multiple
drug resistance. Here, we compared functional activities of the full-length and
truncated YB-1 proteins and showed that the truncated form was more efficient in 
protecting cells against doxorubicin treatment. Both forms of YB-1 induced
changes in expression of various genes without affecting those responsible for
drug resistance. Interestingly, although YB-1 cleavage did not significantly
affect its DNA binding properties, truncated YB-1 was detected in complexes with 
Mre11 and Rad50 under genotoxic stress conditions. We conclude that both
full-length and truncated YB-1 are capable of protecting cells against DNA
damaging agents, and the truncated form may have an additional function in DNA
repair.

PMCID: PMC3905071
PMID: 24107631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1430-1. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt255. Epub
2013 Sep 23.

Novel facts about FAK: new connections to drug resistance?

Annunziata CM(1), Kohn EC.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Center for Cancer Research (CMA) and Clinical
Investigations Branch, Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (ECK), National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1485-95.

PMID: 24062526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1485-95. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt210. Epub
2013 Sep 23.

Role of focal adhesion kinase in regulating YB-1-mediated paclitaxel resistance
in ovarian cancer.

Kang Y(1), Hu W, Ivan C, Dalton HJ, Miyake T, Pecot CV, Zand B, Liu T, Huang J,
Jennings NB, Rupaimoole R, Taylor M, Pradeep S, Wu SY, Lu C, Wen Y, Huang J, Liu 
J, Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Repro ductive 
Medicine (YK, WH, CI, CVP, HJD, BZ, TL, JH, NBJ, RR, MT, TM, SP, SYW, CL, YW,
AKS), Center for RNAi and Non-Coding RNA (CI, AKS), Department of Pathology (JH, 
JL), and Department of Cancer Biology (AKS), The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine Related Diseases, Hospital and Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, China (YK); Department of
General Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China (TL).

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Oct 2;105(19):1430-1.

BACKGROUND: We previously found focal adhesion kinase (FAK) inhibition sensitizes
ovarian cancer to taxanes; however, the mechanisms are not well understood.
METHODS: We characterized the biologic response of taxane-resistant and
taxane-sensitive ovarian cancer models to a novel FAK inhibitor (VS-6063). We
used reverse-phase protein arrays (RPPA) to identify novel downstream targets in 
taxane-resistant cell lines. Furthermore, we correlated clinical and pathological
data with nuclear and cytoplasmic expression of FAK and YB-1 in 105 ovarian
cancer samples. Statistical tests were two-sided, and P values were calculated
with Student t test or Fisher exact test.
RESULTS: We found that VS-6063 inhibited FAK phosphorylation at the Tyr397 site
in a time- and dose-dependent manner. The combination of VS-6063 and paclitaxel
markedly decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis, which resulted in 92.7%
to 97.9% reductions in tumor weight. RPPA data showed that VS-6063 reduced levels
of AKT and YB-1 in taxane-resistant cell lines. FAK inhibition enhanced
chemosensitivity in taxane-resistant cells by decreasing YB-1 phosphorylation and
subsequently CD44 in an AKT-dependent manner. In human ovarian cancer samples,
nuclear FAK expression was associated with increased nuclear YB-1 expression (<U+03C7>²)
= 37.7; P < .001). Coexpression of nuclear FAK and YB-1 was associated with
statistically significantly worse median overall survival (24.9 vs 67.3 months;
hazard ratio = 2.64; 95% confidence interval = 1.38 to 5.05; P = .006).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel pathway whereby FAK inhibition with
VS-6063 overcomes YB-1-mediated paclitaxel resistance by an AKT-dependent
pathway. These findings have implications for clinical trials aimed at targeting 
FAK.

PMCID: PMC3787907
PMID: 24062525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Elife. 2013 Sep 10;2:e00683. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00683.

An essential role for maternal control of Nodal signaling.

Kumari P(1), Gilligan PC, Lim S, Tran LD, Winkler S, Philp R, Sampath K.

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory , National University of Singapore ,
Singapore , Singapore ; Department of Biological Sciences , National University
of Singapore , Singapore , Singapore.

Growth factor signaling is essential for pattern formation, growth,
differentiation, and maintenance of stem cell pluripotency. Nodal-related
signaling factors are required for axis formation and germ layer specification
from sea urchins to mammals. Maternal transcripts of the zebrafish Nodal factor, 
Squint (Sqt), are localized to future embryonic dorsal. The mechanisms by which
maternal sqt/nodal RNA is localized and regulated have been unclear. Here, we
show that maternal control of Nodal signaling via the conserved Y box-binding
protein 1 (Ybx1) is essential. We identified Ybx1 via a proteomic screen. Ybx1
recognizes the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of sqt RNA and prevents premature
translation and Sqt/Nodal signaling. Maternal-effect mutations in zebrafish ybx1 
lead to deregulated Nodal signaling, gastrulation failure, and embryonic
lethality. Implanted Nodal-coated beads phenocopy ybx1 mutant defects. Thus, Ybx1
prevents ectopic Nodal activity, revealing a new paradigm in the regulation of
Nodal signaling, which is likely to be conserved.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00683.001.

PMCID: PMC3771576
PMID: 24040511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Cell. 2013 Aug 26;26(4):393-404. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.07.002.

A multifunctional protein, EWS, is essential for early brown fat lineage
determination.

Park JH(1), Kang HJ, Kang SI, Lee JE, Hur J, Ge K, Mueller E, Li H, Lee BC, Lee
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The recent surge in obesity has provided an impetus to better understand the
mechanisms of adipogenesis, particularly in brown adipose tissue (BAT) because of
its potential utilization for antiobesity therapy. Postnatal brown adipocytes
arise from early muscle progenitors, but how brown fat lineage is determined is
not completely understood. Here, we show that a multifunctional protein, Ewing
Sarcoma (EWS), is essential for determining brown fat lineage during development.
BATs from Ews null embryos and newborns are developmentally arrested. Ews mutant 
brown preadipocytes fail to differentiate due to loss of Bmp7 expression, a
critical early brown adipogenic factor. We demonstrate that EWS, along with its
binding partner Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), activates Bmp7 transcription.
Depletion of either Ews or Ybx1 leads to loss of Bmp7 expression and brown
adipogenesis. Remarkably, Ews null BATs and brown preadipocytes ectopically
express myogenic genes. These results demonstrate that EWS is essential for early
brown fat lineage determination.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3817832
PMID: 23987512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11704-20. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01474-13. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

A host YB-1 ribonucleoprotein complex is hijacked by hepatitis C virus for the
control of NS3-dependent particle production.

Chatel-Chaix L(1), Germain MA, Motorina A, Bonneil É, Thibault P, Baril M,
Lamarre D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) orchestrates the different stages of its life cycle in
time and space through the sequential participation of HCV proteins and cellular 
machineries; hence, these represent tractable molecular host targets for HCV
elimination by combination therapies. We recently identified multifunctional
Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1 or YBX1) as an interacting partner of NS3/4A
protein and HCV genomic RNA that negatively regulates the equilibrium between
viral translation/replication and particle production. To identify novel host
factors that regulate the production of infectious particles, we elucidated the
YB-1 interactome in human hepatoma cells by a quantitative mass spectrometry
approach. We identified 71 YB-1-associated proteins that included previously
reported HCV regulators DDX3, heterogeneous nuclear RNP A1, and ILF2. Of the
potential YB-1 interactors, 26 proteins significantly modulated HCV replication
in a gene-silencing screening. Following extensive interaction and functional
validation, we identified three YB-1 partners, C1QBP, LARP-1, and IGF2BP2, that
redistribute to the surface of core-containing lipid droplets in HCV
JFH-1-expressing cells, similarly to YB-1 and DDX6. Importantly, knockdown of
these proteins stimulated the release and/or egress of HCV particles without
affecting virus assembly, suggesting a functional YB-1 protein complex that
negatively regulates virus production. Furthermore, a JFH-1 strain with the NS3
Q221L mutation, which promotes virus production, was less sensitive to this
negative regulation, suggesting that this HCV-specific YB-1 protein complex
modulates an NS3-dependent step in virus production. Overall, our data support a 
model in which HCV hijacks host cell machinery containing numerous RNA-binding
proteins to control the equilibrium between viral RNA replication and
NS3-dependent late steps in particle production.

PMCID: PMC3807372
PMID: 23986595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 Jul 9;3:e277. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.50.

Autism-specific maternal autoantibodies recognize critical proteins in developing
brain.

Braunschweig D(1), Krakowiak P, Duncanson P, Boyce R, Hansen RL, Ashwood P,
Hertz-Picciotto I, Pessah IN, Van de Water J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA,
USA.

Comment in
    J Autism Dev Disord. 2014 Apr;44(4):988-9.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are neurodevelopmental in origin, affecting an
estimated 1 in 88 children in the United States. We previously described
ASD-specific maternal autoantibodies that recognize fetal brain antigens. Herein,
we demonstrate that lactate dehydrogenase A and B (LDH), cypin, stress-induced
phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), collapsin response mediator proteins 1 and 2 (CRMP1,
CRMP2) and Y-box-binding protein to comprise the seven primary antigens of
maternal autoantibody-related (MAR) autism. Exclusive reactivity to specific
antigen combinations was noted in 23% of mothers of ASD children and only 1% of
controls. ASD children from mothers with specific reactivity to LDH, STIP1 and
CRMP1 and/or cypin (7% vs 0% in controls; P<0.0002; odds ratios of 24.2 (95%
confidence interval: 1.45-405)) had elevated stereotypical behaviors compared
with ASD children from mothers lacking these antibodies. We describe the first
panel of clinically significant biomarkers with over 99% specificity for autism
risk thereby advancing our understanding of the etiologic mechanisms and
therapeutic possibilities for MAR autism.

PMCID: PMC3731784
PMID: 23838888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;19(17):4638-50. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3705.
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Mutual regulation between Raf/MEK/ERK signaling and Y-box-binding protein-1
promotes prostate cancer progression.

Imada K(1), Shiota M, Kohashi K, Kuroiwa K, Song Y, Sugimoto M, Naito S, Oda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: Y-box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) is known to conduct various functions
related to cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
and castration resistance in prostate cancer. However, it is still unknown how
YB-1 affects cancer biology, especially its correlations with the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Therefore, we aimed to
examine the interaction between YB-1 and the MAPK pathway in prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Quantitative real-time PCR, Western blotting, and
co-immunoprecipitation assay were conducted in prostate cancer cells. YB-1,
phosphorylated YB-1 (p-YB-1), and ERK2 protein expressions in 165 clinical
specimens of prostate cancer were investigated by immunohistochemistry. YB-1,
p-YB-1, and ERK2 nuclear expressions were compared with clinicopathologic
characteristics and patient prognoses.
RESULTS: EGF upregulated p-YB-1, whereas MEK inhibitor (U0126, PD98059) decreased
p-YB-1. Inversely, silencing of YB-1 using siRNA decreased the expression of ERK2
and phosphorylated MEK, ERK1/2, and RSK. Furthermore, YB-1 interacted with ERK2
and Raf-1 and regulated their expressions, through the proteasomal pathway.
Immunohistochemical staining showed a significant correlation among the nuclear
expressions of YB-1, p-YB-1, and ERK2. The Cox proportional hazards model
revealed that high ERK2 expression was an independent prognostic factor [HR,
7.947; 95% confidence interval (CI), 3.527-20.508; P<0.0001].
CONCLUSION: We revealed the functional relationship between YB-1 and MAPK
signaling and its biochemical relevance to the progression of prostate cancer. In
addition, ERK2 expression was an independent prognostic factor. These findings
suggest that both the ERK pathway and YB-1 may be promising molecular targets for
prostate cancer diagnosis and therapeutics.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23838318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. BMC Mol Biol. 2013 Jul 4;14:14. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-14-14.

Tip110 interacts with YB-1 and regulates each other's function.

Timani KA(1), Liu Y, He JJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tip110 plays important roles in tumor immunobiology, pre-mRNA
splicing, expression regulation of viral and host genes, and possibly protein
turnover. It is clear that our understanding of Tip110 biological function
remains incomplete.
RESULTS: Herein, we employed an immunoaffinity-based enrichment approach combined
with protein mass spectrometry and attempted to identify Tip110-interacting
cellular proteins. A total of 13 major proteins were identified to be complexed
with Tip110. Among them was Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1). The interaction of
Tip110 with YB-1 was further dissected and confirmed to be specific and involve
the N-terminal of both Tip110 and YB-1 proteins. A HIV-1 LTR promoter-driven
reporter gene assay and a CD44 minigene in vivo splicing assay were chosen to
evaluate the functional relevance of the Tip110/YB-1 interaction. We showed that 
YB-1 potentiates the Tip110/Tat-mediated transactivation of the HIV-1 LTR
promoter while Tip110 promotes the inclusion of the exon 5 in CD44 minigene
alternative splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: Tip110 and YB-1 interact to form a complex and mutually regulate
each other's biological functions.

PMCID: PMC3716619
PMID: 23822148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Dec;114(12):2753-69. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24624.

Transglutaminase-2 mediates calcium-regulated crosslinking of the Y-box 1 (YB-1) 
translation-regulatory protein in TGFß1-activated myofibroblasts.

Willis WL(1), Hariharan S, David JJ, Strauch AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Integrated Biomedical Sciences 
Graduate Program, and the Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Dorothy M. Davis Heart
and Lung Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, 43210.

Myofibroblast differentiation is required for wound healing and accompanied by
activation of smooth muscle a-actin (SMaA) gene expression. The stress-response
protein, Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) binds SMaA mRNA and regulates its
translational activity. Activation of SMaA gene expression in human pulmonary
myofibroblasts by TGFß1 was associated with formation of denaturation-resistant
YB-1 oligomers with selective affinity for a known translation-silencer sequence 
in SMaA mRNA. We have determined that YB-1 is a substrate for the
protein-crosslinking enzyme transglutaminase 2 (TG2) that catalyzes
calcium-dependent formation of covalent <U+03B3>-glutamyl-isopeptide linkages in
response to reactive oxygen signaling. TG2 transamidation reactions using intact 
cells, cell lysates, and recombinant YB-1 revealed covalent crosslinking of the
50<U+2009>kDa YB-1 polypeptide into protein oligomers that were distributed during
SDS-PAGE over a 75-250 kDa size range. In vitro YB-1 transamidation required
nanomolar levels of calcium and was enhanced by the presence of SMaA mRNA. In
human pulmonary fibroblasts, YB-1 crosslinking was inhibited by (a) anti-oxidant 
cystamine, (b) the reactive-oxygen antagonist, diphenyleneiodonium, (c)
competitive inhibition of TG2 transamidation using the aminyl-surrogate
substrate, monodansylcadaverine, and (d) transfection with small-interfering RNA 
specific for human TG2 mRNA. YB-1 crosslinking was partially reversible as a
function of oligomer-substrate availability and TG2 enzyme concentration.
Intracellular calcium accumulation and peroxidative stress in injury-activated
myofibroblasts may govern SMaA mRNA translational activity during wound healing
via TG2-mediated crosslinking of the YB-1 mRNA-binding protein.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23804301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jun 22;13:303. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-303.

Low expression of the X-linked ribosomal protein S4 in human serous epithelial
ovarian cancer is associated with a poor prognosis.

Tsofack SP(1), Meunier L, Sanchez L, Madore J, Provencher D, Mes-Masson AM, Lebel
M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The X-linked ribosomal protein S4 (RPS4X), which is involved in
cellular translation and proliferation, has previously been identified as a
partner of the overexpressed multifunctional protein YB-1 in several breast
cancer cells. Depletion of RPS4X results in consistent resistance to cisplatin in
such cell lines.
METHODS: As platinum-based chemotherapy is a standard first line therapy used to 
treat patients with ovarian cancer, we evaluated the prognostic value of RPS4X
and YB-1 at the protein level in specimen from 192 high-grade serous epithelial
ovarian cancer patients.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry studies indicated that high expression of RPS4X was
associated with a lower risk of death and later disease progression (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.713, 
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001 and HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.761, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, respectively) as compared to low expression 
of RPS4X. In contrast, YB-1 was not significantly associated with either
recurrence or survival time in this cohort. Finally, the depletion of RPS4X with 
different siRNAs in two different ovarian cancer cell lines reduced their
proliferative growth rate but more importantly increased their resistance to
cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these results suggest that the levels of RPS4X could be a
good indicator for resistance to platinum-based therapy and a prognostic marker
for ovarian cancer. Our study also showed that RPS4X is an independent prognostic
factor in patients with serous epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3708827
PMID: 23800275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Prostate. 2013 Sep;73(12):1336-44. doi: 10.1002/pros.22681. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Interaction between docetaxel resistance and castration resistance in prostate
cancer: implications of Twist1, YB-1, and androgen receptor.

Shiota M(1), Kashiwagi E, Yokomizo A, Takeuchi A, Dejima T, Song Y, Tatsugami K, 
Inokuchi J, Uchiumi T, Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Taxanes, including docetaxel, are currently the only cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents proven to confer survival benefit in patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, the merits of taxanes
remain modest, and efforts are needed to improve their therapeutic efficacy.
METHODS: We evaluated the sensitivity of prostate cancer cells to various agents 
using cytotoxicity assays. Gene and protein expression levels were evaluated by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting analysis,
respectively.
RESULTS: Hydrogen peroxide-resistant and castration-resistant cells that
overexpressed Twist1 and Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) were cross-resistant to
cytotoxic agents, including docetaxel. Twist1 regulated YB-1 expression in
prostate cancer cells, supported by the induction of Twist1 and YB-1 by
transforming-growth factor-ß, which is critical for taxane resistance. Twist1
and/or YB-1 were activated in docetaxel-resistant prostate cancer cells, and YB-1
was activated by docetaxel treatment. Conversely, Twist1 and YB-1 knockdown
sensitized prostate cancer cells to cytotoxic agents, including docetaxel. In
addition, androgen receptor (AR) knockdown increased cellular sensitivity to
docetaxel, though AR expression in docetaxel-resistant LNCaP cells was
paradoxically lower than in parental cells. Intriguingly, androgen deprivation
treatment was more effective in docetaxel-resistant LNCaP cells compared with
parental cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Twist1/YB-1 and AR signaling promote docetaxel resistance in CRPC
cells. However, docetaxel-resistant cells were collaterally sensitive to androgen
deprivation because of down-regulation of AR expression, suggesting that the
therapeutic effect of initial taxane treatment in hormone-naïve prostate cancer
may be superior to that of salvage taxane treatment in CRPC.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23775496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Anticancer Res. 2013 Jun;33(6):2473-80.

Antiestrogens suppress effects of transforming growth factor-ß in breast cancer
cells via the signaling axis estrogen receptor-a and Y-box Binding Protein-1.

Popp SL(1), Joffroy C, Stope MB, Buck MB, Fritz P, Knabbe C.

Author information: 
(1)Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Multifunctional Y-box Binding Protein-1 (YB1) is correlated with a
poor outcome in breast cancer. We found YB1 expression to be regulated by
antiestrogens commonly used in the hormonal therapy of breast cancer and known as
activators of Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGFß). Thus, a putative influence of 
YB1 on TGFß signaling should be investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of YB1 on TGFß signaling was monitored by
expression analysis and reporter gene assays in breast cancer cells
overexpressing YB1 and treated with antiestrogens.
RESULTS: Antiestrogen-mediated inhibition of estrogen receptor-a led to a
suppression of YB1 protein synthesis. On the other hand, YB1 was found to be an
enhancer of TGFß signaling.
CONCLUSION: High levels of YB1 expression lead to a stimulation of TGFß pathways,
thereby counteracting antihormonal breast cancer therapy and representing a
putative resistance mechanism.

PMID: 23749898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2013 Jul;23(6):990-6. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e31829783e3.

Alterations in expression pattern of splicing factors in epithelial ovarian
cancer and its clinical impact.

Iborra S(1), Hirschfeld M, Jaeger M, Zur Hausen A, Braicu I, Sehouli J, Gitsch G,
Stickeler E.

Author information: 
(1)Gynecological Hospital, Freiburg University Medical Center, Hugstetterstrasse 
55, Freiburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Alternative splicing represents an important nuclear mechanism in the 
posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression, which is frequently altered
during tumorigenesis. Previously, we described marked changes in alternative
splicing of the CD44 gene in ovarian and breast cancer as well as specific
induction of distinct splicing factors during tumor development. The present
study was focused on the expression profiles of different splicing factors,
including classical serine-arginine (SR) proteins including ASF/SF2, hTra2ß1,
hTra2a, and Y-box-binding protein (YB-1) in physiological and malignant
epithelial ovarian tissue to evaluate their expression pattern with regard to
tumor development and disease progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression levels of the different splicing factors were
analyzed in physiological epithelial ovarian tissue samples, primary tumors, and 
metastatic samples of patients with a diagnosis of epithelial ovarian cancer
using quantified reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis. We
examined more closely the splicing factor hTra2ß1 using Western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The analysis revealed a marked and specific induction of ASF/SF2, SRp20,
hTra2ß1, and YB-1 in primary tumors as well as in their metastatic sites.
However, in our patient cohort, no induction was seen for the other investigated 
splicing factors SRp55, SRp40, and hTra2a.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a specific induction of distinct splicing
factors in ovarian cancer tumorigenesis. The involvement of hTra2ß1, YB-1, SRp20,
and ASF/SF2 in exon recognition and alternative splicing may be important for
gene regulation of alternatively spliced genes like CD44 with potential
functional consequences in this tumor type leading to progression and metastasis.

PMID: 23748175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Sep;26(5):685-96. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12119. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Melanoma inhibitory activity promotes melanoma development through activation of 
YBX1.

Schmid R(1), Meyer K, Spang R, Schittek B, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg,
Germany.

Melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA), a small soluble secreted protein, is
functionally important for progression of malignant melanoma. We recently
revealed that p54(nrb) acts as a mediator of MIA action. In this study, we
characterize the transcriptional regulation of p54(nrb) by MIA to explain MIA's
molecular action. We identified one highly conserved region in the p54(nrb)
promoter that is necessary and sufficient for MIA-dependent activation.
Functional promoter analysis identified the transcription factor YBX1 as the
mediator of MIA activation of p54(nrb) transcription. We screened the genome for 
further potential MIA-regulated genes carrying the element in their promoter
regions. Integrating our sequence data with expression data from human melanomas 
identified a list of 23 potential MIA-YBX1 targets in melanomas. In summary, we
present for the first time effects of MIA on transcriptional regulation.
Uncovering new potential downstream effectors working via activation of YBX1
supports the important role of MIA in melanoma.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23672612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2013 Mar;154(5):654-7.

Coexpression of two mRNA isoforms of insulin-like growth factor-1 gene and mRNA
of YB-1 gene in patients with multiple myeloma.

Shushanov SS(1), Mar'ina LG, Kravtsova TA, Chernykh YB, Kakpakova ES.

Author information: 
(1)N. N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
Moscow, Russia. sainHershy@yandex.ru

Coexpression of two mRNA isoforms for insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1A and
IGF-1B) and expression of YB-1 mRNA were analyzed in the bone marrow aspirates
from 19 patients with multiple myeloma. It was shown that mRNA isoforms for
IGF-1A and IGF-1B were mainly expressed in samples with hyperexpression of YB-1
mRNA, and, on the contrary, practically were not expressed (except sporadic
cases) in samples with low level of YB-1 mRNA expression. Coexpression of mRNA
isoforms for IGF-1A and IGF-1B were observed in 80% patients with multiple
myeloma.

PMID: 23658892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Aug;12(8):2148-59. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.027086. Epub
2013 May 3.

Oncogenic H-ras reprograms Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell-derived exosomal
proteins following epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Tauro BJ(1), Mathias RA, Greening DW, Gopal SK, Ji H, Kapp EA, Coleman BM, Hill
AF, Kusebauch U, Hallows JL, Shteynberg D, Moritz RL, Zhu HJ, Simpson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe
University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a highly conserved morphogenic process
defined by the loss of epithelial characteristics and the acquisition of a
mesenchymal phenotype. EMT is associated with increased aggressiveness,
invasiveness, and metastatic potential in carcinoma cells. To assess the
contribution of extracellular vesicles following EMT, we conducted a proteomic
analysis of exosomes released from Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, and
MDCK cells transformed with oncogenic H-Ras (21D1 cells). Exosomes are 40-100 nm 
membranous vesicles originating from the inward budding of late endosomes and
multivesicular bodies and are released from cells on fusion of multivesicular
bodies with the plasma membrane. Exosomes from MDCK cells (MDCK-Exos) and 21D1
cells (21D1-Exos) were purified from cell culture media using density gradient
centrifugation (OptiPrep™), and protein content identified by GeLC-MS/MS
proteomic profiling. Both MDCK- and 21D1-Exos populations were morphologically
similar by cryo-electron microscopy and contained stereotypical exosome marker
proteins such as TSG101, Alix, and CD63. In this study we show that the
expression levels of typical EMT hallmark proteins seen in whole cells correlate 
with those observed in MDCK- and 21D1-Exos, i.e. reduction of characteristic
inhibitor of angiogenesis, thrombospondin-1, and epithelial markers E-cadherin,
and EpCAM, with a concomitant up-regulation of mesenchymal makers such as
vimentin. Further, we reveal that 21D1-Exos are enriched with several proteases
(e.g. MMP-1, -14, -19, ADAM-10, and ADAMTS1), and integrins (e.g. ITGB1, ITGA3,
and ITGA6) that have been recently implicated in regulating the tumor
microenvironment to promote metastatic progression. A salient finding of this
study was the unique presence of key transcriptional regulators (e.g. the master 
transcriptional regulator YBX1) and core splicing complex components (e.g. SF3B1,
SF3B3, and SFRS1) in mesenchymal 21D1-Exos. Taken together, our findings reveal
that exosomes from Ras-transformed MDCK cells are reprogrammed with factors which
may be capable of inducing EMT in recipient cells.

PMCID: PMC3734576
PMID: 23645497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Jun;296(6):891-8. doi: 10.1002/ar.22702. Epub 2013 Apr
24.

Silencing the YB-1 gene inhibits cell migration in gastric cancer in vitro.

Guo TT(1), Yu YN, Yip GW, Matsumoto K, Bay BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

The Y-Box-Binding Protein-1 (YB-1) is known to regulate the processes of
transcription, translation, cellular response to drug treatment and viral
infection as well as DNA repair among others. As gastric cancer is a common
cancer with a high incidence in countries in Asia, we evaluated the association
of YB-1 with the malignant potential of gastric cancer cells in vitro. YB-1 mRNA 
expression levels were first determined by real-time RT-PCR in two adherent
gastric cancer cell lines (viz., MKN7 and NUGC3 gastric cancer cells) and a
normal GES-1 gastric epithelial cell line. Poorly differentiated NUGC3 gastric
cancer cells were found to have the highest YB-1 gene expression among the
adherent cells. YB-1 gene expression was also observed to be higher in
non-adherent SNU5 gastric cancer cells compared to more aggressive SNU16 cells.
Silencing of the YB-1 gene by siRNA in NUGC3 cells was associated with a
significant reduction of the YB-1 protein by more than 55% as verified by Western
blot analysis. Down-regulation of YB-1 protein expression was further
demonstrated qualitatively by immunocytochemistry and immunofluorescence
staining. Silencing of the YB-1 gene induced significant inhibition of cell
migration in NUGC3 cells by 60% but did not influence cell invasion. Although
epithelial-mesenchymal-transition (EMT) is known to be associated with the
migratory phenotype in cancer cells, there was no change in the expression of EMT
genes when YB-1 expression was modulated. YB-1 appears to have an integral role
in cancer cell migration, a process which is important for gastric cancer
metastasis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23613305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Death Differ. 2013 May;20(5):676-85. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.13. Epub 2013 Mar
1.

Targeting the Y/CCAAT box in cancer: YB-1 (YBX1) or NF-Y?

Dolfini D(1), Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 26, 
Milan 20133, Italy.

The Y box is an important sequence motif found in promoters and enhancers
containing a CCAAT box - one of the few elements enriched in promoters of large
sets of genes overexpressed in cancer. The search for the transcription factor(s)
acting on it led to the biochemical purification of the nuclear factor Y (NF-Y)
heterotrimer, and to the cloning - through the screening of expression libraries 
- of Y box-binding protein 1 (YB-1), an oncogene, overexpressed in aggressive
tumors and associated with drug resistance. These two factors have been
associated with Y/CCAAT-dependent activation of numerous growth-related genes,
notably multidrug resistance protein 1. We review two decades of data indicating 
that NF-Y ultimately acts on Y/CCAAT in cancer cells, a notion recently confirmed
by genome-wide data. Other features of YB-1, such as post-transcriptional control
of mRNA biology, render it important in cancer biology.

PMCID: PMC3619239
PMID: 23449390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Urol Oncol. 2014 Jan;32(1):31.e1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2012.11.003. Epub 2013
Feb 6.

Twist1 and Y-box-binding protein-1 are potential prognostic factors in bladder
cancer.

Song YH(1), Shiota M(1), Yokomizo A(2), Uchiumi T(3), Kiyoshima K(1), Kuroiwa
K(1), Oda Y(4), Naito S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address:
yokoa@uro.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression and possible roles of Twist1 and
Y-box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) in bladder cancer tissue. Twist1 belongs to the
family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. A functional link between
Twist1 and YB-1 has recently been determined to play an important role in bladder
cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Frozen samples from 75 patients with bladder cancer were
analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues from 53 patients with bladder cancer
were examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Twist1 transcript levels were positively correlated with YB-1 transcript
levels (coefficient of correlation = 0.42, P<0.001), tumor grade (low grade vs.
high grade; P<0.001), invasiveness (non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer vs. muscle
invasive bladder cancer; P = 0.0018), and metastasis (meta- vs. meta+; P<0.001). 
YB-1 transcript level was also correlated with grade (P = 0.029) and invasiveness
(P = 0.006). By immunohistochemistry, Twist1 expression was also correlated with 
YB-1 expression (P<0.001). Further, both Twist1 and YB-1 expression were
positively correlated with invasiveness (P = 0.007 and P = 0.002, respectively). 
Patients with high Twist1 expression and high YB-1 expression had lower overall
survival rates, compared with patients with low expression (log-rank test, P =
0.040 and P<0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest a functional link between Twist1 and YB-1, and
they indicate that Twist1 and YB-1 promote bladder cancer progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;768:61-70. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-5107-5_5.

GW/P-bodies and autoimmune disease.

Bloch DB(1), Nobre RA, Yang WH.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
bloch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Human autoantibodies have performed admirably in the service of characterizing
GW/P-bodies. These antibodies have provided a critical point of reference by
which other proteins have been shown to be components of GW/P-bodies. In
addition,autoantibodies have been used to identify new GW/P-body components,
including Ge-l, GW182, RAP55, and YB-1. Using new, high-throughput screening
assays, it is likely that additional, novel GW/P-body components will be
identified. Human auto antibodies have also raised the possibility of a
functional link between two apparently unrelated cellular structures, PML-SplOO
nuclear bodies and GW/P-bodies.A key unanswered question remains: What is the
role of GW/P-bodies in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease? Over the next 10
years, as more is learned about the function of GW/P-bodies, it is hoped that
molecular and cellular biologists will further consider this question and
remember the important contributions of patients with autoimmune disease to the
early characterization of these cellular structures.

PMID: 23224965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 1;449(1):11-23. doi: 10.1042/BJ20121323.

YB-1: oncoprotein, prognostic marker and therapeutic target?

Lasham A(1), Print CG, Woolley AG, Dunn SE, Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand.
a.lasham@auckland.ac.nz

Hanahan and Weinberg have proposed the 'hallmarks of cancer' to cover the
biological changes required for the development and persistence of tumours
[Hanahan and Weinberg (2011) Cell 144, 646-674]. We have noted that many of these
cancer hallmarks are facilitated by the multifunctional protein YB-1
(Y-box-binding protein 1). In the present review we evaluate the literature and
show how YB-1 modulates/regulates cellular signalling pathways within each of
these hallmarks. For example, we describe how YB-1 regulates multiple
proliferation pathways, overrides cell-cycle check points, promotes replicative
immortality and genomic instability, may regulate angiogenesis, has a role in
invasion and metastasis, and promotes inflammation. We also argue that there is
strong and sufficient evidence to suggest that YB-1 is an excellent molecular
marker of cancer progression that could be used in the clinic, and that YB-1
could be a useful target for cancer therapy.

PMID: 23216250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Feb;45(2):80-6. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gms099. Epub 2012 Nov 23.

miR-137 restoration sensitizes multidrug-resistant MCF-7/ADM cells to anticancer 
agents by targeting YB-1.

Zhu X(1), Li Y, Shen H, Li H, Long L, Hui L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212001, China.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) to chemotherapeutic agents is a major obstacle to
successful treatment in breast cancer patients. The aims of this study were to
investigate whether miR-137 was involved in the regulation of MDR, and to explore
the mechanism of miR-137 on the sensitivity of MCF-7/ADM cells. miR-137 was
downregulated in MCF-7/ADM cells, and its expression was found to inversely
correlate with Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) levels in
breast cancer cells. Furthermore, YB-1 was confirmed as a target of miR-137 by
luciferase reporter assay and western blot analysis. Moreover, elevated
expression of miR-137 reduced the protein expression levels of YB-1 and P-gp,
mimicking the effect of YB-1 knockdown in the sensitivity of MCF-7/ADM cells to
anticancer agents, whereas restoration of YB-1 diminished this effect. In
conclusion, our results demonstrated that miR-137 was involved in MDR in cancer
through modulation of P-gp by targeting YB-1, suggesting that miR-137 might be a 
potential target for preventing and reversing MDR in tumor cells.

PMID: 23178914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 29;32(35):4189-90. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.521. Epub 2012 Nov
19.

YB-1 (YBX1) does not bind to Y/CCAAT boxes in vivo.

Dolfini D, Mantovani R.

PMID: 23160378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 Mar;133(3):768-75. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.357. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

miR-137 inhibits the invasion of melanoma cells through downregulation of
multiple oncogenic target genes.

Luo C(1), Tetteh PW, Merz PR, Dickes E, Abukiwan A, Hotz-Wagenblatt A,
Holland-Cunz S, Sinnberg T, Schittek B, Schadendorf D, Diederichs S, Eichmüller
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Immunology (D015), German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. c.luo@dkfz.de

MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression and have
important roles in various types of cancer. Previously, miR-137 was reported to
act as a tumor suppressor in different cancers, including malignant melanoma. In 
this study, we show that low miR-137 expression is correlated with poor survival 
in stage IV melanoma patients. We identified and validated two genes (c-Met and
YB1) as direct targets of miR-137 and confirmed two previously known targets,
namely enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor (MITF). Functional studies showed that miR-137 suppressed
melanoma cell invasion through the downregulation of multiple target genes. The
decreased invasion caused by miR-137 overexpression could be phenocopied by small
interfering RNA knockdown of EZH2, c-Met, or Y box-binding protein 1 (YB1).
Furthermore, miR-137 inhibited melanoma cell migration and proliferation.
Finally, miR-137 induced apoptosis in melanoma cell lines and decreased BCL2
levels. In summary, our study confirms that miR-137 acts as a tumor suppressor in
malignant melanoma and reveals that miR-137 regulates multiple targets including 
c-Met, YB1, EZH2, and MITF.

PMID: 23151846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2013 Mar;62(3):517-27. doi: 10.1007/s00262-012-1356-8.
Epub 2012 Sep 30.

YB-1 suppression induces STAT3 proteolysis and sensitizes renal cancer to
interferon-a.

Takeuchi A(1), Shiota M, Tatsugami K, Yokomizo A, Kuroiwa K, Dejima T, Tanaka S, 
Itsumi M, Eto M, Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan.
atakeuchi@prostatecentre.com

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 80-95 % of kidney tumors, and
approximately 30 % of RCC patients have metastatic disease at diagnosis.
Conventional chemotherapy is not effective in patients with metastatic RCC
(MRCC); therefore, immunotherapy with interferon-a (IFN-a) has been employed to
improve survival. However, the response rate of MRCC to IFN-a therapy is low. We 
previously reported that a signal transducer and activator 3 (STAT3) polymorphism
was a useful diagnostic marker to predict the response to IFN-a therapy in
patients with MRCC. Therefore, we hypothesized the inhibition of STAT3 in the
addition of IFN-a therapy might be useful. Moreover, the blockage of STAT3 itself
has been reported to enhance the antitumor effects. However, because IFN-a is
thought to elicit its therapeutic effect via enhancement of an antitumor immune
response mediated by lymphocytes that can be activated by IFN-a administrations, 
it is probable that the suppression of STAT3 in vivo relates to autoimmune
disorders. In the present study, we found Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) was
poorly expressed in T lymphocytes, as compared with cancer tissues. YB-1 was
reported to have an important effect on the STAT3 pathway. Suppression of STAT3
by YB-1 inhibition did not seem to enhance the potential risk for autoimmune
disorders. Moreover, we found sensitivity to IFN-a was increased by YB-1
suppression, and this suppression did not down-regulate IFN-a activation of T
lymphocytes.

PMID: 23052245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Proteomics. 2012 Dec 21;77:e1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.08.019. Epub 2012
Sep 5.

Identification and quantification of newly synthesized proteins translationally
regulated by YB-1 using a novel Click-SILAC approach.

Somasekharan SP(1), Stoynov N, Rotblat B, Leprivier G, Galpin JD, Ahern CA,
Foster LJ, Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada BC V6T 1Z4.

Messenger RNA-binding translational regulatory proteins determine in large part
the spectrum of transcripts that are translated under specific cellular contexts.
Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a conserved eukaryotic translational regulator 
that is implicated in cancer progression. To identify specific proteins that are 
translationally regulated by YB-1, we established a pulse-labelling approach
combining Click chemistry and stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell
culture (SILAC). The proteome of TC32 human Ewing sarcoma cells, which robustly
express YB-1, was compared with or without YB-1 siRNA knockdown. Cells labelled
with light or heavy isotopologs of Arg and Lys were then cotranslationally pulsed
with the methionine derivative, azidohomoalanine (AHA). Cells were lysed and
newly synthesized proteins were selectively derivatized via a Click (3+2
cycloaddition) reaction to add an alkyne biotin tag. They were then affinity
purified and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This
combined Click-SILAC approach enabled us to catalog and quantify newly
synthesized proteins regulated by YB-1 after only 45 min of labelling.
Bioinformatic analysis revealed that YB-1 regulated proteins are involved in
diverse biological pathways. We anticipate that this Click-SILAC strategy will be
useful for studying short-term protein synthesis in different cell culture
systems and under diverse biological contexts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22967496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Anticancer Res. 2012 Aug;32(8):3177-84.

Elevated nuclear YB1 expression is associated with poor survival of patients with
early breast cancer.

Maciejczyk A(1), Szelachowska J, Ekiert M, Matkowski R, Halon A, Lage H, Surowiak
P.

Author information: 
(1)Lower Silesian Centre of Oncology, Wroclaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Y-Box-Binding (YB1) protein represents a multifunctional protein,
which plays a significant role in processes of proliferation, apoptosis and
control of tumour cell response to toxic agents, including chemotherapy. The
present study aimed at evaluating the prognostic significance of YB1 expression
in breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed nuclear and cytoplasmic expression of YB1 in
101 patients with stage II breast cancer, with 17 years of follow-up.
Immunohistochemical reactions were performed on paraffin sections of primary
tumours, using monoclonal antibodies against YB1. Results were tested for their
correlation with clinical and pathological data.
RESULTS: Patients with a pronounced expression of the nuclear form the YB1
protein demonstrated a highly significant shortening of disease-free survival,
disease-specific survival and overall survival. The prognostic value of YB1 was
also corroborated by multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that high nuclear expression of YB1 is associated
with poor survival of patients with early-stage breast cancer.

PMID: 22843890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30170-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349951. Epub
2012 Jul 11.

The p63 protein isoform <U+0394>Np63a modulates Y-box binding protein 1 in its
subcellular distribution and regulation of cell survival and motility genes.

Di Costanzo A(1), Troiano A, di Martino O, Cacace A, Natale CF, Ventre M, Netti
P, Caserta S, Pollice A, La Mantia G, Calabrò V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia and Interdisciplinary Research Centre on Biomaterials, University of
Naples Federico II, Naples 80126, Italy.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) belongs to the cold-shock domain protein
superfamily, one of the most evolutionarily conserved nucleic acid-binding
proteins currently known. YB-1 performs a wide variety of cellular functions,
including transcriptional and translational regulation, DNA repair, drug
resistance, and stress responses to extracellular signals. Inasmuch as the level 
of YB-1 drastically increases in tumor cells, this protein is considered to be
one of the most indicative markers of malignant tumors. Here, we present evidence
that <U+0394>Np63a, the predominant p63 protein isoform in squamous epithelia and YB-1, 
can physically interact. Into the nucleus, <U+0394>Np63a and YB-1 cooperate in PI3KCA
gene promoter activation. Moreover, <U+0394>Np63a promotes YB-1 nuclear accumulation
thereby reducing the amount of YB-1 bound to its target transcripts such as that 
encoding the SNAIL1 protein. Accordingly, <U+0394>Np63a enforced expression was
associated with a reduction of the level of SNAIL1, a potent inducer of
epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, <U+0394>Np63a depletion causes
morphological change and enhanced formation of actin stress fibers in squamous
cancer cells. Mechanistic studies indicate that <U+0394>Np63a affects cell movement and 
can reverse the increase of cell motility induced by YB-1 overexpression. These
data thus suggest that <U+0394>Np63a provides inhibitory signals for cell motility.
Deficiency of <U+0394>Np63a gene expression promotes cell mobilization, at least
partially, through a YB-1-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3436271
PMID: 22787154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8622-36. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

YB-1 binds to CAUC motifs and stimulates exon inclusion by enhancing the
recruitment of U2AF to weak polypyrimidine tracts.

Wei WJ(1), Mu SR, Heiner M, Fu X, Cao LJ, Gong XF, Bindereif A, Hui J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 200031 Shanghai, China.

The human Y box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA)/ribonucleic acid (RNA)-binding protein with pleiotropic functions. Besides 
its roles in the regulation of transcription and translation, several recent
studies indicate that YB-1 is a spliceosome-associated protein and is involved in
alternative splicing, but the underlying mechanism has remained elusive. Here, we
define both CAUC and CACC as high-affinity binding motifs for YB-1 by systematic 
evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) and demonstrate that these
newly defined motifs function as splicing enhancers. Interestingly, on the
endogenous CD44 gene, YB-1 appears to mediate a network interaction to activate
exon v5 inclusion via multiple CAUC motifs in both the alternative exon and its
upstream polypyrimidine tract. We provide evidence that YB-1 activates splicing
by facilitating the recruitment of U2AF65 to weak polypyrimidine tracts through
direct protein-protein interactions. Together, these findings suggest a vital
role of YB-1 in activating a subset of weak 3' splice sites in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3458536
PMID: 22730292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2012 May;237(5):593-607. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2012.011137.
Epub 2012 May 22.

Y-box binding protein-1 implicated in translational control of fetal myocardial
gene expression after cardiac transplant.

David JJ(1), Subramanian SV, Zhang A, Willis WL, Kelm RJ Jr, Leier CV, Strauch
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Cell Biology, Dorothy M. Davis Heart & Lung
Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Peri-transplant surgical trauma and ischemia/reperfusion injury in accepted
murine heterotopic heart grafts has been associated with myofibroblast
differentiation, cardiac fibrosis and biomechanical-stress activation of the
fetal myocardial smooth muscle a-actin (SMaA) gene. The wound-healing agonists,
transforming growth factor ß1 and thrombin, are known to coordinate SMaA mRNA
transcription and translation in activated myofibroblasts by altering the
subcellular localization and mRNA-binding affinity of the Y-box binding protein-1
(YB-1) cold-shock domain (CSD) protein that governs a variety of cellular
responses to metabolic stress. YB-1 accumulated in polyribosome-enriched regions 
of the sarcoplasm proximal to cardiac intercalated discs in accepted heart
grafts. YB-1 binding to a purine-rich motif in exon 3 of SMaA mRNA that regulates
translational efficiency increased substantially in perfusion-isolated,
rod-shaped adult rat cardiomyocytes during phenotypic de-differentiation in the
presence of serum-derived growth factors. Cardiomyocyte de-differentiation was
accompanied by the loss of a 60 kDa YB-1 variant that was highly expressed in
both adult myocardium and freshly isolated myocytes and replacement with the 50
kDa form of YB-1 (p50) typically expressed in myofibroblasts that demonstrated
sequence-specific interaction with SMaA mRNA. Accumulation of p50 YB-1 in
reprogrammed, de-differentiated myocytes was associated with a 10-fold increase
in SMaA protein expression. Endomyocardial biopsies collected from patients up to
14 years after heart transplant showed variable yet coordinately elevated
expression of SMaA and p50 YB-1 protein and demonstrable p50 YB-1:SMaA mRNA
interaction. The p60 YB-1 variant in human heart graft samples, but neither mouse
p60 nor mouse or human p50, reacted with an antibody specific for the
phosphoserine 102 modification in the YB-1 CSD. Modulation of YB-1 subcellular
compartmentalization and mRNA-binding activity may be linked with reprogramming
of contractile protein gene expression in ventricular cardiomyocytes that could
contribute to maladaptive remodeling in accepted, long-term heart grafts.

PMID: 22619371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36969. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036969. Epub 2012 May 8.

Formation of amyloid-like fibrils by Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is mediated
by its cold shock domain and modulated by disordered terminal domains.

Guryanov SG(1), Selivanova OM, Nikulin AD, Enin GA, Melnik BS, Kretov DA, Serdyuk
IN, Ovchinnikov LP.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Protein Biosynthesis Regulation, Institute of Protein Research,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Russia.

YB-1, a multifunctional DNA- and RNA-binding nucleocytoplasmic protein, is
involved in the majority of DNA- and mRNA-dependent events in the cell. It
consists of three structurally different domains: its central cold shock domain
has the structure of a ß-barrel, while the flanking domains are predicted to be
intrinsically disordered. Recently, we showed that YB-1 is capable of forming
elongated fibrils under high ionic strength conditions. Here we report that it is
the cold shock domain that is responsible for formation of YB-1 fibrils, while
the terminal domains differentially modulate this process depending on salt
conditions. We demonstrate that YB-1 fibrils have amyloid-like features,
including affinity for specific dyes and a typical X-ray diffraction pattern, and
that in contrast to most of amyloids, they disassemble under nearly physiological
conditions.

PMCID: PMC3348147
PMID: 22590640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nature. 2012 May 2;485(7396):109-13. doi: 10.1038/nature11083.

A unifying model for mTORC1-mediated regulation of mRNA translation.

Thoreen CC(1), Chantranupong L, Keys HR, Wang T, Gray NS, Sabatini DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 250 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 Dec;188(6):2433-4.
    Nature. 2012 May 3;485(7396):50-1.

The mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) kinase nucleates a pathway that promotes cell growth 
and proliferation and is the target of rapamycin, a drug with many clinical uses.
mTORC1 regulates messenger RNA translation, but the overall translational program
is poorly defined and no unifying model exists to explain how mTORC1
differentially controls the translation of specific mRNAs. Here we use
high-resolution transcriptome-scale ribosome profiling to monitor translation in 
mouse cells acutely treated with the mTOR inhibitor Torin 1, which, unlike
rapamycin, fully inhibits mTORC1 (ref. 2). Our data reveal a surprisingly simple 
model of the mRNA features and mechanisms that confer mTORC1-dependent
translation control. The subset of mRNAs that are specifically regulated by
mTORC1 consists almost entirely of transcripts with established 5' terminal
oligopyrimidine (TOP) motifs, or, like Hsp90ab1 and Ybx1, with previously
unrecognized TOP or related TOP-like motifs that we identified. We find no
evidence to support proposals that mTORC1 preferentially regulates mRNAs with
increased 5' untranslated region length or complexity. mTORC1 phosphorylates a
myriad of translational regulators, but how it controls TOP mRNA translation is
unknown. Remarkably, loss of just the 4E-BP family of translational repressors,
arguably the best characterized mTORC1 substrates, is sufficient to render TOP
and TOP-like mRNA translation resistant to Torin 1. The 4E-BPs inhibit
translation initiation by interfering with the interaction between the
cap-binding protein eIF4E and eIF4G1. Loss of this interaction diminishes the
capacity of eIF4E to bind TOP and TOP-like mRNAs much more than other mRNAs,
explaining why mTOR inhibition selectively suppresses their translation. Our
results clarify the translational program controlled by mTORC1 and identify
4E-BPs and eIF4G1 as its master effectors.

PMCID: PMC3347774
PMID: 22552098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. FEBS J. 2013 Jan;280(2):324-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08609.x. Epub 2012 
May 21.

Protein Ser/Thr phosphatases--the ugly ducklings of cell signalling.

Brautigan DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. db8g@virginia.edu

This review traces the historical origins and conceptual developments leading to 
the current state of knowledge of the three superfamilies of protein Ser/Thr
phosphatases. 'PR enzyme' was identified as an enzyme that inactivates glycogen
phosphorylase, although it took 10 years before this ugly duckling was recognized
for its true identity as a protein Ser/Thr phosphatase. Ethanol denaturation for 
purification in the 1970s yielded a phosphatase that exhibited broad specificity,
which was resolved into type-1 and type-2 phosphatases in the 1980s. More recent 
developments show that regulation and specificity are achieved through assembly
of multisubunit holoenzymes, transient phosphorylation and the action of
inhibitor proteins. Still not widely appreciated, there are hundreds of discrete 
protein Ser/Thr phosphatases available to counteract protein kinases, offering
potential therapeutic targets. Signalling networks and modelling schemes need to 
incorporate the full gamut of protein Ser/Thr phosphatases and their
interconnections.

© 2012 The Author Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMID: 22519956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Exp Dermatol. 2012 Apr;21(4):265-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2012.01448.x.

MAPK and PI3K/AKT mediated YB-1 activation promotes melanoma cell proliferation
which is counteracted by an autoregulatory loop.

Sinnberg T(1), Sauer B, Holm P, Spangler B, Kuphal S, Bosserhoff A, Schittek B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Division of Dermatooncology,
Eberhard-Karls-University, Tübingen, Germany.

Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription and translation
factor and is overexpressed in several types of cancer. Our previous data showed 
that YB-1 is upregulated and translocated to the nucleus during melanoma
progression and that YB-1 is an important transcription factor regulating
proliferation, survival, migration, invasion and chemosensitivity of melanoma
cells. It has been suggested that YB-1 is activated and translocated to the
nucleus after S102-phosphorylation in the DNA binding domain. In this study, we
show that activation of YB-1 by S102-phosphorylation and nuclear translocation is
increased during melanoma progression using a human tissue microarray with 100
melanocytic lesions. Furthermore, we analysed the mechanisms governing the
expression and activity of YB-1 in melanoma cells. We show that the PI3K/AKT and 
p53 signalling, growth factors and chemotherapeutic agents increase YB-1 promoter
activity. This, however, resulted in no or only modest increase in YB-1 protein
expression. We show that the MAPK and PI3K/AKT signalling pathways, both
activated in melanoma cells, as well as p53 overexpression increase YB-1
S102-phosphorylation, whereas NF<U+03BA>B signalling inhibits phosphorylation.
Overexpression of YB-1 in melanoma cells inhibits translation efficiency and by
this proliferation and survival of melanoma cells indicating that there is an
autoregulatory loop restricting YB-1 protein expression. These data suggest that 
there is a tightly regulated feedback mechanism regulating YB-1 expression and
activation, necessary for proper cell cycle progression of melanoma cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22417301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2011 Dec;76(13):1402-33. doi: 10.1134/S0006297911130049.

Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) and its functions.

Eliseeva IA(1), Kim ER, Guryanov SG, Ovchinnikov LP, Lyabin DN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, Russia.

This review describes the structure and functions of Y-box binding protein 1
(YB-1) and its homologs. Interactions of YB-1 with DNA, mRNAs, and proteins are
considered. Data on the participation of YB-1 in DNA reparation and
transcription, mRNA splicing and translation are systematized. Results on
interactions of YB-1 with cytoskeleton components and its possible role in mRNA
localization are discussed. Data on intracellular distribution of YB-1, its
redistribution between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, and its secretion and
extracellular functions are summarized. The effect of YB-1 on cell
differentiation, its involvement in extra- and intracellular signaling pathways, 
and its role in early embryogenesis are described. The mechanisms of regulation
of YB-1 expression in the cell are presented. Special attention is paid to the
involvement of YB-1 in oncogenic cell transformation, multiple drug resistance,
and dissemination of tumors. Both the oncogenic and antioncogenic activities of
YB-1 are reviewed. The potential use of YB-1 in diagnostics and therapy as an
early cancer marker and a molecular target is discussed.

PMID: 22339596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Sep;13(5):375-84. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.11.006. Epub
2012 Jan 27.

Association of nuclear YB-1 localization with lung resistance-related protein and
epidermal growth factor receptor expression in lung cancer.

Hyogotani A(1), Ito K, Yoshida K, Izumi H, Kohno K, Amano J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription factor
that is activated in response to various genotoxic stresses. The purpose of this 
study was to elucidate whether YB-1 correlates with the expression of lung
resistance-related protein (LRP) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in
primary lung cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and five non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
specimens were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. Knockdown of YB-1 messenger RNA 
by small interfering RNA(siRNA) was tested for the lung cancer cell lines A549
and Calu-3.
RESULTS: Nuclear YB-1 expression significantly correlated with positive LRP and
EGFR expression (P < .001). Nuclear YB-1 expression and positive LRP and EGFR
expression were independent adverse prognostic factors in patients with NSCLC.
Furthermore, patients with tumors positive for nuclear YB-1 and LRP had a
significantly worse prognosis than those negative for nuclear YB-1 and LRP (P <
.001). In addition, patients with tumors positive for nuclear YB-1 and EGFR had a
significantly worse prognosis than those negative for nuclear YB-1 and EGFR (P < 
.001). In in vitro analyses that use the NSCLC cell lines A549 and Calu-3, the
downregulation of YB-1 with siRNAs drastically decreased the expression of EGFR. 
However, downregulation of YB-1 remarkably decreased the expression of LRP in
A549 cells; however, a slight decrease in LRP was induced by the downregulation
of YB-1 in Calu-3 cells.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that nuclear YB-1 localization is associated
with LRP and EGFR expression in NSCLC, and nuclear YB-1 localization and LRP and 
EGFR expression are of prognostic significance in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22284440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 2012 Oct 11;31(41):4434-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.617. Epub 2012 Jan
16.

MKNK1 is a YB-1 target gene responsible for imparting trastuzumab resistance and 
can be blocked by RSK inhibition.

Astanehe A(1), Finkbeiner MR, Krzywinski M, Fotovati A, Dhillon J, Berquin IM,
Mills GB, Marra MA, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Trastuzumab (Herceptin) resistance is a major obstacle in the treatment of
patients with HER2-positive breast cancers. We recently reported that the
transcription factor Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) leads to acquisition of
resistance to trastuzumab in a phosphorylation-dependent manner that relies on
p90 ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK). To explore how this may occur we compared YB-1
target genes between trastuzumab-sensitive cells (BT474) and those with acquired 
resistance (HR5 and HR6) using genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing (ChIP-sequencing), which identified 1391 genes uniquely bound by YB-1 
in the resistant cell lines. We then examined differences in protein expression
and phosphorylation between these cell lines using the Kinexus Kinex antibody
microarrays. Cross-referencing these two data sets identified the
mitogen-activated protein kinase-interacting kinase (MNK) family as potentially
being involved in acquired resistance downstream from YB-1. MNK1 and MNK2 were
subsequently shown to be overexpressed in the resistant cell lines; however, only
the former was a YB-1 target based on ChIP-PCR and small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
studies. Importantly, loss of MNK1 expression using siRNA enhanced sensitivity to
trastuzumab. Further, MNK1 overexpression was sufficient to confer resistance to 
trastuzumab in cells that were previously sensitive. We then developed a de novo 
model of acquired resistance by exposing BT474 cells to trastuzumab for 60 days
(BT474LT). Similar to the HR5/HR6 cells, the BT474LT cells had elevated MNK1
levels and were dependent on it for survival. In addition, we demonstrated that
RSK phosphorylated MNK1, and that this phosphorylation was required for ability
of MNK1 to mediate resistance to trastuzumab. Furthermore, inhibition of RSK with
the small molecule BI-D1870 repressed the MNK1-mediated trastuzumab resistance.
In conclusion, this unbiased integrated approach identified MNK1 as a player in
mediating trastuzumab resistance as a consequence of YB-1 activation, and
demonstrated RSK inhibition as a means to overcome recalcitrance to trastuzumab.

PMID: 22249268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Pathol. 2012 Mar;180(3):1283-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.11.029. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

Tumor endothelial cells acquire drug resistance by MDR1 up-regulation via VEGF
signaling in tumor microenvironment.

Akiyama K(1), Ohga N, Hida Y, Kawamoto T, Sadamoto Y, Ishikawa S, Maishi N, Akino
T, Kondoh M, Matsuda A, Inoue N, Shindoh M, Hida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Graduate School of Dental Medicine, University
of Hokkaido, Hokkaido, Japan.

Tumor endothelial cells (TECs) are therapeutic targets in anti-angiogenic
therapy. Contrary to the traditional assumption, TECs can be genetically abnormal
and might also acquire drug resistance. In this study, mouse TECs and normal ECs 
were isolated to investigate the drug resistance of TECs and the mechanism by
which it is acquired. TECs were more resistant to paclitaxel with the
up-regulation of multidrug resistance (MDR) 1 mRNA, which encodes the
P-glycoprotein, compared with normal ECs. Normal human microvascular ECs were
cultured in tumor-conditioned medium (CM) and became more resistant to paclitaxel
through MDR1 mRNA up-regulation and nuclear translocation of Y-box-binding
protein 1, which is an MDR1 transcription factor. Vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) receptor 2 (VEGFR2) and Akt were activated in human microvascular
ECs by tumor CM. We observed that tumor CM contained a significantly high level
of VEGF. A VEGFR kinase inhibitor, Ki8751, and a phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-Akt inhibitor, LY294002, blocked tumor CM-induced MDR1 up-regulation.
MDR1 up-regulation, via the VEGF-VEGFR pathway in the tumor microenvironment, is 
one of the mechanisms of drug resistance acquired by TECs. We observed that VEGF 
secreted from tumors up-regulated MDR1 through the activation of VEGFR2 and Akt. 
This process is a novel mechanism of the acquisition of drug resistance by TECs
in the tumor microenvironment.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun 1;105(7):724-30. doi: 10.1002/jso.23030. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Strong YB-1 expression is associated with liver metastasis progression and
predicts shorter disease-free survival in advanced gastric cancer.

Wu Y(1), Yamada S, Izumi H, Li Z, Shimajiri S, Wang KY, Liu YP, Kohno K, Sasaguri
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The most significant cause of gastric cancer (GC) death is
metastasis, although the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Y-box binding
protein-1 (YB-1) is associated with tumor aggressiveness and poor prognosis in
various cancers. In this study we investigated the relationship between YB-1
expression and the clinicopathologic features and metastasis-associated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype in advanced GC patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to analyze YB-1,
E-cadherin, and vimentin expression in 98 advanced GC cases.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine (29.6%) cases of GC exhibited strong YB-1 immunoreactivity. 
Strong YB-1 staining occurred more often in patients with intestinal or
non-scirrhous cancer, and demonstrated a significant correlation with vascular
invasion (VI), liver metastasis, and shorter disease-free survival (DFS).
However, we observed no relationship between YB-1 expression and EMT phenotype or
overall survival. Logistic regression analysis revealed that strong staining for 
YB-1 was the only predictive factor for liver metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that YB-1 plays a role in the process of GC
metastasis, and that the immunohistochemical detection of this protein
potentially delivers valuable insight regarding the prediction of liver
metastasis and shorter DFS in patients undergoing curative resection for advanced
GC.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22215526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Jan 18;104(2):133-46. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr512. Epub
2011 Dec 28.

YB-1, the E2F pathway, and regulation of tumor cell growth.

Lasham A(1), Samuel W, Cao H, Patel R, Mehta R, Stern JL, Reid G, Woolley AG,
Miller LD, Black MA, Shelling AN, Print CG, Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. a.lasham@auckland.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: Y-box binding factor 1 (YB-1) has been associated with prognosis in
many tumor types. Reduced YB-1 expression inhibits tumor cell growth, but the
mechanism is unclear.
METHODS: YB-1 mRNA levels were compared with tumor grade and histology using
microarray data from 771 breast cancer patients and with disease-free survival
and distant metastasis-free survival using data from 375 of those patients who
did not receive adjuvant therapy. Microarrays were further searched for genes
that had correlated expression with YB-1 mRNA. Small interfering RNA (siRNA) was 
used to study the effects of reduced YB-1 expression on growth of three tumor
cell lines (MCF-7 breast, HCT116 colon, and A549 lung cancer cells), on
tumorigenesis by A549 cells in nude mice, and on global transcription in the
three cancer cell lines. Reporter gene assays were used to determine whether YB-1
siRNAs affected the expression of E2F1, and chromatin immunoprecipitation was
used to determine whether YB-1 bound to various E2F promoters as well as
E2F1-regulated promoters. All P values were from two-sided tests.
RESULTS: YB-1 levels were elevated in more aggressive tumors and were strongly
associated with poor disease-free survival and distant metastasis-free survival. 
YB-1 expression was often associated with the expression of genes with E2F sites 
in their promoters. Cells expressing YB-1 siRNA grew substantially more slowly
than control cells and formed tumors less readily in nude mice. Transcripts that 
were altered in cancer cell lines with YB-1 siRNA included 32 genes that are
components of prognostic gene expression signatures. YB-1 regulated expression of
an E2F1 promoter-reporter construct in A549 cells (eg, relative E2F1 promoter
activity with control siRNA = 4.04; with YB-1 siRNA = 1.40, difference= -2.64,
95% confidence interval = -3.57 to -1.71, P < .001) and bound to the promoters of
several well-defined E2F1 target genes.
CONCLUSION: YB-1 expression is associated with the activity of E2F transcription 
factors and may control tumor cell growth by this mechanism.

PMID: 22205655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2012 Feb;295(2):215-22. doi: 10.1002/ar.22401. Epub 2011 Dec 
20.

Surmounting chemoresistance by targeting the Y-box binding protein-1.

Inoue I(1), Matsumoto K, Yu Y, Bay BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1), characterized by the presence of the cold
shock domain, has been reported to induce chemoresistance in cancer therapy.
Chemotherapy is one of the main therapeutic strategies in the treatment of
cancer, in addition to surgery, radiation therapy, and hormonal therapy. However,
chemoresistance remains a key obstacle to successful cancer management. In this
review, we will focus on the role of YB-1, an important regulator of gene
transcription, in cancer therapy and chemoresistance.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22190445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Urol. 2012 Feb;187(2):707-14. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.09.147. Epub 2011 Dec
16.

Antioxidant therapy alleviates oxidative stress by androgen deprivation and
prevents conversion from androgen dependent to castration resistant prostate
cancer.

Shiota M(1), Song Y, Takeuchi A, Yokomizo A, Kashiwagi E, Kuroiwa K, Tatsugami K,
Uchiumi T, Oda Y, Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer progression from androgen dependence to castration
resistance results at least in part from oxidative stress induced by androgen
deprivation therapy. We elucidated the state and the role of oxidative stress
induced by androgen deprivation therapy and the possibility of antioxidant
therapy in human prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated 4-HNE (4-hydroxy-2-nonenal histidine
adduct) staining, and Twist1, YB-1 and androgen receptor expression by
immunohistochemistry in prostate cancer samples treated with or without
neoadjuvant androgen deprivation therapy. Intracellular reactive oxygen species
and protein expression were examined by CM-H(2)DCFDA and Western blot analysis,
respectively. A cell proliferation assay and a mouse xenograft model were used to
assess tumor growth.
RESULTS: Androgen deprivation therapy increased oxidative stress, as shown by
4-HNE staining in human prostate cancer tissue. Twist1 and YB-1 expression was
up-regulated by androgen deprivation, resulting in androgen receptor over
expression. In LNCaP and 22Rv1 cells androgen deprivation increased intracellular
reactive oxygen species and evoked Twist1, YB-1 and androgen receptor over
expression, resulting in cell growth in a castration resistant manner. Growth was
alleviated by N-acetyl-cysteine, an electrophile that supports glutathione
production. N-acetyl-cysteine also decreased LNCaP and 22Rv1 tumor growth in
castrated and noncastrated mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Androgen deprivation therapy induced oxidative stress in in vitro
and human prostate cancer. Antioxidant therapy using N-acetyl-cysteine appears to
be a promising therapeutic modality for prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Blood. 2012 Jan 26;119(4):1045-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-387316. Epub 2011
Dec 1.

AUF-1 and YB-1 are critical determinants of ß-globin mRNA expression in erythroid
cells.

van Zalen S(1), Jeschke GR, Hexner EO, Russell JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology-Oncology), Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, and The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3615
Civic Center Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The normal accumulation of ß-globin protein in terminally differentiating
erythroid cells is critically dependent on the high stability of its encoding
mRNA. The molecular basis for this property, though, is incompletely understood. 
Factors that regulate ß-globin mRNA within the nucleus of early erythroid
progenitors are unlikely to account for the constitutively high half-life of
ß-globin mRNA in the cytoplasm of their anucleate erythroid progeny. We conducted
in vitro protein-RNA binding analyses that identified a cytoplasm-restricted
ß-globin messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) complex in both cultured K562 cells
and erythroid-differentiated human CD34(+) cells. This novel mRNP targets a
specific guanine-rich pentanucleotide in a region of the ß-globin 3'untranslated 
region that has recently been implicated as a determinant of ß-globin mRNA
stability. Subsequent affinity-enrichment analyses identified AUF-1 and YB-1, 2
cytoplasmic proteins with well-established roles in RNA biology, as trans-acting 
components of the mRNP. Factor-depletion studies conducted in vivo demonstrated
the importance of the mRNP to normal steady-state levels of ß-globin mRNA in
erythroid precursors. These data define a previously unrecognized mechanism for
the posttranscriptional regulation of ß-globin mRNA during normal erythropoiesis,
providing new therapeutic targets for disorders of ß-globin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3271717
PMID: 22134169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cancer. 2011 Nov 25;10:145. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-145.

NONO and RALY proteins are required for YB-1 oxaliplatin induced resistance in
colon adenocarcinoma cell lines.

Tsofack SP(1), Garand C, Sereduk C, Chow D, Aziz M, Guay D, Yin HH, Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, Québec, G1R 2J6, Canada.

BACKGROUND: YB-1 is a multifunctional protein that affects transcription,
splicing, and translation. Overexpression of YB-1 in breast cancers causes
cisplatin resistance. Recent data have shown that YB-1 is also overexpress in
colorectal cancer. In this study, we tested the hypothesis that YB-1 also confers
oxaliplatin resistance in colorectal adenocarcinomas.
RESULTS: We show for the first time that transfection of YB-1 cDNA confers
oxaliplatin resistance in two colorectal cancer cell lines (SW480 and HT29 cell
lines). Furthermore, we identified by mass spectrometry analyses important YB-1
interactors required for such oxaliplatin resistance in these colorectal cancer
cell lines. A tagged YB-1 construct was used to identify proteins interacting
directly to YB-1 in such cells. We then focused on proteins that are potentially 
involved in colorectal cancer progression based on the Oncomine microarray
database. Genes encoding for these YB-1 interactors were also examined in the
public NCBI comparative genomic hybridization database to determine whether these
genes are localized to regions of chromosomes rearranged in colorectal cancer
tissues. From these analyses, we obtained a list of proteins interacting with
YB-1 and potentially involved in oxaliplatin resistance. Oxaliplatin dose
response curves of SW480 and HT29 colorectal cancer cell lines transfected with
several siRNAs corresponding to each of these YB-1 interactors were obtained to
identify proteins significantly affecting oxaliplatin sensitivity upon gene
silencing. Only the depletion of either NONO or RALY sensitized both colorectal
cancer cell lines to oxaliplatin. Furthermore, depletion of NONO or RALY
sensitized otherwise oxaliplatin resistant overexpressing YB-1 SW480 or HT29
cells.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest knocking down NONO or RALY significant
counteracts oxaliplatin resistance in colorectal cancers overexpressing the YB-1 
protein.

PMCID: PMC3240900
PMID: 22118625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Br J Cancer. 2011 Dec 6;105(12):1864-73. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.491. Epub 2011 Nov
17.

Expression of Y-box-binding protein YB-1 allows stratification into long- and
short-term survivors of head and neck cancer patients.

Kolk A(1), Jubitz N, Mengele K, Mantwill K, Bissinger O, Schmitt M, Kremer M,
Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Technische Universität München, 
Klinikum rechts der Isar, Ismaninger Strasse 22, Munich, Germany.
Kolk@mkg.med.tum.de

BACKGROUND: Histology-based classifications and clinical parameters of head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are limited in their clinical capacity to
provide information on prognosis and treatment choice of HNSCC. The primary aim
of this study was to analyse Y-box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) protein expression in
different grading groups of HNSCC patients, and to correlate these findings with 
the disease-specific survival (DSS).
METHODS: We investigated the expression and cellular localisation of the
oncogenic transcription/translation factor YB-1 by immunohistochemistry on tissue
micro arrays in a total of 365 HNSCC specimens and correlated expression data
with clinico-pathological parameters including DSS.
RESULTS: Compared with control tissue from healthy individuals, a significantly
(P<0.01) increased YB-1 protein expression was observed in high-grade HNSCC
patients. By univariate survival data analysis, HNSCC patients with elevated YB-1
protein expression had a significantly (P<0.01) decreased DSS. By multivariate
Cox regression analysis, high YB-1 expression and nuclear localisation retained
its significance as a statistically independent (P<0.002) prognostic marker for
DSS. Within grade 2 group of HNSCC patients, a subgroup defined by high nuclear
and cytoplasmic YB-1 levels (co-expression pattern) in the cells of the tumour
invasion front had a significantly poorer 5-year DSS rate of only 38% compared
with overall 55% for grade 2 patients. Vice versa, the DSS rate was markedly
increased to 74% for grade 2 cancer patients with low YB-1 protein expression at 
the same localisation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings point to the fact that YB-1 expression in combination
with histological classification in a double stratification strategy is superior 
to classical grading in the prediction of tumour progression in HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC3251888
PMID: 22095225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2011 Sep;76(9):1009-16. doi: 10.1134/S0006297911090045.

Influence of proteasome inhibitor bortezomib on the expression of multidrug
resistance genes and Akt kinase activity.

Panischeva LA(1), Kakpakova ES, Rybalkina EY, Stavrovskaya AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russia. panlidia@gmail.com

The goal of this work was to study the mechanisms of ABC family transport
proteins' regulation by a new-generation antitumor drug - the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib (Velcade). ABC transporters determine the multidrug
resistance of tumor cells (MDR). We confirmed our previously discovered
observation that bortezomib affects the expression of genes involved in the
formation of MDR (ABCB1 gene, also known as MDR1, and ABCC1-MRP1), reducing the
amount of their mRNA. This effect was found to depend on Akt kinase activity: the
Akt activity inhibitor Ly 294002 increased the amount of MRP1 mRNA in KB 8-5
cells. It was also shown that bortezomib increased the amount of Akt kinase
phosphorylated form in cell lines of malignant cells KB 8-5 and K 562/i-S9 that
overexpressed ABCB1 transporter (Pgp), and did not affect the amount of activated
Akt in the corresponding wild-type cells. When exposed to bortezomib, selection
of resistant to it cell variants was much faster for a Pgp-overexpressing cell
population (compared to wild-type cells). It is shown that bortezomib affects the
amount of MRP1 gene mRNA, relocating the multifunctional protein YB-1, dependent 
on Akt activity, from cytoplasm to nuclei of MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The data 
indicate that the transcriptional activity of YB-1 might be one of the mechanisms
that determine the effect of bortezomib on the amount of MRP1 gene mRNA.

PMID: 22082269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Dec;9(12):1755-66. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0379. Epub 
2011 Oct 10.

Clusterin is a critical downstream mediator of stress-induced YB-1
transactivation in prostate cancer.

Shiota M(1), Zoubeidi A, Kumano M, Beraldi E, Naito S, Nelson CC, Sorensen PH,
Gleave ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Vancouver Prostate Centre and Department of Urologic Sciences, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3Z6, Canada.

Clusterin is a stress-activated, cytoprotective chaperone that confers
broad-spectrum treatment resistance in cancer. However, the molecular mechanisms 
mediating CLU transcription following anticancer treatment stress remain
incompletely defined. We report that Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) directly
binds to CLU promoter regions to transcriptionally regulate clusterin expression.
In response to endoplasmic reticulum stress inducers, including paclitaxel, YB-1 
is translocated to the nucleus to transactivate clusterin. Furthermore, higher
levels of activated YB-1 and clusterin are seen in taxane-resistant, compared
with parental, prostate cancer cells. Knockdown of either YB-1 or clusterin
sensitized prostate cancer cells to paclitaxel, whereas their overexpression
increased resistance to taxane. Clusterin overexpression rescued cells from
increased paclitaxel-induced apoptosis following YB-1 knockdown; in contrast,
however, YB-1 overexpression did not rescue cells from increased
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis following clusterin knockdown. Collectively, these
data indicate that YB-1 transactivation of clusterin in response to stress is a
critical mediator of paclitaxel resistance in prostate cancer.

PMID: 21987172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Med Oncol. 2012 Sep;29(3):1992-7. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0062-2. Epub 2011 Sep
11.

Overexpression of Y-box binding protein-1 in cervical cancer and its association 
with the pathological response rate to chemoradiotherapy.

Zhang Y(1), Reng SR, Wang L, Lu L, Zhao ZH, Zhang ZK, Feng XD, Ding XD, Wang J,
Feng G, Dai TZ, Pu J, Du XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mian Yang Central Hospital, Mian Yang, Sichuan 621000,
People's Republic of China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of Y-box binding protein-1
(YB-1) in nonneoplastic cervical tissue and cervical cancer tissue and to
evaluate its relationship with chemoradiosensitivity in the cases of cervical
cancer. We performed immunohistochemical studies to examine YB-1 expression among
59 patients with cervical cancer, 30 with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
(CIN), and 30 with cervicitis. The mean YB-1 histological score(HSCORE)values for
cervicitis, cervical CIN, and cervical cancer tissues were 22.3, 39, and 84.4,
respectively. The mean YB-1 HSCORE value was 80.0 for cervical cancer patients
who showed complete pathological response to chemoradiotherapy and 144.3 for
cervical cancer patients who showed partial pathological response. Our data
showed that the YB-1 expression was the highest in cervical cancer tissue,
followed by cervical CIN tissue, and then cervicitis tissues. High YB-1
expression resulted in a lower pathological response rate in patients of cervical
cancer than low YB-1 expression did. Our results implied that YB-1 may play a
role in the genesis of cervical cancer and that high YB-1 expression decreases
the chemoradiosensitivity of cervical cancers.

PMID: 21909940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2963-70.

Elevated YB-1 expression is a new unfavorable prognostic factor in non-Hodgkin's 
lymphomas.

Szczuraszek K(1), Halon A, Materna V, Mazur G, Wrobel T, Kuliczkowski K, Donizy
P, Holm PS, Lage H, Surowiak P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland.

BACKGROUND: Y-Box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) acts as a transcription factor for
multiple genes and is linked to DNA replication and repair, cell proliferation
and resistance to cytostatic drugs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The prognostic value of YB-1 expression in primarily
untreated malignant non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs) was examined using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Expression of YB-1 was detected in 48 out of 56 NHLs, and the
immunohistochemical reaction was localized exclusively in the cytoplasm.
Expression of YB-1 did not correlate with clinicopathological variables. Patients
with higher YB-1 expression had shorter progression-free survival during the
entire period of observation (p=0.0434), as well as in the course of 30 months'
observation (p=0.0253). Additionally, in the course of 50 months' observation,
patients with higher expression of YB-1 demonstrated a shorter overall survival
time (p=0.0383) and a shorter progression-free survival (p=0.0309).
CONCLUSION: Elevated YB-1 expression may represent a new unfavorable prognostic
factor.

PMID: 21868545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Cell Sci. 2011 Sep 15;124(Pt 18):3060-5. doi: 10.1242/jcs.086751. Epub 2011 Aug
24.

A new regulatory function of the region proximal to the RGG box in the fragile X 
mental retardation protein.

Blackwell E(1), Ceman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61801, USA.

Fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) is required for normal cognition.
FMRP has two autosomal paralogs, which although similar to FMRP, cannot
compensate for the loss of FMRP expression in brain. The arginine- and
glycine-rich region of FMRP (the RGG box) is unique; it is the high-affinity
RNA-binding motif in FMRP and is encoded by exon 15. Alternative splicing occurs 
in the 5' end of exon 15, which is predicted to affect the structure of the
distally encoded RGG box. Here, we provide evidence that isoform 3, which removes
25 amino acids from the 5' end of exon 15, has an altered conformation that
reduces binding of a specific antibody and renders the RGG box unable to
efficiently associate with polyribosomes. Isoform 3 is also compromised in its
ability to form granules and to associate with a key messenger ribonucleoprotein 
Yb1 (also known as p50, NSEP1 and YBX1). Significantly, these functions are
similarly compromised when the RGG box is absent from FMRP, suggesting an
important regulatory role of the N-terminal region encoded by exon 15.

PMCID: PMC3172185
PMID: 21868366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 May;133(1):145-59. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1731-8. 
Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Alteration of Y-box binding protein-1 expression modifies the response to
endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Ito T(1), Kamijo S, Izumi H, Kohno K, Amano J, Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Department of Surgery, Shinshu
University School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) plays an important role in tumor progression and
drug resistance. This study examined whether YB-1 is involved in the alteration
of response to endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer
cells. MCF7 cells that stably expressed YB-1 (MCF7-YB-1) and vector control cells
(MCF7-vector) were established. These cells were used to analyze the expression
of the factors related to ER and growth factor receptor signaling pathways and
responses to antiestrogens (tamoxifen and fulvestrant) and estrogen responsive
element (ERE) activity. The effect of knocking down endogenous YB-1 expression
was tested in wild-type MCF7 cells. In addition, the expression of YB-1 and the
factors related to ER and growth factor receptor signaling pathways were
evaluated in clinical breast cancers treated with preoperative chemotherapy. The 
expression of HER2, AIB1, p-Erk, and c-Myc was increased in MCF7-YB-1 cells. In
contrast, knocking down of YB-1 decreased the expression of these factors but
increased the expression of ERa in wild-type MCF7 cells. Furthermore, sensitivity
to antiestrogens was decreased in the MCF7-YB-1 in comparison to that in
MCF7-vector cells. The introduction of YB-1 into MCF7 cells inhibited apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest at G1 phase induced by antiestrogens. In MCF7-YB-1 cells,
the expression levels of p-Erk and c-Myc were continuously upregulated when cells
were treated with either tamoxifen or fulvestrant. The ERE activity was reduced
in MCF7-YB-1 cells in comparison to MCF7-vector cells, and the ERE activity in
MCF7-YB-1 cells was inhibited by fulvestrant at a lower concentration than that
which inhibited the ERE activity in MCF7-vector cells. In ER-positive clinical
breast cancers treated with preoperative chemotherapy, significantly more number 
of specimens that showed increased or positive YB-1 expression after chemotherapy
was positive for HER2 expression. These data suggest that alteration of YB-1 may 
modify the crosstalk between the ER pathway and HER2 pathway in ER-positive
breast cancer cells, and consequently, may alter the response to endocrine
therapy in ER-positive breast cancer cells.

PMID: 21863258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell. 2011 Aug 19;43(4):613-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.022.

Angiogenin-induced tRNA fragments inhibit translation initiation.

Ivanov P(1), Emara MM, Villen J, Gygi SP, Anderson P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology, and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. pivanov@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2011 Aug 19;43(4):500-2.

Angiogenin is a stress-activated ribonuclease that cleaves tRNA within anticodon 
loops to produce tRNA-derived stress-induced fragments (tiRNAs). Transfection of 
natural or synthetic tiRNAs inhibits protein synthesis and triggers the
phospho-eIF2a-independent assembly of stress granules (SGs), essential components
of the stress response program. We show that selected tiRNAs inhibit protein
synthesis by displacing eIF4G/eIF4A from uncapped > capped RNAs. tiRNAs also
displace eIF4F, but not eIF4E:4EBP1, from isolated m(7)G cap. We identify a
terminal oligoguanine motif that is required to displace the eIF4F complex,
inhibit translation, and induce SG assembly. We show that the tiRNA-associated
translational silencer YB-1 contributes to angiogenin-, tiRNA-, and oxidative
stress-induced translational repression. Our data reveal some of the mechanisms
by which stress-induced tRNA cleavage inhibits protein synthesis and activates a 
cytoprotective stress response program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3160621
PMID: 21855800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;32(6):383-7.

[Effect of regulation of Y-box protein 1 by RNA interference on the doxorubicin
induced mdr1 gene expression in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Shen HL(1), Xu WL, Chen QY, Wang FC, Fei X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Central Laboratory, the Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu 
University, Zhenjiang 212002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of YB-1 on the transcription of induced mdr1
gene expression in K562 cells.
METHODS: K562 cells were treated with doxorubicin (DOX) at different
concentrations and times. Expression of mdr1 and YB-1 genes was examined by
RT-PCR and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) by flow cytometry. Cyto/nuclear protein was
extracted for YB-1 detection by Western blotting. The expression of YB-1 gene in 
K562 cells was inhibited by YB-1 gene specific RNA interference (RNAi), then the 
expression of mdr1 and P-gp in YB-1 gene silenced cells treated with DOX was
detected.
RESULTS: The mdr1 gene as well as its corresponding protein P-gp was highly
expressed in DOX exposed K562 cells. DOX up-regulated the expression of YB-1
gene, and promoted YB-1 protein nuclear translocation. On YB-1 gene silenced, the
expressions of mdr1 gene and P-gp were obviously down-regulated in DOX treated
K562 cells.
CONCLUSION: Doxorubicin can induce the expression of mdr1 gene in K562 cells,
which may result from the transcription of mdr1 gene by activated YB-1.

PMID: 21781495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int J Cancer. 2011 Sep 1;129(5):1265-76. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25783. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

YB-1 dependent virotherapy in combination with temozolomide as a multimodal
therapy approach to eradicate malignant glioma.

Holzmüller R(1), Mantwill K, Haczek C, Rognoni E, Anton M, Kasajima A, Weichert
W, Treue D, Lage H, Schuster T, Schlegel J, Gänsbacher B, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Experimentelle Onkologie und Therapieforschung, Klinikum Rechts
der Isar, Munich, Germany.

The human Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is known to be a promising target for
cancer therapy. We have demonstrated that YB-1 plays an important role in the
adenoviral life cycle by regulating the adenoviral E2-gene expression. Thus, we
studied the oncolytic effect of the recombinant adenovirus Ad-Delo3-RGD, in which
the transactivation domain CR3 of the E1A protein is ablated to enable viral
replication only in YB-1 positive cancer cells. In vitro Southern Blot analysis
and cytopathic effect assays demonstrate high anti-glioma potency, which was
significantly increased in combination with temozolomide (TMZ), daunorubicin and 
cisplatin. Since vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is thought to promote 
the hypervascular phenotype of primary, malignant brain tumors, we also tested
Ad-Delo3-RGD in regard to the inhibition of VEGF expression. Indeed, we found
that Ad-Delo3-RGD induced VEGF down regulation, which was even amplified under
hypoxic conditions. Tumor-bearing nudemice treated with the YB-1 dependent
oncolytic adenovirus showed significantly smaller tumors than untreated controls.
Furthermore, combination therapy with TMZ led to a regression in all treated
animals with complete tumor regression in 33 % of analyzed mice, which was
verified by bioluminescence imaging and histological studies. In addition,
histopathological evaluation revealed enhanced apoptosis and a reduction in tumor
vessel formation, indicating that Ad-Delo3-RGD has an anti-angiogenic effect in
addition to its oncolytic capacity in vivo. Hence, our results demonstrate that
the combination therapy of YB-1 dependent virotherapy and TMZ is effective in a
xenograft glioma mouse model and might be useful in a YB-1 based clinical
setting.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 21710499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020603. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Prognostic association of YB-1 expression in breast cancers: a matter of
antibody.

Woolley AG(1), Algie M, Samuel W, Harfoot R, Wiles A, Hung NA, Tan PH, Hains P,
Valova VA, Huschtscha L, Royds JA, Perez D, Yoon HS, Cohen SB, Robinson PJ, Bay
BH, Lasham A, Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
adele.woolley@otago.ac.nz

The literature concerning the subcellular location of Y-box binding protein 1
(YB-1), its abundance in normal and cancer tissues, and its prognostic
significance is replete with inconsistencies. An explanation for this could be
due in part to the use of different antibodies in immunohistochemical and
immunofluorescent labeling of cells and tissues. The inconsistencies could also
be due to poor resolution of immunohistochemical data. We analyzed two cohorts of
breast tumours for both abundance and subcellular location of YB-1 using three
different antibodies; two targeting N-terminal epitopes (AB-a and AB-b) and
another (AB-c) targeting a C-terminal epitope. We also investigated
stress-induced nuclear translocation of YB-1 in cell culture. We report that both
AB-a and AB-c detected increased YB-1 in the cytoplasm of high-grade breast
cancers, and in those lacking estrogen and progesterone receptors; however the
amount of YB-1 detected by AB-a in these cancers is significantly greater than
that detected by AB-c. We confirm our previously published findings that AB-b is 
also detecting hnRNP A1, and cannot therefore be used to reliably detect YB-1 by 
immunohistochemistry. We also report that AB-a detected nuclear YB-1 in some
tumour tissues and stress treated cells, whereas AB-c did not. To understand
this, cancer cell lines were analyzed using native gel electrophoresis, which
revealed that the antibodies detect different complexes in which YB-1 is a
component. Our data suggest that different YB-1 antibodies show different
staining patterns that are determined by the accessibility of epitopes, and this 
depends on the nature of the YB-1 complexes. It is important therefore to
standardize the protocols if YB-1 is to be used reproducibly as a prognostic
guide for different cancers.

PMCID: PMC3112203
PMID: 21695211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Immunol. 2011 Jul 1;187(1):298-308. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100382. Epub 2011
May 23.

Y-box binding protein-1 mediates profibrotic effects of calcineurin inhibitors in
the kidney.

Hanssen L(1), Frye BC, Ostendorf T, Alidousty C, Djudjaj S, Boor P, Rauen T,
Floege J, Mertens PR, Raffetseder U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule-Aachen, Aachen 52057, Germany.

The immunosuppressive calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs) cyclosporine A (CsA) and
tacrolimus are widely used in transplant organ recipients, but in the kidney
allograft, they may cause tubulointerstitial as well as mesangial fibrosis, with 
TGF-ß believed to be a central inductor. In this study, we report that the
cold-shock protein Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a TGF-ß independent
downstream effector in CsA- as well as in tacrolimus- but not in
rapamycin-mediated activation of rat mesangial cells (rMCs). Intracellular
content of YB-1 is several-fold increased in MCs following CNI treatment in vitro
and in vivo in mice. This effect ensues in a time-dependent manner, and the
operative concentration range encompasses therapeutically relevant doses for
CNIs. The effect of CNI on cellular YB-1 content is abrogated by specific
blockade of translation, whereas retarding the transcription remains ineffective.
The activation of rMCs by CNIs is accomplished by generation of reactive oxygen
species. In contrast to TGF-ß-triggered reactive oxygen species generation,
hydrogen peroxide especially could be identified as a potent inductor of YB-1
accumulation. In line with this, hindering TGF-ß did not influence CNI-induced
YB-1 upregulation, whereas ERK/Akt pathways are involved in CNI-mediated YB-1
expression. CsA-induced YB-1 accumulation results in mRNA stabilization and
subsequent generation of collagen. Our results provide strong evidence for a
CNI-dependent induction of YB-1 in MCs that contributes to renal fibrosis via
regulation of its own and collagen translation.

PMID: 21606250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncotarget. 2011 May;2(5):401-6.

YB-1 drives preneoplastic progression: Insight into opportunities for cancer
prevention.

Davies AH(1), Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncogenomic Research, Departments of Pediatrics and Experimental
Medicine, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Surprisingly little is known about the underlying genetic events that trigger the
progression of a normal cell into a cancerous cell. We recently developed a
YB-1-driven model of pre-malignancy where we uncovered that the oncogene promotes
genomic instability through cell cycle checkpoint slippage and centrosome
amplification. In this research perspective, we describe a possible mechanism by 
which YB-1 instigates preneoplastic transformation. Using Kinex antibody
microarrays with coverage of 800 proteins, we discovered that pre-malignant cells
exhibit deregulated signal transduction along the HER2-MAPK-RSK axis. We will
discuss the implications of these finding in regard to early intervention
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3248184
PMID: 21576761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;19(2):363-6.

[Mechanisms of preventive effect of tetrandrine on acquired multidrug resistance 
in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu XL(1), Xu WL, Lü XJ, Luo WJ, Zhou LL, Chen QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu Province,
China.

This study was purposed to explore the mechanisms of preventive effect of
tetrandrine (TTD) on doxorubicin (ADM)-induced multidrug resistance (MDR) in
human leukemia cell line K562 from two aspects of the transcription control of
MDR1 gene and cell apoptosis. The experiment was divided into 3 groups: group
I-blank control; group II-ADM-induced drug-resistance; group III-ADM-induced
drug-resistance after pretreatment with TTD. Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR)
was used to detect the mRNA expression levels of c-Jun, YB-1 and Survivin genes. 
Western blot was used to determine the nuclear protein expression levels of c-Jun
and YB-1. Flow cytometry was used to assay the apoptosis of cells. The results
showed that as compared with group I, the expression levels of c-Jun mRNA and
nuclear protein decreased (p < 0.05), as well as the expression levels of YB-1
mRNA and nuclear protein increased in group II (p < 0.05). However, the
expression of Survivin mRNA had no change (p > 0.05); the apoptosis rate of cells
was 8.31%. As compared with group II, the expression levels of c-Jun mRNA and
nuclear protein increased (p < 0.05), expression levels of YB-1 mRNA and nuclear 
protein as well as Survivin mRNA decreased in group III (p < 0.05). The apoptosis
of cells was 97.2%. It is concluded that TTD can inhibit the expression of YB-1
and up-regulate the expression of c-Jun, thus inhibit the expression of MDR1
gene. TTD can also inhibit the expression of Survivin and increase the apoptosis 
of cells induced by ADM.

PMID: 21518489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;19(2):342-7.

[Influence of YB-1 protein on the biological behaviour in K562/A02 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Shen HL(1), Zhou LL, Chen QY, Chen C, Fang LL, Fang XJ, Xu WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu University People Hospital, Zhenjiang
212002, Jiangsu Province, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the growth, apoptosis and
sensitivity to anticancer agent could be altered after introduction of YB-1 shRNA
eukaryotic expression vector into the K562/A02 cells, and its possible molecular 
mechanisms. The recombinant eukaryotic expression plasmids including YB-1 shRNA
and the vector-random-sequence were introduced into K562/A02 cells by
lipofectamine mediation, and the positive clones were screened by G418. RT-PCR
and Western blot were employed to detect the expression of mRNA and protein of
YB-1 in leukemia cells, respectively. The proliferative ability of the cells was 
determined by MTT assay and cell cycle analysis. Apoptosis of K562/A02 cells was 
assayed by AnnexinV-FITC/PI double labeled flow cytometry. The drug sensitivity
to anticancer agent was determined by MTT assay. The expressions of MDR1 gene and
P-gp were detected by RT-PCR and flow cytometry respectively. The results
indicated that the levels of mRNA and protein of YB-1 decreased dramatically in
three groups of positively transfected cells when compared with control cells.
The inhibitory rates of 3 different shRNA sequences targeting YB-1 gene were
(65.1 ± 2.1)%, (27.4 ± 1.3)% and (67.4 ± 1.6)% respectively. The introduction of 
exogenous YB-1 shRNA gene into K562/A02 cells resulted in decreased levels of the
proliferative ability in K562/A02 cells, and displayed higher at G(1), lower at
G(2) and S phase in cell cycle distribution in comparison with the control
groups. AnnexinV/PI detection indicated higher AnnexinV(+) ratio in 3 groups of
positively transfected cells after being treated with As(2)O(3) of 0.5 µmol/L for
24 hours. The IC(50) values of doxorubicin in 3 groups of positively transfected 
cells were significantly lower than that in control group. The level of MDR1 gene
and P-gp decreased significantly in 3 groups of positively transfected cells. It 
is concluded that the transfection with YB-1 shRNA gene can inhibit the
proliferation of leukemia cells and induce cell apoptosis. The expression of MDR1
mRNA and P-gp decrease after transfection of YB-1 shRNA into K562/A02 cells.

PMID: 21518485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jul;102(7):1410-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01948.x. Epub
2011 May 5.

An integrative approach to identify YB-1-interacting proteins required for
cisplatin resistance in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Garand C(1), Guay D, Sereduk C, Chow D, Tsofack SP, Langlois M, Perreault E, Yin 
HH, Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry, and Pathology, Laval
University Quebec City, Québec, Canada.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is a multifunctional protein that affects
transcription, splicing, and translation. Overexpression of YB-1 in breast
cancers causes cisplatin resistance. The exact mechanism by which YB-1 confers
cisplatin resistance is unknown. The aim of the present study was to identify,
using mass spectrometry, proteins that interact with YB-1 that are important for 
cisplatin resistance in two breast cancer cell lines, namely MCF7 and MDA-MB-231.
A tagged YB-1 construct was used to identify proteins interacting directly with
YB-1 in breast cancer cells. We then focused on proteins that are potentially
involved in breast cancer progression based on the ONCOMINE public microarray
database. Genes encoding for these YB-1-interacting proteins were examined in the
public NCBI comparative genomic hybridization database to determine whether they 
are localized to regions of chromosomes that are rearranged in breast cancer
tissues. From these analyses, we generated a list of proteins potentially
involved in cisplatin resistance. Cisplatin dose-response curves were constructed
in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 transfected with four siRNA corresponding to each of these
YB-1 interactors to identify proteins significantly affecting cisplatin
sensitivity upon gene silencing. Depletion of only the X-linked ribosomal protein
S4 (RPS4X) resulted in consistent resistance to cisplatin in both cell lines with
at least three different siRNA sequences against RPS4X. Further analyses
indicated that the knock down of RPS4X decreased DNA synthesis, induced cisplatin
resistance, and is equivalent to the overexpression of YB-1 in both MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells. These results suggest that the RPS4X/YB-1 complex is a
significant potential target to counteract cisplatin resistance in breast cancer.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21466612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2011 Aug 25;30(34):3649-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.82. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

YB-1 evokes susceptibility to cancer through cytokinesis failure, mitotic
dysfunction and HER2 amplification.

Davies AH(1), Barrett I, Pambid MR, Hu K, Stratford AL, Freeman S, Berquin IM,
Pelech S, Hieter P, Maxwell C, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncogenomic Research, Departments of Pediatrics and Experimental
Medicine, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) expression in the mammary gland promotes breast
carcinoma that demonstrates a high degree of genomic instability. In the present 
study, we developed a model of pre-malignancy to characterize the role of this
gene during breast cancer initiation and early progression. Antibody microarray
technology was used to ascertain global changes in signal transduction following 
the conditional expression of YB-1 in human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). Cell
cycle-associated proteins were frequently altered with the most dramatic being
LIM kinase 1/2 (LIMK1/2). Consequently, the misexpression of LIMK1/2 was
associated with cytokinesis failure that acted as a precursor to centrosome
amplification. Detailed investigation revealed that YB-1 localized to the
centrosome in a phosphorylation-dependent manner, where it complexed with
pericentrin and <U+03B3>-tubulin. This was found to be essential in maintaining the
structural integrity and microtubule nucleation capacity of the organelle.
Prolonged exposure to YB-1 led to rampant acceleration toward tumorigenesis, with
the majority of cells acquiring numerical and structural chromosomal
abnormalities. Slippage through the G(1)/S checkpoint due to overexpression of
cyclin E promoted continued proliferation of these genomically compromised cells.
As malignancy further progressed, we identified a subset of cells harboring HER2 
amplification. Our results recognize YB-1 as a cancer susceptibility gene, with
the capacity to prime cells for tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3121916
PMID: 21423216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 10;13(2):R28. doi: 10.1186/bcr2845.

Impact of oncogenic K-RAS on YB-1 phosphorylation induced by ionizing radiation.

Toulany M(1), Schickfluss TA, Eicheler W, Kehlbach R, Schittek B, Rodemann HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiobiology and Molecular Environmental Research, Department of
Radiation Oncology, Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Roentgenweg 11, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Expression of Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is associated with
tumor progression and drug resistance. Phosphorylation of YB-1 at serine residue 
102 (S102) in response to growth factors is required for its transcriptional
activity and is thought to be regulated by cytoplasmic signaling
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and mitogen-activated protein
kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathways. These pathways 
can be activated by growth factors and by exposure to ionizing radiation (IR). So
far, however, no studies have been conducted on IR-induced YB-1 phosphorylation.
METHODS: IR-induced YB-1 phosphorylation in K-RAS wild-type (K-RASwt) and
K-RAS-mutated (K-RASmt) breast cancer cell lines was investigated. Using
pharmacological inhibitors, small interfering RNA (siRNA) and plasmid-based
overexpression approaches, we analyzed pathways involved in YB-1 phosphorylation 
by IR. Using <U+03B3>-H2AX foci and standard colony formation assays, we investigated
the function of YB-1 in repair of IR-induced DNA double-stranded breaks (DNA-DSB)
and postirradiation survival was investigated.
RESULTS: The average level of phosphorylation of YB-1 in the breast cancer cell
lines SKBr3, MCF-7, HBL100 and MDA-MB-231 was significantly higher than that in
normal cells. Exposure to IR and stimulation with erbB1 ligands resulted in
phosphorylation of YB-1 in K-RASwt SKBr3, MCF-7 and HBL100 cells, which was shown
to be K-Ras-independent. In contrast, lack of YB-1 phosphorylation after
stimulation with either IR or erbB1 ligands was observed in K-RASmt MDA-MB-231
cells. Similarly to MDA-MB-231 cells, YB-1 became constitutively phosphorylated
in K-RASwt cells following the overexpression of mutated K-RAS, and its
phosphorylation was not further enhanced by IR. Phosphorylation of YB-1 as a
result of irradiation or K-RAS mutation was dependent on erbB1 and its downstream
pathways, PI3K and MAPK/ERK. In K-RASmt cells K-RAS siRNA as well as YB-1 siRNA
blocked repair of DNA-DSB. Likewise, YB-1 siRNA increased radiation sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: IR induces YB-1 phosphorylation. YB-1 phosphorylation induced by
oncogenic K-Ras or IR enhances repair of DNA-DSB and postirradiation survival via
erbB1 downstream PI3K/Akt and MAPK/ERK signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3219189
PMID: 21392397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Immunogenetics. 2011 Jun;63(6):337-50. doi: 10.1007/s00251-011-0517-9. Epub 2011 
Mar 3.

YBX1 expression and function in early hematopoiesis and leukemic cells.

Bhullar J(1), Sollars VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Joan C. Edwards School of
Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, USA.

Hematopoietic transcription factors play a critical role in directing the
commitment and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells along a particular
lineage. Y-box protein (YBX1) is a transcription factor which is widely expressed
throughout development and is involved in erythroid cell development; however,
its role in early hematopoietic differentiation is not known. This study aims to 
investigate the role of YBX1 expression in early hematopoietic differentiation
and leukemia. Here, we show that YBX1 is highly expressed in mouse erythroid
myeloid lymphoid-clone 1 (EML), a hematopoietic precursor cell line, but is
down-regulated in myeloid progenitors and GM-CSF-treated EML cells during the
course of myeloid differentiation. Moreover, we found that
lineage(-)/IL-7R(-)/c-kit(+)/Sca1(+) (LKS; enriched fraction of hematopoietic
stem cells) and lineage(-)/IL-7R(-)/c-kit(+)/Sca1(-) myeloid progenitor cells
showed high level of YBX1 expression as compared to the differentiated cells like
granulocytes in mouse bone marrow. Also, YBX1 protein was expressed at high
levels in myeloid leukemic cell lines blocked at different stages of myeloid
development. We further investigated the role of YBX1 in leukemic cells by
knockdown studies and observed that down-regulation of YBX1 expression in K562
leukemic cells inhibited their proliferation ability, induced apoptosis, and
differentiation towards megakaryocytic lineage upon arsenic trioxide treatments
relative to untreated. Overall, our data indicates that YBX1 is down-regulated
during myeloid differentiation and the aberrant YBX1 expression in leukemic cells
could be a contributing factor in the development of leukemia by blocking their
differentiation. Thus, YBX1 protein could be an excellent molecular target for
therapy in myeloproliferative disorders and leukemia.

PMID: 21369783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3433-41. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22700.

p53 Suppresses lung resistance-related protein expression through Y-box binding
protein 1 in the MCF-7 breast tumor cell line.

Tian B(1), Liu J, Liu B, Dong Y, Liu J, Song Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China.

Lung resistance-related protein (LRP) has roles in multi-drug resistance of tumor
cells. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate LRP expression in tumor cells
is an important research area. A putative p53 response element in the LRP
promoter has been found. Thus, p53-related regulation of LRP expression was
explored in this study. We first demonstrated that p53 overexpression inhibited
LRP expression both at the protein and mRNA levels. Then, using a dual-luciferase
reporter assay, we located the p53 response element to the Y-box (-263~-407) of
the LRP promoter, the YB-1 binding site, but not the putative p53 response
element. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation
showed p53 could bind to the Y-box of the LRP promoter through interaction of p53
with YB-1. YB-1 coexpression with p53 facilitated p53-induced suppression of
endogenous LRP expression in MCF-7 cells. HDAC2, a corepressor of p53, was found 
to also interact with YB-1, and this interaction was mediated by p53. These
results showed that the p53-HDAC2 transcriptional repressor complex can bind to
the Y-box of the LRP promoter and repress LRP expression through interaction with
YB-1. p53-related suppression of LRP expression was completely reversed by
doxorubicin treatment and Adr, whereas CP and VP-16 treatment induced LRP
expression increased significantly. Inhibition of LRP expression by siRNA
facilitated Adr induced apoptosis of MCF-7 cells. All these findings indicated
that loss of p53-related suppression of LRP may be the reason for LRP expression 
increase, and, therefore, chemotherapy resistance in tumor cells.

Copyright© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Exp Hematol. 2011 May;39(5):558-69. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2011.01.013. Epub 2011 
Feb 24.

Upregulation of mdr1 gene is related to activation of the MAPK/ERK signal
transduction pathway and YB-1 nuclear translocation in B-cell lymphoma.

Shen H(1), Xu W, Luo W, Zhou L, Yong W, Chen F, Wu C, Chen Q, Han X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing
Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Multidrug resistance (MDR) in human B-cell lymphoma constitutes a
major obstacle to the effectiveness of chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to
investigate the molecular mechanism of MDR in B-cell lymphoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The B-cell lymphoma MDR sublines were developed by
exposing the parental Daudi cells to stepwise increasing concentrations of
doxorubicin. Interaction of Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) with the Y-box motif
of the mdr1 gene promoters was studied by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
The effects of YB-1 on mdr1 promoter activity were examined by luciferase assay. 
After silencing of YB-1 gene by shRNA, the role of YB-1 nuclear translocation in 
the formation of induced MDR was examined. Expression of mdr1 and YB-1 was
examined further after Daudi cells were pretreated with mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) inhibitor PD98059 for 1 hour.
RESULTS: Doxorubicin-resistant sublines was generated from the Daudi cell line by
stepwise selection in doxorubicin. We found that acquisition of MDR is associated
with enhanced YB-1 nuclear translocation and MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK) activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed that
doxorubicin increased binding of YB-1 to the Y-box of mdr1 promoter. Luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that the Y-box region is essential for YB-1
regulation of mdr1 expression. The introduction of exogenous YB-1 shRNA into
Daudi cells resulted in decreased levels of the expression of mdr1 gene and
P-glycoprotein induced by doxorubicin. When Daudi cells were pretreated with MAPK
inhibitor PD98059, the phosphorylation of ERK was effectively inhibited as well
as the nuclear translocation of YB-1 and the expression of mdr1 gene.
CONCLUSION: Doxorubicin can increase expression of mdr1/P-glycoprotein through
activating MAPK/ERK transduction pathway, then increasing expression of YB-1,
inducing YB-1 nuclear translocation, and enhancing DNA-binding activity of YB-1.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21300134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 22;286(16):14291-303. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.204602. Epub
2011 Jan 18.

A multiprotein binding interface in an intrinsically disordered region of the
tumor suppressor protein interferon regulatory factor-1.

Narayan V(1), Halada P, Hernychová L, Chong YP, Žáková J, Hupp TR, Vojtesek B,
Ball KL.

Author information: 
(1)CRUK Interferon and Cell Signalling Group, Cell Signalling Unit, Edinburgh
Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, United
Kingdom.

The interferon-regulated transcription factor and tumor suppressor protein IRF-1 
is predicted to be largely disordered outside of the DNA-binding domain. One of
the advantages of intrinsically disordered protein domains is thought to be their
ability to take part in multiple, specific but low affinity protein interactions;
however, relatively few IRF-1-interacting proteins have been described. The
recent identification of a functional binding interface for the E3-ubiquitin
ligase CHIP within the major disordered domain of IRF-1 led us to ask whether
this region might be employed more widely by regulators of IRF-1 function. Here
we describe the use of peptide aptamer-based affinity chromatography coupled with
mass spectrometry to define a multiprotein binding interface on IRF-1 (Mf2
domain; amino acids 106-140) and to identify Mf2-binding proteins from A375
cells. Based on their function as known transcriptional regulators, a selection
of the Mf2 domain-binding proteins (NPM1, TRIM28, and YB-1) have been validated
using in vitro and cell-based assays. Interestingly, although NPM1, TRIM28, and
YB-1 all bind to the Mf2 domain, they have differing amino acid specificities,
demonstrating the degree of combinatorial diversity and specificity available
through linear interaction motifs.

PMCID: PMC3077630
PMID: 21245151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 2;6(12):e1001231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001231.

Identification of Y-box binding protein 1 as a core regulator of MEK/ERK
pathway-dependent gene signatures in colorectal cancer cells.

Jürchott K(1), Kuban RJ, Krech T, Blüthgen N, Stein U, Walther W, Friese C,
Kielbasa SM, Ungethüm U, Lund P, Knösel T, Kemmner W, Morkel M, Fritzmann J,
Schlag PM, Birchmeier W, Krueger T, Sperling S, Sers C, Royer HD, Herzel H,
Schäfer R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Pathology, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Transcriptional signatures are an indispensible source of correlative information
on disease-related molecular alterations on a genome-wide level. Numerous
candidate genes involved in disease and in factors of predictive, as well as of
prognostic, value have been deduced from such molecular portraits, e.g. in
cancer. However, mechanistic insights into the regulatory principles governing
global transcriptional changes are lagging behind extensive compilations of
deregulated genes. To identify regulators of transcriptome alterations, we used
an integrated approach combining transcriptional profiling of colorectal cancer
cell lines treated with inhibitors targeting the receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK)/RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, computational prediction of
regulatory elements in promoters of co-regulated genes, chromatin-based and
functional cellular assays. We identified commonly co-regulated,
proliferation-associated target genes that respond to the MAPK pathway. We
recognized E2F and NFY transcription factor binding sites as prevalent motifs in 
those pathway-responsive genes and confirmed the predicted regulatory role of
Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1) by reporter gene, gel shift, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. We also validated the MAPK-dependent gene signature
in colorectal cancers and provided evidence for the association of YBX1 with poor
prognosis in colorectal cancer patients. This suggests that MEK/ERK-dependent,
YBX1-regulated target genes are involved in executing malignant properties.

PMCID: PMC2996331
PMID: 21170361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4485-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.151936. Epub 2010 
Nov 28.

A novel small compound that promotes nuclear translocation of YB-1 ameliorates
experimental hepatic fibrosis in mice.

Higashi K(1), Tomigahara Y, Shiraki H, Miyata K, Mikami T, Kimura T, Moro T,
Inagaki Y, Kaneko H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Company Limited,
Osaka 554-8558, Japan.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is considered to be a major factor
contributing to liver fibrosis. We have previously shown that nuclear
translocation of YB-1 antagonizes the TGF-ß/Smad3 signaling in regulating
collagen gene expression. More recently, we have demonstrated that the novel
small compound HSc025 promotes nuclear translocation of YB-1, resulting in the
improvement of skin and pulmonary fibrosis. Here, we presented evidence as to the
mechanism by which HSc025 stimulates nuclear translocation of YB-1 and the
pharmacological effects of HSc025 on a murine model of hepatic fibrosis. A
proteomics approach and binding assays using HSc025-immobilized resin showed that
HSc025 binds to the amino acid sequence within the C-tail region of YB-1. In
addition, immunoprecipitation experiments and glutathione S-transferase pulldown 
assays identified poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) as one of the cytoplasmic anchor
proteins of YB-1. HSc025 directly binds to YB-1 and interrupts its interaction
with PABP, resulting in accelerated nuclear translocation of YB-1. Transfection
of cells with PABP siRNA promoted nuclear translocation of YB-1 and subsequently 
inhibited basal and TGF-ß-stimulated collagen gene expression. Moreover, HSc025
significantly suppressed collagen gene expression in cultured activated hepatic
stellate cells. Oral administration of HSc025 to mice with carbon
tetrachloride-induced hepatic fibrosis improved liver injury as well as the
degree of hepatic fibrosis. Altogether, the results provide a novel insight into 
therapy for organ fibrosis using YB-1 modulators.

PMCID: PMC3039351
PMID: 21115500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Adv Enzyme Regul. 2011;51(1):126-36. doi: 10.1016/j.advenzreg.2010.11.005. Epub
2010 Nov 20.

RAS oncogene-mediated deregulation of the transcriptome: from molecular signature
to function.

Schäfer R(1), Sers C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany. reinhold.schaefer@charite.de

Transcriptome analysis of cancer cells has developed into a standard procedure to
elucidate multiple features of the malignant process and to link gene expression 
to clinical properties. Gene expression profiling based on microarrays provides
essentially correlative information and needs to be transferred to the functional
level in order to understand the activity and contribution of individual genes or
sets of genes as elements of the gene signature. To date, there exist significant
gaps in the functional understanding of gene expression profiles. Moreover, the
processes that drive the profound transcriptional alterations that characterize
cancer cells remain mainly elusive. We have used pathway-restricted gene
expression profiles derived from RAS oncogene-transformed cells and from
RAS-expressing cancer cells to identify regulators downstream of the MAPK
pathway.We describe the role of epigenetic regulation exemplified by the control 
of several immune genes in generic cell lines and colorectal cancer cells,
particularly the functional interaction between signaling and DNA methylation.
Moreover, we assess the role of the architectural transcription factor high
mobility AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) as a regulator of the RAS-responsive transcriptome in 
ovarian epithelial cells. Finally, we describe an integrated approach combining
pathway interference in colorectal cancer cells, gene expression profiling and
computational analysis of regulatory elements of deregulated target genes. This
strategy resulted in the identification of Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1) as a
regulator of MAPK-dependent proliferation and gene expression. The implications
for a therapeutic application of HMGA2 gene silencing and the role of YBX1 as a
prognostic factor are discussed.

PMID: 21094659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Proteome Res. 2011 Feb 4;10(2):404-15. doi: 10.1021/pr100468w. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Cancer drug-resistance and a look at specific proteins: Rho GDP-dissociation
inhibitor 2, Y-box binding protein 1, and HSP70/90 organizing protein in
proteomics clinical application.

Skalnikova H(1), Martinkova J, Hrabakova R, Halada P, Dziechciarkova M, Hajduch
M, Gadher SJ, Hammar A, Enetoft D, Ekefjard A, Forsstrom-Olsson O, Kovarova H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics AS CR, vvi, Libechov, Czech
Republic.

Resistance to anti-cancer drugs is a well recognized problem and very often it is
responsible for failure of the cancer treatment. In this study, the proteome
alterations associated with the development of acquired resistance to
cyclin-depedent kinases inhibitor bohemine, a promising anti-cancer drug, were
analyzed with the primary aim of identifying potential targets of resistance
within the cell that could pave a way to selective elimination of specific
resistant cell types. A model of parental susceptible CEM T-lymphoblastic
leukemia cells and its resistant counterpart CEM-BOH was used and advanced 2-D
liquid chromatography was applied to fractionate cellular proteins.
Differentially expressed identified proteins were further verified using
immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Our study has revealed that Rho
GDP-dissociation inhibitor 2, Y-box binding protein 1, and the HSP70/90
organizing protein have a critical role to play in resistance to cyclin-depedent 
kinases inhibitor. The results indicated not only that quantitative protein
changes play an important role in drug-resistance, but also that there are
various other parameters such as truncation, post-translational modification(s), 
and subcellular localization of selected proteins. Furthermore, these proteins
were validated for their roles in drug resistance using different cell lines
resistant to diverse representatives of anti-cancer drugs such as vincristine and
daunorubicin.

PMID: 21067243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Clin Pathol. 2010 Dec;63(12):1071-6. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2010.078766. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Nucleic acid sequence-based amplification in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded
breast-cancer tissues.

Riehle U(1), Mader A, Brandstetter T, Rühe J, zur Hausen A, Stickeler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

AIM: To evaluate the nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) technique 
to amplify mRNA isolated from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
breast-cancer tissues.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from archived, 10-year-old FFPE tissues, and selected 
genes, namely ribosomal protein S18 (RPS18), epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), estrogen receptor alpha (ERa), Y box binding protein (YBX-1), matrix
metallopeptidase 11 (MMP11), caspase 8 (CASP8) and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2),
were amplified by NASBA.
RESULTS: Despite strong degradation of the template, RNA amplification of all
tested genes resulted in strong hybridisation signals. Sensitivity tests showed
that the RPS18 NASBA assay was more sensitive than real-time RT-PCR used as a
reference method. The sensitivity of the HER2, ERa, MMP11, YBX1, CASP8 and SOD2
NASBA assay was comparable with RT-PCR targeted to the respective genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained indicate that NASBA is suitable to amplify with
high specificity and sensitivity, even strongly degraded RNA isolated from FFPE
tissues, and therefore can complement already-existing amplification techniques
such as RT-PCR for analysis of such tissues.

PMID: 20974626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Nov;17(11):1358-66. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1912. Epub 2010
Oct 24.

Cotranscriptional exon skipping in the genotoxic stress response.

Dutertre M(1), Sanchez G, De Cian MC, Barbier J, Dardenne E, Gratadou L, Dujardin
G, Le Jossic-Corcos C, Corcos L, Auboeuf D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale U590, Centre Léon Bérard, 
Lyon, France. martin.dutertre@inserm.fr

Pre-mRNA splicing is functionally coupled to transcription, and genotoxic
stresses can enhance alternative exon inclusion by affecting elongating RNA
polymerase II. We report here that various genotoxic stress inducers, including
camptothecin (CPT), inhibit the interaction between Ewing's sarcoma
proto-oncoprotein (EWS), an RNA polymerase II-associated factor, and YB-1, a
spliceosome-associated factor. This results in the cotranscriptional skipping of 
several exons of the MDM2 gene, which encodes the main p53 ubiquitin ligase. This
reversible exon skipping participates in the regulation of MDM2 expression that
may contribute to the accumulation of p53 during stress exposure and its rapid
shut-off when stress is removed. Finally, a splicing-sensitive microarray
identified numerous exons that are skipped in response to CPT and EWS-YB-1
depletion. These data demonstrate genotoxic stress-induced alteration of the
communication between the transcriptional and splicing machineries, which results
in widespread exon skipping and plays a central role in the genotoxic stress
response.

PMID: 20972445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 27;30(4):482-93. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.435. Epub 2010 Sep 20.

Human AP endonuclease (APE1/Ref-1) and its acetylation regulate YB-1-p300
recruitment and RNA polymerase II loading in the drug-induced activation of
multidrug resistance gene MDR1.

Sengupta S(1), Mantha AK, Mitra S, Bhakat KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1079, USA.

The overexpression of human apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonuclease 1
(APE1/Ref-1), a key enzyme in the DNA base excision repair (BER) pathway, is
often associated with tumor cell resistance to various anticancer drugs. In this 
study, we examined the molecular basis of transcriptional regulatory (nonrepair) 
function of APE1 in promoting resistance to certain types of drugs. We have
recently shown that APE1 stably interacts with Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1),
and acts as its coactivator for the expression of multidrug resistance gene MDR1,
thereby causing drug resistance. In this study, we show, to the best of our
knowledge, for the first time that APE1 is stably associated with the basic
transcription factor RNA polymerase II (RNA pol II) and the coactivator p300 on
the endogenous MDR1 promoter. The depletion of APE1 significantly reduces
YB-1-p300 recruitment to the promoter, resulting in reduced RNA pol II loading.
Drug-induced APE1 acetylation, which is mediated by p300, enhances formation of
acetylated APE1 (AcAPE1)-YB-1-p300 complex on the MDR1 promoter. Enhanced
recruitment of this complex increases MDR1 promoter-dependent luciferase activity
and its endogenous expression. Using APE1-downregulated cells and cells
overexpressing wild-type APE1 or its nonacetylable mutant, we have demonstrated
that the loss of APE1's acetylation impaired MDR1 activation and sensitizes the
cells to cisplatin or etoposide. We have thus established the basis for APE1's
acetylation-dependent regulatory function in inducing MDR1-mediated drug
resistance.

PMCID: PMC3010319
PMID: 20856196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 2010 Dec 2;29(48):6343-56. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.366. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

Suppression of Her2/neu expression through ILK inhibition is regulated by a
pathway involving TWIST and YB-1.

Kalra J(1), Sutherland BW, Stratford AL, Dragowska W, Gelmon KA, Dedhar S, Dunn
SE, Bally MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. jkalra@bccrc.ca

In a previous study it was found that the therapeutic effects of QLT0267, a small
molecule inhibitor of integrin-linked kinase (ILK), were influenced by Her2/neu
expression. To understand how inhibition or silencing of ILK influences Her2/neu 
expression, Her2/neu signaling was evaluated in six Her2/neu-positive breast
cancer cell lines (LCC6(Her2), MCF7(Her2), SKBR3, BT474, JIMT-1 and KPL-4).
Treatment with QLT0267 engendered suppression (32-87%) of total Her2/neu protein 
in these cells. Suppression of Her2/neu was also observed following small
interfering RNA-mediated silencing of ILK expression. Time course studies suggest
that ILK inhibition or silencing caused transient decreases in P-AKT(ser473),
which were not temporally related to Her2/neu downregulation. Attenuation of ILK 
activity or expression was, however, associated with decreases in YB-1 (Y-box
binding protein-1) protein and transcript levels. YB-1 is a known transcriptional
regulator of Her2/neu expression, and in this study it is demonstrated that
inhibition of ILK activity using QLT0267 decreased YB-1 promoter activity by
50.6%. ILK inhibition was associated with changes in YB-1 localization, as
reflected by localization of cytoplasmic YB-1 into stress granules. ILK
inhibition also suppressed TWIST (a regulator of YB-1 expression) protein
expression. To confirm the role of ILK on YB-1 and TWIST, cells were engineered
to overexpress ILK. This was associated with a fourfold increase in the level of 
YB-1 in the nucleus, and a 2- and 1.5-fold increase in TWIST and Her2/neu protein
levels, respectively. Taken together, these data indicate that ILK regulates the 
expression of Her2/neu through TWIST and YB-1, lending support to the use of ILK 
inhibitors in the treatment of aggressive Her2/neu-positive tumors.

PMCID: PMC3007675
PMID: 20838384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 25;29(47):6294-300. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.365. Epub 2010 Aug
30.

The expression of activated Y-box binding protein-1 serine 102 mediates
trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer cells by increasing CD44+ cells.

Dhillon J(1), Astanehe A, Lee C, Fotovati A, Hu K, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Experimental Medicine Program, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

The development of acquired resistance to trastuzumab remains a prevalent
challenge in the treatment of patients whose tumors express human epidermal
growth factor 2 (HER2). We previously reported that HER2 overexpressing breast
cancers are dependent on Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) for growth and survival. 
As YB-1 is also linked to drug resistance in other types of cancer, we address
its possible role in trastuzumab insensitivity. Employing an in vivo model of
acquired resistance, we demonstrate that resistant cell lines have elevated
levels of P-YB-1(S102) and its activating kinase P-RSK and these levels are
sustained following trastuzumab treatment. Further, to demonstrate the importance
of YB-1 in mediating drug resistance, the expression of the active mutant
YB-1(S102D) rendered the BT474 cell line insensitive to trastuzumab. Questioning 
the role of tumor-initiating cells (TIC) and their ability to escape cancer
therapies, we investigate YB-1's role in inducing the cancer stem cell marker
CD44. Notably, the resistant cells express more CD44 mRNA and protein compared
with BT474 cells, which correlated with increased mammosphere formation.
Expression of YB-1(S102D) in the BT474 cells increase CD44 protein levels,
resulting in enhanced mammosphere formation. Further, exposing BT474 cells to
trastuzumab selected for a resistant sub-population enriched for CD44.
Conversely, small intefering RNA inhibition of CD44 restored trastuzumab
sensitivity in the resistant cell lines. Our findings provide insight on a novel 
mechanism employed by tumor cells to acquire the ability to escape the effects of
trastuzumab and suggest that targeting YB-1 may overcome resistance by
eliminating the unresponsive TIC population, rendering the cancer sensitive to
therapy.

PMID: 20802512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 29;285(44):34004-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165027. Epub
2010 Aug 16.

Post-transcriptional up-regulation of Tsc-22 by Ybx1, a target of miR-216a,
mediates TGF-{beta}-induced collagen expression in kidney cells.

Kato M(1), Wang L, Putta S, Wang M, Yuan H, Sun G, Lanting L, Todorov I, Rossi
JJ, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Diabetes Center, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

Increased accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins and hypertrophy induced
by transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß) in renal mesangial cells (MC) are
hallmark features of diabetic nephropathy. Although the post-transcriptional
regulation of key genes has been implicated in these events, details are not
fully understood. Here we show that TGF-ß increased microRNA-216a (miR-216a)
levels in mouse MC, with parallel down-regulation of Ybx1, a miR-216a target and 
RNA-binding protein. TGF-ß also enhanced protein levels of Tsc-22
(TGF-ß-stimulated clone 22) and collagen type I a-2 (Col1a2) expression in MC
through far upstream enhancer E-boxes by interaction of Tsc-22 with an E-box
regulator, Tfe3. Ybx1 colocalized with processing bodies in MC and formed a
ribonucleoprotein complex with Tsc-22 mRNA, and this complex formation was
reduced by TGF-ß, miR-216a mimics, or Ybx1 shRNA to increase Tsc-22 protein
levels but enhanced by miR-216a inhibitor oligonucleotides. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that TGF-ß could increase the
occupancies of Tsc-22 and Tfe3 on enhancer E-boxes of Col1a2.
Co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that TGF-ß promoted the interaction of
Tsc-22 with Tfe3. These results demonstrate that post-transcriptional regulation 
of Tsc-22 mediated through Ybx1, a miR-216a target, plays a key role in
TGF-ß-induced Col1a2 in MC related to the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC2962500
PMID: 20713358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jul 22;10:388. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-388.

p-Glycoprotein ABCB5 and YB-1 expression plays a role in increased heterogeneity 
of breast cancer cells: correlations with cell fusion and doxorubicin resistance.

Yang JY(1), Ha SA, Yang YS, Kim JW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetic Laboratory, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul 137-040, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells recurrently develop into acquired resistance to the
administered drugs. The iatrogenic mechanisms of induced chemotherapy-resistance 
remain elusive and the degree of drug resistance did not exclusively correlate
with reductions of drug accumulation, suggesting that drug resistance may involve
additional mechanisms. Our aim is to define the potential targets, that makes
drug-sensitive MCF-7 breast cancer cells turn to drug-resistant, for the
anti-cancer drug development against drug resistant breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Doxorubicin resistant human breast MCF-7 clones were generated. The
doxorubicin-induced cell fusion events were examined. Heterokaryons were
identified and sorted by FACS. In the development of doxorubicin resistance,
cell-fusion associated genes, from the previous results of microarray, were
verified using dot blot array and quantitative RT-PCR. The doxorubicin-induced
expression patterns of pro-survival and pro-apoptotic genes were validated.
RESULTS: YB-1 and ABCB5 were up regulated in the doxorubicin treated MCF-7 cells 
that resulted in certain degree of genomic instability that accompanied by the
drug resistance phenotype. Cell fusion increased diversity within the cell
population and doxorubicin resistant MCF-7 cells emerged probably through clonal 
selection. Most of the drug resistant hybrid cells were anchorage independent.
But some of the anchorage dependent MCF-7 cells exhibited several unique
morphological appearances suggesting minor population of the fused cells maybe
de-differentiated and have progenitor cell like characteristics.
CONCLUSION: Our work provides valuable insight into the drug induced cell fusion 
event and outcome, and suggests YB-1, GST, ABCB5 and ERK3 could be potential
targets for the anti-cancer drug development against drug resistant breast cancer
cells. Especially, the ERK-3 serine/threonine kinase is specifically up-regulated
in the resistant cells and known to be susceptible to synthetic antagonists.

PMCID: PMC2913965
PMID: 20649952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 30;398(3):482-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.104. Epub 2010 Jul 1.

YB-1 alters MT1-MMP trafficking and stimulates MCF-7 breast tumor invasion and
metastasis.

Lovett DH(1), Cheng S, Cape L, Pollock AS, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Medicine, San Francisco Department of Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, University of California, The Northern California Institute for
Research and Education, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA. david.lovett@va.gov

YB-1 is a member of the cold shock domain family, with complex roles in DNA
structure, gene transcription and translation. YB-1 promotes chromosomal
instability, and mammary gland transgenic expression induces tumors with 100%
penetrance. YB-1 is linked to poor prognosis in breast carcinoma and is a strong 
predictor of relapse and disease-specific survival. Survival is directly tied to 
the extent of local invasion and distal metastasis, processes dependent upon the 
activity of the membrane type I-matrix metalloproteinase, MT1-MMP. Non-invasive
MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells were transfected with YB-1/EGFP. YB-1 protein
was detected in the invadopodia of cells with a migratory phenotype. There was
increased expression of MT1-MMP protein concentrated at the leading edges of
motile cells, which were highly invasive in collagen three-dimensional culture.
The rates of MT1-MMP protein endocytosis and recycling to the cell surface were
elevated in clones expressing higher levels of YB-1 protein. Control MCF-7 cells 
formed nonfatal, non-invasive, differentiated adenocarcinomas in vivo. MCF-7
cells expressing a twofold increase in YB-1 formed highly anaplastic tumors with 
local invasion, pulmonary metastases and high lethality. We conclude that YB-1
contributes to the development of an invasive, metastatic breast carcinoma
phenotype by enhanced presentation of MT1-MMP at the sites of cellular invasion.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2925540
PMID: 20599698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Anticancer Res. 2010 Apr;30(4):1239-42.

Y-box-binding protein-1 is a potential novel tumour marker for neuroblastoma.

Wachowiak R(1), Thieltges S, Rawnaq T, Kaifi JT, Fiegel H, Metzger R, Quaas A,
Mertens PR, Till H, Izbicki JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
robin.wachowiak@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

BACKGROUND: The Y-box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a member of a family of
DNA-binding proteins and an oncogenic transcription factor that is highly
expressed in cancers of the breast, lung and prostate. To date, no data are
available on its role in neuroblastoma. The aim of the present study was to
evaluate the YB-1 expression in neuroblastoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A tumour tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed from 36
neuroblastoma samples which were analysed by immunohistochemistry for YB-1
expression.
RESULTS: Expression of YB-1 was detected in 35 of 37 (94.6%) neuroblastoma cases 
examined. Nevertheless, no correlation of YB-1 expression with survival, risk
factors or stage of the disease was observed.
CONCLUSION: As the majority of neuroblastomas express YB-1, this protein may play
an important role in tumour pathogenesis. The results of this study suggest that 
YB-1 may serve as a novel immune marker for neuroblastoma and may be potentially 
useful as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 20530434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Cancer Sci. 2010 Aug;101(8):1797-806. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01598.x. Epub
2010 Apr 23.

P300/CBP-associated factor regulates Y-box binding protein-1 expression and
promotes cancer cell growth, cancer invasion and drug resistance.

Shiota M(1), Yokomizo A, Tada Y, Uchiumi T, Inokuchi J, Tatsugami K, Kuroiwa K,
Yamamoto K, Seki N, Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

Twist1 has been proposed to have oncogenic properties. Although Twist1 was
reported to interact with p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) and to inhibit the
functions of PCAF, it remains unclear how PCAF affects the functions of Twist1,
cell growth, invasive ability, and cellular sensitivity to anticancer agents. We 
found that PCAF, Twist1, and Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) expressions were
elevated in cisplatin- and doxorubicin-resistant cancer cells. Luciferase
reporter assays revealed that PCAF manipulation modulated YB-1 transcription in a
Twist1-dependent manner. In addition, PCAF regulated the Twist1 intracellular
localization and the Twist1 transcriptional activity through its acetylation
function to the Twist1. Suppression of PCAF expression reduced YB-1 expression in
human urothelial cancer KK47 cells. As a result, the cell growth and invasive
ability of KK47 cells was retarded by PCAF knockdown, and PCAF knockdown rendered
KK47 cells sensitive to cisplatin and doxorubicin, but not to 5-fluorouracil. The
present data suggest that Twist1 and YB-1 as well as PCAF may be promising
molecular therapeutic targets.

PMID: 20491776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jun;101(6):1367-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01534.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 16.

Y-box binding protein-1 is a novel molecular target for tumor vessels.

Takahashi M(1), Shimajiri S, Izumi H, Hirano G, Kashiwagi E, Yasuniwa Y, Wu Y,
Han B, Akiyama M, Nishizawa S, Sasaguri Y, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a member of the cold shock protein family and
functions in transcription and translation. Many reports indicate that YB-1 is
highly expressed in tumor cells and is a marker for tumor aggressiveness and
clinical prognosis. Here, we show clear evidence that YB-1 is expressed in the
angiogenic endothelial cells of various tumors, such as glioblastoma, esophageal 
cancer, gastric cancer, colon cancer, and lung cancer, as well as in tumor cells.
YB-1 was highly expressed in glomeruloid microvascular endothelial cells of brain
tumors and microvessels in the desmoplastic region around multiple solid tumors. 
On the other hand, no or low YB-1 expression was observed in normal angiogenic
endothelial cells from fetal kidney, newborn lung, and placenta. The endothelial 
cells in inflammatory regions of granulomas were also weakly labeled. Knockdown
of YB-1 expression by small-interfering RNA induced G1 cell cycle arrest and
inhibited the growth of human umbilical vein endothelial cells stimulated by
growth factors. Taken together, YB-1 plays an important role in the growth of not
only tumor cells but also tumor-associated endothelial cells, suggesting that
YB-1 is a promising target for cancer therapy.

PMID: 20398058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Klin Lab Diagn. 2010 Feb;(2):29-32.

[Determination of the amount of YB-1 gene mRNA in the breast tumor tissues to
predict the course of disease].

[Article in Russian]

Gens GP, Moiseeva NI, Stromskaia TP, Rybalkina EIu, Vaiman AV, Stavrovskaia AA.

The purpose of the study was to develop a test of the multifunctional protein
YB-1 in the intraoperative biopsy specimen to predict the course of breast cancer
(BC). Its tasks were to use of real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-RCR) to substantiate the data previously obtained by
semiquantitative RT-PCR and to clarify whether there was a correlation between
the amount of YB-1 mRNA in the BC tissue and the status of steroid hormone
receptors of these tumors. The determination of the tumor amount of YB-1 mRNA was
shown to predict the course of BC: a statistically significant correlation was
found between the higher content of YB-1 mRNA and the aggressive course of
BC--the emergence of distant metastases. Comparing the content of YB-1 mRNA and
the hormonal status of a tumor (the number of estrogen and progesterone
receptors) revealed no correlations. The findings indicate that the determination
of YB-1 mRNA by both real-time RT-PCR and semiquantitative RT-PCR may be used to 
predict BC metastases in distant organs.

PMID: 20397575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 May 1;77(1):244-52. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.11.033.

Bystander effects induced by medium from irradiated cells: similar transcriptome 
responses in irradiated and bystander K562 cells.

Herok R(1), Konopacka M, Polanska J, Swierniak A, Rogolinski J, Jaksik R, Hancock
R, Rzeszowska-Wolny J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland.

PURPOSE: Cells exposed to ionizing radiation release factors that induce
deoxyribonucleic acid damage, chromosomal instability, apoptosis, and changes in 
the proliferation rate of neighboring unexposed cells, phenomena known as
bystander effects. This work analyzes and compares changes in global transcript
levels induced by direct irradiation and by bystander effects in K562 (human
erythroleukemia) cells.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Cells were X-irradiated with 4 Gy or transferred into
culture medium collected from cells 1 h after irradiation
(irradiation-conditioned medium). Global transcript profiles were assessed after 
36 h of growth by use of Affymetrix microarrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) and
the kinetics of change of selected transcripts by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The level of the majority (72%) of transcripts changed similarly
(increase, decrease, or no change) in cells grown in irradiation-conditioned
medium or irradiated, whereas only 0.6% showed an opposite response. Transcript
level changes in bystander and irradiated cells were significantly different from
those in untreated cells grown for the same amount of time and were confirmed by 
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction for selected genes. 
Signaling pathways in which the highest number of transcripts changed in both
conditions were found in the following groups: neuroactive ligand-receptor,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, Janus Kinase-Signal Transducers and
Activators of Transcription (JAK-STAT) and Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase
(MAPK) In control cells more transcripts were downregulated than in irradiated
and bystander cells with transcription factors YBX1 and STAT5B, heat shock
protein HSPA1A, and ribonucleic acid helicase DDX3X as examples.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptomes of cells grown in medium from X-irradiated cells 
or directly irradiated show very similar changes. Signals released by irradiated 
cells may cause changes in the transcriptome of neighboring cells that sustain
their survival.

PMID: 20394856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Anticancer Res. 2010 Feb;30(2):693-8.

Regulation of mRNA expression in drug-sensitive and drug-resistant gastric
carcinoma cells is independent of YB-1 expression.

Kurucz R(1), Belian E, Treue D, Lage H.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Campus Mitte, Institute of Pathology, Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, 
Germany.

Y-Box protein 1 (YB-1) is a multifunctional cellular protein expressed in a range
of mammalian cells, including human cancer cells. It is involved in the
regulation of various genes including cancer-associated genes, but the full range
of target genes and regulatory mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. To
identify global mRNA expression patterns that are potentially regulated by YB-1, 
a previously established and well-characterized cell model derived from
drug-sensitive (EPG85-257P/tetR/YB-1) and multidrug-resistant
(EPG85-257RDB/tetR/YB-1) gastric carcinoma cells in which the expression of YB-1 
can be inhibited by tetracycline-dependent activation of the RNA interference
(RNAi) pathway, was analyzed by microarray technology. By this approach, various 
potentially regulated genes encoding members of important cellular pathways such 
as the Jak/STAT, VEGF and the MAP-kinase signaling pathways were identified.
Independent validation of these findings by quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and Western blot did not confirm these
regulatory effects. In conclusion, the findings suggest that YB-1 is not directly
involved in the regulation of mRNA expression in drug-sensitive or drug-resistant
gastric carcinoma cells.

PMID: 20332492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Anticancer Res. 2010 Feb;30(2):629-33.

Effect of YB-1 on the regulation of micro RNA expression in drug-sensitive and
drug-resistant gastric carcinoma cells.

Belian E(1), Kurucz R, Treue D, Lage H.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Campus Mitte, Institute of Pathology, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.

The multifunctional Y-Box protein 1 (YB-1) exerts positive and negative
regulatory effects on gene expression by different mechanisms. Since
transcription can be controlled by micro RNAs (miRNAs), YB-1 could also cause
effects on gene expression by regulation of cellular miRNAs. To test this
hypothesis, a previously established and well-characterized cell model derived
from drug-sensitive (EPG85-257P/tetR/YB-1) and multidrug-resistant
(EPG85-257RDB/tetR/YB-1) gastric carcinoma cells, in which the expression of YB-1
can be inhibited by tetracycline-dependent triggering of the RNA interference
(RNAi) pathway, was investigated concerning their miRNA expression profiles in
the presence and absence of YB-1. Microarray hybridizations demonstrated that six
miRNAs (miR-96*, miR-210, miR-503, miR-623, miR-1275, miR-1290) were up-regulated
more than 1.5-fold in drug-sensitive cells following YB-1 inhibition, but no
differences in miRNA expression could be detected in multidrug-resistant cells.
Independent validation of these findings by quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction did not confirm these effects. Likewise, 
an in silico analysis of potential regulatory effects of the miRNAs on their
target genes did not support the potential miRNA regulatory effects of YB-1. In
conclusion, the data provide evidence that YB-1 has no direct influence on global
miRNA expression pattern in different variants of gastric carcinoma cells and,
therewith, does not control gene expression by regulation of miRNAs.

PMID: 20332481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2840-51. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3155. Epub
2010 Mar 23.

Y-box binding protein-1 induces the expression of CD44 and CD49f leading to
enhanced self-renewal, mammosphere growth, and drug resistance.

To K(1), Fotovati A, Reipas KM, Law JH, Hu K, Wang J, Astanehe A, Davies AH, Lee 
L, Stratford AL, Raouf A, Johnson P, Berquin IM, Royer HD, Eaves CJ, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Medicine Program, University of British Columbia, Canada.

Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription/translation factor
expressed in >40% of breast cancers, where it is associated with poor prognosis, 
disease recurrence, and drug resistance. We questioned whether this may be linked
to the ability of YB-1 to induce the expression of genes linked to cancer stem
cells such as CD44 and CD49f. Herein, we report that YB-1 binds the CD44 and
CD49f promoters to transcriptionally upregulate their expressions. The
introduction of wild-type (WT) YB-1 or activated P-YB-1(S102) stimulated the
production of CD44 and CD49f in MDA-MB-231 and SUM 149 breast cancer cell lines. 
YB-1-transfected cells also bound to the CD44 ligand hyaluronan more than the
control cells. Similarly, YB-1 was induced in immortalized breast epithelial
cells and upregulated CD44. Conversely, silencing YB-1 decreased CD44 expression 
as well as reporter activity in SUM 149 cells. In mice, expression of YB-1 in the
mammary gland induces CD44 and CD49f with associated hyperplasia. Further,
activated mutant YB-1(S102D) enhances self-renewal, primary and secondary
mammosphere growth, and soft-agar colony growth, which were reversible via loss
of CD44 or CD49f. We next addressed the consequence of this system on therapeutic
responsiveness. Here, we show that paclitaxel induces P-YB-1(S102) expression,
nuclear localization of activated YB-1, and CD44 expression. The overexpression
of WT YB-1 promotes mammosphere growth in the presence of paclitaxel.
Importantly, targeting YB-1 sensitized the CD44(High)/CD24(Low) cells to
paclitaxel. In conclusion, YB-1 promotes cancer cell growth and drug resistance
through its induction of CD44 and CD49f.

PMCID: PMC2848879
PMID: 20332234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Dec;37(8):4059-66. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0065-7. Epub 2010
Mar 18.

Identification of differentially expressed genes between hepatocytes of Landes
geese (Anser anser) and Sichuan White geese (Anser cygnoides).

Pan Z(1), Wang J, Han C, Zhai N, Lv J, Zhou Z, Tang H, Xiang S, Wang J, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Animal Genetic Resources, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, 625014, Sichuan, People's Republic of
China.

In this study, we examined gene expression in order to identify genes that are
differentially expressed between the hepatocytes of Sichuan White geese and
Landes geese. We hypothesized that such genes may be involved in the different
predispositions between these two species to develop hepatic steatosis. RNA was
isolated from primary hepatocytes of the two species, and suppression subtractive
hybridization was employed to screen for genes that showed differences in mRNA
expression. We built and characterized two reciprocal cDNA libraries that were
enriched in genes up-regulated in Landes geese or Sichuan White geese. Using dot 
blot analysis we identified 128 of 600 randomly selected sequences that
demonstrated differential expression between the two species. Of these
differentially expressed genes, 115 sequences shared high homology with 46 known 
genes and 13 sequences corresponded to eight novel expressed sequence tags
(ESTs). Based on functional clustering, up and down-regulated genes were mostly
related to lipid metabolism, nuclear mRNA splicing, enzyme activity and
transcription control. The expression of 18 selected clones was further studied
by quantitative PCR. The data showed that eight clones similar to the genes
ACSL5, CTGF, CIDEA, PPAR<U+03B3>, PCK, GSTS1, RPS4X, and THBS1 had significantly higher 
expression levels in the hepatocytes of Landes geese. In contrast, seven clones
similar to the genes ADH5, YBX1, ASAH1, UCB, AOPVLDL, SCD-1, and ELOVL-6 had
significantly higher expression levels in the hepatocytes of Sichuan White geese.

PMID: 20238173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;26(4):400-5.

[Effect of YB-1 gene knockdown on human leukemia cell line K562/A02].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu WL(1), Zhou LL, Chen QY, Chen C, Fang LL, Fang XJ, Shen HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Affiliated People's Hospital, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, 212002 P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the potential effects of YB-1 gene knockdown on gene
expression profile, cell growth and apoptosis in leukemia cell line K562/A02.
METHODS: The recombinant eukaryotic expression plasmid containing YB-1 short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) or random-sequence (HK) were transfected into K562/A02 cells 
by lipofectamine mediation. cDNA microarray was performed to explore the
alteration of gene expression profile when YB-1 gene expression was decreased.
Expression of CARD8 and RHOC genes were verified by semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). The proliferative ability of the cells was determined
by methyl thiazolyltetrazolium (MTT) assay and cell cycle analysis. Cell
apoptosis was assayed by Annexin V-FITC/PI double labeled flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The levels of YB-1 mRNA and protein decreased dramatically in three
positively transfected cells when compared with untransfected K562/A02 cells or
K562/A02-HK thansfected cells. Gene expression profile was altered by
transfection of YB-1 shRNA into K562/A02 cells. Among 47,000 genes on the
microarray, 252 genes were detected to have changes, with 143 down-regulated and 
109 up-regulated. They were functionally related to cell cycle progression, gene 
replication, metabolism, cell apoptosis, cell signal transduction, etc. An
increase in CARD8 gene expression and a decrease in RHOC gene expression have
been confirmed by RT-PCR in K562/A02-YBX13 cells. The introduction of exogenous
YB-1 shRNA gene into K562/A02 cells resulted in decreased proliferation, higher
G1, lower G2 and S ratio in cell cycle distribution in comparison with the
control groups. Annexin V/PI detection indicated higher Annexin V+ ratio in the
three positively transfected cells 24 hours after cells were treated with 0.5
micromol/L of As2O3.
CONCLUSION: Down-regulation of YB-1 gene by shRNA-YB-1 can alter the gene
expression profile in K562/A02 cells, leading to change of cell proliferation and
apoptosis.

PMID: 20017303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Dec;41(12):980-90.

Discovery of YB-1 as a new immunological target in neuroblastoma by vaccination
in the context of regulatory T cell blockade.

Zheng J(1), Jing W, Orentas RJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.
jzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Neuroblastoma is one of the most common solid tumors in infancy and early
childhood. Using the A/J mouse and a syngeneic neuroblastoma cell line AGN2a, we 
induced a strong anti-neuroblastoma cellular immune response when AGN2a
transfected to express costimulatory molecules (CD80/CD86/CD54/CD137L) was used
as a vaccine in the context of regulatory T cell blockade. Strong humoral
immunity was induced by AGN2a-4p immunization in the context with regulatory T
cell blockade. Serum from treated mice was used to screen an AGN2a cDNA
expression library that was constructed with lambda ZAP express vector in order
to identify tumor-associated antigens by SEREX. Twenty one clones were identified
by sequencing and comparative analysis of gene pools. Most transcripts play some 
roles in the neuronal differentiation, cell metabolism, or have previously been
identified as transcripts that are over-expressed in other malignancies. The most
commonly identified tumor-associated antigen, using serum from AGN2a-4p
immunization with Treg blockade mice, was YB-1 protein that also induced a T cell
response. These results indicated that potential neuroblastoma-associated
antigens were found by the sera from mice immunized with tumor cells expressing
costimulatory molecules with regulatory T cell function blockade. The
identification of YB-1 as tumor-associated antigens capable of eliciting a T cell
response validates our experimental approach and argues for the antigens we have 
identified here to be evaluated as targets of effector immunity and as vaccine
candidates.

PMID: 20011972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Nov;43(5):576-84. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0221OC. 
Epub 2009 Dec 11.

Cigarette smoke induces nucleic-acid oxidation in lung fibroblasts.

Deslee G(1), Adair-Kirk TL, Betsuyaku T, Woods JC, Moore CH, Gierada DS, Conradi 
SH, Atkinson JJ, Toennies HM, Battaile JT, Kobayashi DK, Patterson GA, Holtzman
MJ, Pierce RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine,
Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Oxidative stress is widely proposed as a pathogenic mechanism for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but the molecular pathway connecting
oxidative damage to tissue destruction remains to be fully defined. We suggest
that reactive oxygen species (ROS) oxidatively damage nucleic acids, and this
effect requires multiple repair mechanisms, particularly base excision pathway
components 8-oxoguanine-DNA glycosylase (OGG1), endonuclease III homologue 1
(NTH1), and single-strand-selective monofunctional uracil-DNA glycosylase 1
(SMUG1), as well as the nucleic acid-binding protein, Y-box binding protein 1
(YB1). This study was therefore designed to define the levels of nucleic-acid
oxidation and expression of genes involved in the repair of COPD and in
corresponding models of this disease. We found significant oxidation of nucleic
acids localized to alveolar lung fibroblasts, increased levels of OGG1 mRNA
expression, and decreased concentrations of NTH1, SMUG1, and YB1 mRNA in lung
samples from subjects with very severe COPD compared with little or no COPD. Mice
exposed to cigarette smoke exhibited a time-dependent accumulation of
nucleic-acid oxidation in alveolar fibroblasts, which was associated with an
increase in OGG1 and YB1 mRNA concentrations. Similarly, human lung fibroblasts
exposed to cigarette smoke extract exhibited ROS-dependent nucleic-acid
oxidation. The short interfering RNA (siRNA)-dependent knockdown of OGG1 and YB1 
expression increased nucleic-acid oxidation at the basal state and after exposure
to cigarette smoke. Together, our results demonstrate ROS-dependent, cigarette
smoke-induced nucleic-acid oxidation in alveolar fibroblasts, which may play a
role in the pathogenesis of emphysema.

PMCID: PMC2970854
PMID: 20008282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Dec;8(12):3276-84. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0478.

Inhibition of Y-box binding protein-1 slows the growth of glioblastoma multiforme
and sensitizes to temozolomide independent O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase.

Gao Y(1), Fotovati A, Lee C, Wang M, Cote G, Guns E, Toyota B, Faury D, Jabado N,
Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V5Z
4H4.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is an aggressive type of brain tumor where <3% of
newly diagnosed cases in the patients will survive >5 years. In adults, GBM is
the most common type of brain tumor. It is rarer in children, where it
constitutes approximately 15% of all brain tumors diagnosed. These tumors are
often invasive, making surgical resection difficult. Further, they can be
refractory to current therapies such as temozolomide. The current dogma is that
temozolomide resistance rests on the expression of O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) because it cleaves methylated DNA adducts formed by the 
drug. Our laboratory recently reported that another drug resistance gene known as
the Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is highly expressed in primary GBM but not in 
normal brain tissues based on the evaluation of primary tumors. We therefore
questioned whether GBM depend on YB-1 for growth and/or response to temozolomide.
Herein, we report that YB-1 inhibition reduced tumor cell invasion and growth in 
monolayer as well as in soft agar. Moreover, blocking this protein ultimately
delayed tumor onset in mice. Importantly, inhibiting YB-1 enhanced temozolomide
sensitivity in a manner that was independent of MGMT in models of adult and
pediatric GBM. In conclusion, inhibiting YB-1 may be a novel way to improve the
treatment of GBM.

PMID: 19996271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jan;38(3):e19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp1076. Epub 2009 Nov
26.

A rapid and sensitive method to detect siRNA-mediated mRNA cleavage in vivo using
5' RACE and a molecular beacon probe.

Lasham A(1), Herbert M, Coppieters 't Wallant N, Patel R, Feng S, Eszes M, Cao H,
Reid G.

Author information: 
(1)Genesis Research and Development Corporation Limited, Auckland, New Zealand.

Specific detection of mRNA cleavage by 5'RACE is the only method to confirm the
knockdown of mRNA by RNA interference, but is rarely reported for in vivo
studies. We have combined 5'-RNA-linker-mediated RACE (5'-RLM-RACE) with
real-time PCR using a molecular beacon to develop a rapid and specific method
termed MBRACE, which we have used to detect small-interfering RNA (siRNA)-induced
cleavage of ApoB, RRM1 and YBX1 transcripts in vitro, and ApoB in vivo. When RNA 
from siRNA-transfected cells was used for 5'-RLM-RACE and a cleavage
site-specific molecular beacon probe was included in subsequent real-time PCR
analysis, the specific mRNA cleavage product was detected. Detection of
siRNA-mediated cleavage was also observed when RNA from mouse liver following
administration of ApoB-specific siRNA was analysed, even in cases where ApoB
knockdown measured by real-time PCR was <10%. With its sensitivity and
specificity, this variation on the 5'RACE method should prove a useful tool to
detect mRNA cleavage and corroborate knockdown studies following siRNA use in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2817477
PMID: 19942683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. BMC Cancer. 2009 Nov 24;9:410. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-410.

Nuclear detection of Y-box protein-1 (YB-1) closely associates with progesterone 
receptor negativity and is a strong adverse survival factor in human breast
cancer.

Dahl E(1), En-Nia A, Wiesmann F, Krings R, Djudjaj S, Breuer E, Fuchs T, Wild PJ,
Hartmann A, Dunn SE, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, Aachen, Germany. edahl@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is the prototypic member of the cold
shock protein family that fulfills numerous cellular functions. In the nucleus
YB-1 protein orchestrates transcription of proliferation-related genes, whereas
in the cytoplasm it associates with mRNA and directs translation. In human tumor 
entities, such as breast, lung and prostate cancer, cellular YB-1 expression
indicates poor clinical outcome, suggesting that YB-1 is an attractive marker to 
predict patients' prognosis and, potentially, is suitable to individualize
treatment protocols. Given these predictive qualities of YB-1 detection we sought
to establish a highly specific monoclonal antibody (Mab) for diagnostic testing
and its characterization towards outcome prediction (relapse-free and overall
survival).
METHODS: Hybridoma cell generation was carried out with recombinant YB-1 protein 
as immunogen and Mab characterization was performed using immunoblotting and
ELISA with recombinant and tagged YB-1 proteins, as well as immunohistochemistry 
of healthy and breast cancer specimens. Breast tumor tissue array staining
results were analyzed for correlations with receptor expression and outcome
parameters.
RESULTS: YB-1-specific Mab F-E2G5 associates with conformational binding epitopes
mapping to two domains within the N-terminal half of the protein and detects
nuclear YB-1 protein by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded breast cancer
tissues. Prognostic evaluation of Mab F-E2G5 was performed by
immunohistochemistry of a human breast cancer tissue microarray comprising 179
invasive breast cancers, 8 ductal carcinoma in situ and 37 normal breast tissue
samples. Nuclear YB-1 detection in human breast cancer cells was associated with 
poor overall survival (p = 0.0046). We observed a close correlation between
nuclear YB-1 detection and absence of progesterone receptor expression (p =
0.002), indicating that nuclear YB-1 detection marks a specific subgroup of
breast cancer. Likely due to limitation of sample size Cox regression models
failed to demonstrate significance for nuclear YB-1 detection as independent
prognostic marker.
CONCLUSION: Monoclonal YB-1 antibody F-E2G5 should be of great value for
prospective studies to validate YB-1 as a novel biomarker suitable to optimize
breast cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC2788584
PMID: 19930682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec 20;27(36):6144-51. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.19.6261. Epub
2009 Nov 9.

Y-box-binding protein YB-1 identifies high-risk patients with primary breast
cancer benefiting from rapidly cycled tandem high-dose adjuvant chemotherapy.

Gluz O(1), Mengele K, Schmitt M, Kates R, Diallo-Danebrock R, Neff F, Royer HD,
Eckstein N, Mohrmann S, Ting E, Kiechle M, Poremba C, Nitz U, Harbeck N.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Center, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 34, 50931 Cologne,
Germany.

PURPOSE: To investigate the potential of Y-box-binding protein YB-1, a
multifunctional protein linked to tumor aggressiveness and multidrug resistance, 
to identify patients with breast cancer likely to benefit from dose-intensified
chemotherapy regimens.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: YB-1 was immunohistochemically determined in 211 primary
tumors from the prospective, randomized West German Study Group WSG-AM-01 trial
in high-risk (> or = 10 involved lymph-nodes) breast cancer (HRBC). Predictive
impact of YB-1 was assessed by multivariate survival analysis, including
time-varying factor-therapy interactions.
RESULTS: At median follow-up of 61.7 months, patients receiving rapidly cycled
tandem high-dose therapy (HD; two cycles [2x] epirubicin 90 mg/m(2) and
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m(2) every 14 days, followed by 2x epirubicin 90 mg/m(2),
cyclophosphamide 3,000 mg/m(2), and thiotepa 400 mg/m(2) every 21 days) had
better disease-free survival (DFS; hazard ratio [HR] = 0.62; 95% CI, 0.44 to
0.89) and overall survival (OS; HR = 0.59; 95% CI, 0.4 to 0.89) than those
receiving conventional dose-dense chemotherapy (DD; 4x epirubicin 90 mg/m(2) and 
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m(2), followed by 3x cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m(2),
methotrexate 40 mg/m(2), and fluorouracil 600 mg/m(2) every 14 days). High YB-1
was associated with aggressive tumor phenotype (negative steroid hormone receptor
status, positive human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 and p53 status, high
MIB-1, unfavorable tumor grade) and poor OS (median 78 v 97 months; P = .01). In 
patients with high YB-1, HD yielded a 63-month median DFS (P = .001) and a
46-month median OS advantage (P = .002) versus DD. In multivariate models,
patients with high B-1 receiving HD (v DD) had one third the hazard rate after 20
months for DFS and one sixth after 40 months for OS.
CONCLUSION: In a randomized prospective cancer therapy trial, for the first time,
a strong predictive impact of YB-1 on survival has been demonstrated: enhanced
benefit from HD (v DD) therapy occurs in HRBC with high YB-1. Future trials could
therefore address optimal chemotherapeutic strategies,taking YB-1 into account.

PMID: 19901122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36569-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.042879. Epub
2009 Oct 19.

Role of microtubules in stress granule assembly: microtubule dynamical
instability favors the formation of micrometric stress granules in cells.

Chernov KG(1), Barbet A, Hamon L, Ovchinnikov LP, Curmi PA, Pastré D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Structure-Activité des Biomolécules Normales et Pathologiques,
INSERM/Université d'Evry-Val d'Essonne, U829, EA3637, Evry 91025, France.

Following exposure to various stresses (arsenite, UV, hyperthermia, and hypoxia),
mRNAs are assembled into large cytoplasmic bodies known as "stress granules," in 
which mRNAs and associated proteins may be processed by specific enzymes for
different purposes like transient storing, sorting, silencing, or other still
unknown processes. To limit mRNA damage during stress, the assembly of
micrometric granules has to be rapid, and, indeed, it takes only approximately
10-20 min in living cells. However, such a rapid assembly breaks the rules of
hindered diffusion in the cytoplasm, which states that large cytoplasmic bodies
are almost immobile. In the present work, using HeLa cells and YB-1 protein as a 
stress granule marker, we studied three hypotheses to understand how cells
overcome the limitation of hindered diffusion: shuttling of small messenger
ribonucleoprotein particles from small to large stress granules, sliding of
messenger ribonucleoprotein particles along microtubules, microtubule-mediated
stirring of large stress granules. Our data favor the two last hypotheses and
underline that microtubule dynamic instability favors the formation of
micrometric stress granules.

PMCID: PMC2794772
PMID: 19843517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Oncogene. 2010 Jan 21;29(3):403-10. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.321. Epub 2009 Oct 19.

Genotoxic stress-induced nuclear localization of oncoprotein YB-1 in the absence 
of proteolytic processing.

Cohen SB(1), Ma W, Valova VA, Algie M, Harfoot R, Woolley AG, Robinson PJ,
Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Transformation Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New
South Wales, 2145, Australia.

Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1) is an oncogenic transcription factor whose
overexpression and nuclear localization is associated with tumor progression and 
drug resistance. Transcriptional activation of YB-1 in response to genotoxic
stress is believed to occur in the cytoplasm through sequence-specific
endoproteolytic cleavage by the 20S Proteasome, followed by nuclear translocation
of cleaved YB-1. To study the proteolysis model, we developed a two-step affinity
purification of endogenous YB-1 protein species and characterized the products
using mass spectrometry. Whereas full-length YB-1 was readily identified, the
smaller protein band thought to be activated YB-1 was identified as hnRNP A1. An 
antibody specific for YB-1 was generated, which revealed only one YB-1 species,
even after genotoxic stress-induced nuclear YB-1 translocation. These findings
warrant re-evaluation of the mechanism of YB-1 nuclear translocation and
transcriptional activation. The relationship between nuclear YB-1 and tumor
progression may also have to re-evaluated in some cases.

PMID: 19838214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(5):R69. doi: 10.1186/bcr2363.

Identification of biology-based breast cancer types with distinct predictive and 
prognostic features: role of steroid hormone and HER2 receptor expression in
patients treated with neoadjuvant anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy.

Darb-Esfahani S(1), Loibl S, Müller BM, Roller M, Denkert C, Komor M, Schlüns K, 
Blohmer JU, Budczies J, Gerber B, Noske A, du Bois A, Weichert W, Jackisch C,
Dietel M, Richter K, Kaufmann M, von Minckwitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1,
Berlin, 10117, Germany. Silvia.Darb-Esfahani@charite.de

INTRODUCTION: Reliable predictive and prognostic markers for routine diagnostic
purposes are needed for breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. We evaluated protein biomarkers in a cohort of 116 participants of 
the GeparDuo study on anthracycline/taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy for
operable breast cancer to test for associations with pathological complete
response (pCR) and disease-free survival (DFS). Particularly, we evaluated if
interactions between hormone receptor (HR) and human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER2) expression might lead to a different clinical behavior of
HR+/HER2+ co-expressing and HR+/HER2- tumors and whether subgroups of triple
negative tumors might be identified by the help of Ki67 labeling index,
cytokeratin 5/6 (CK5/6), as well as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and Y-box binding
protein 1 (YB-1) expression.
METHODS: Expression analysis was performed using immunohistochemistry and
silver-enhanced in situ hybridization on tissue microarrays (TMAs) of
pretherapeutic core biopsies.
RESULTS: pCR rates were significantly different between the biology-based tumor
types (P = 0.044) with HR+/HER2+ and HR-/HER2- tumors having higher pCR rates
than HR+/HER2- tumors. Ki67 labeling index, confirmed as significant predictor of
pCR in the whole cohort (P = 0.001), identified HR-/HER- (triple negative)
carcinomas with a higher chance for a pCR (P = 0.006). Biology-based tumor type
(P = 0.046 for HR+/HER2+ vs. HR+/HER2-), Ki67 labeling index (P = 0.028), and
treatment arm (P = 0.036) were independent predictors of pCR in a multivariate
model. DFS was different in the biology-based tumor types (P < 0.0001) with
HR+/HER2- and HR+/HER2+ tumors having the best prognosis and HR-/HER2+ tumors
showing the worst outcome. Biology-based tumor type was an independent prognostic
factor for DFS in multivariate analysis (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that a biology-based breast cancer
classification using estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and
HER2 bears independent predictive and prognostic potential. The HR+/HER2+
co-expressing carcinomas emerged as a group of tumors with a good response rate
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and a favorable prognosis. HR+/HER2- tumors had a
good prognosis irrespective of a pCR, whereas patients with HR-/HER- and HR-/HER+
tumors, especially if they had not achieved a pCR, had an unfavorable prognosis
and are in need of additional treatment options.

PMCID: PMC2790846
PMID: 19758440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cell Cycle. 2009 Sep 15;8(18):2901-6. Epub 2009 Sep 16.

Reduced proliferation and enhanced migration: two sides of the same coin?
Molecular mechanisms of metastatic progression by YB-1.

Evdokimova V(1), Tognon C, Ng T, Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, BC, CA. v.evdokimova@gmail.com

Hyperproliferation induced by various oncogenic proteins, including activated
Ras, is the most prominent and well characterized feature of cancerous cells.
This property has been exploited in the development of the most successful
anti-cancer treatments to target rapidly dividing cells. Here we argue that
hyperproliferation may in fact be detrimental to survival during particular
stages of cancer progression such as dissemination from primary tumor and
establishing metastatic outgrowth. Our recent work has demonstrated that
elevation of YB-1 protein levels, which is frequently observed in human cancers, 
is associated with reduced proliferation rates in disseminated mesenchymal-like
breast carcinoma cells. In breast cancer cell lines with activated Ras-MAPK
signaling, YB-1 inhibited cellular proliferation, while inducing an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The underlying mechanism involves
YB-1-mediated translational repression of pro-growth transcripts and activation
of the messages encoding EMT-associated proteins, many of which are also known to
inhibit proliferation. In addition to the lack of epithelial polarity, increased 
mobility and invasiveness, YB-1-overexpressing cells displayed a remarkable
ability to shut down proliferation and survive in anchorage-independent
conditions. These findings support the view that while an increase in
proliferation is important for the initiation and maintenance of primary tumors, 
growth inhibition could ultimately be crucial for survival of carcinoma cells in 
the circulation and secondary organs, thereby leading to the development of a
more malignant phenotype.

PMID: 19713745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Thorac Oncol. 2009 Sep;4(9):1066-74. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181ae2828.

Nuclear Y-box binding protein-1, a predictive marker of prognosis, is correlated 
with expression of HER2/ErbB2 and HER3/ErbB3 in non-small cell lung cancer.

Kashihara M(1), Azuma K, Kawahara A, Basaki Y, Hattori S, Yanagawa T, Terazaki Y,
Takamori S, Shirouzu K, Aizawa H, Nakano K, Kage M, Kuwano M, Ono M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Oncology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Nuclear expression of Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is closely
associated not only with global drug resistance and expression of several growth 
factor receptors in various human malignancies but also with overall patient
survival.
METHODS: The effect of YB-1 knockdown on expression of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) family proteins was examined by Western blot using human lung
cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression of
nuclear YB-1 and EGFR family proteins in patients with non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) (n = 104).
RESULTS: In the five NSCLC cell lines, expressions of EGFR, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), HER3, and hepatocyte growth factor receptor
(c-Met) in PC-9 cells; of HER2 and c-Met in EBC-1 cells; and of HER3 in QG56
cells were down-regulated by YB-1 knockdown. By immunohistochemical analysis, we 
observed that HER3 expression was significantly negatively correlated with
nuclear YB-1 expression in squamous cell carcinoma (p = 0.038). HER2 expression
was positively correlated with nuclear YB-1 expression in adenocarcinoma (p =
0.052). Nuclear expression of YB-1 correlated with overall survival of all
patients (p = 0.028) and of patients with adenocarcinoma (p = 0.007).
Furthermore, there was a significant difference in therapeutic efficacies of
gefitinib between patients with nuclear YB-1 expression and those with
non-nuclear YB-1 expression in patients with NSCLC (p = 0.004, n = 26) but not
between those with high and those with low expression of EGFR, HER2, HER3, and
c-Met.
CONCLUSION: Nuclear YB-1 expression might be essential for the malignant
phenotype in lung cancer patients and might be an important biomarker for the
development of therapeutic strategy against NSCLC.

PMID: 19648825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Klin Lab Diagn. 2009 Apr;(4):21-4.

[Studies of YB-1 protein in breast tumors].

[Article in Russian]

Gens GP, Stromskaia TP, Kalita OV, Vaiman AV, Rybalkina EIu, Ovchinnikov LP,
Sorokin AV, Korobkova LI, Astrakhantsev AF, Mukha SF, Moiseeva NI, Stavrovskaia
AA.

The multifunctional mammalian protein YB-1 is involved in multiple DNA- and
mRNA-dependent events in the cell and regulates gene expression at different
levels. The intracellular localization and relative mRNA content of YB-1 in the
breast tumors were studied. The presence of cells with nuclear YB-1 localization 
in the tumor cell population is a poor predictor that correlates with larger
tumors (more than 5 cm). The high YB-1 mRNA content in the breast tumors promotes
metastasis of small neoplasms and patients with breast cancer who have high tumor
tissue YB-1 mRNA levels may referred to as an early distant metastasis risk
group. The findings suggest that combined determination of YB-1 intercellular
localization and mRNA levels can ensure a more reliable prognosis of breast
cancer.

PMID: 19517610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):402-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.017.

Translational activation of snail1 and other developmentally regulated
transcription factors by YB-1 promotes an epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Evdokimova V(1), Tognon C, Ng T, Ruzanov P, Melnyk N, Fink D, Sorokin A,
Ovchinnikov LP, Davicioni E, Triche TJ, Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. v.evdokimova@gmail.com

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):357-9.

Increased expression of the transcription/translation regulatory protein Y-box
binding protein-1 (YB-1) is associated with cancer aggressiveness, particularly
in breast carcinoma. Here we establish that YB-1 levels are elevated in invasive 
breast cancer cells and correlate with reduced expression of E-cadherin and poor 
patient survival. Enforced expression of YB-1 in noninvasive breast epithelial
cells induced an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) accompanied by enhanced 
metastatic potential and reduced proliferation rates. YB-1 directly activates
cap-independent translation of messenger RNAs encoding Snail1 and other
transcription factors implicated in downregulation of epithelial and
growth-related genes and activation of mesenchymal genes. Hence, translational
regulation by YB-1 is a restriction point enabling coordinated expression of a
network of EMT-inducing transcription factors, likely acting together to promote 
metastatic spread.

PMID: 19411069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):357-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.04.006.

YB-1 translational control of epithelial-mesenchyme transition.

Mouneimne G(1), Brugge JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):402-15.

Transitions between epithelial and mesenchmal phenotypes play critical roles in
normal development and cancer progression. In this issue of Cancer Cell,
Evdokimova et al. demonstrate that YB-1 regulates epithelial-mesenchyme
transition (EMT) by inducing cap-independent translation of mRNAs encoding
EMT-promoting factors and suppressing cap-dependent translation of mRNAs encoding
growth-promoting factors.

PMID: 19411064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cancer Gene Ther. 2009 Oct;16(10):753-63. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2009.20. Epub 2009 Apr
10.

Adenovirus-based virotherapy enabled by cellular YB-1 expression in vitro and in 
vivo.

Rognoni E(1), Widmaier M, Haczek C, Mantwill K, Holzmüller R, Gansbacher B, Kolk 
A, Schuster T, Schmid RM, Saur D, Kaszubiak A, Lage H, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Oncology and Therapeutics, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technische Universitaet Muenchen, Muenchen 81675, Germany.

We have earlier described the oncolytic adenovirus vector dl520 that was rendered
cancer-specific by deletion of the transactivation domain CR3 of the adenoviral
E1A13S protein; this deletion causes antitumor activity in drug-resistant cells
displaying nuclear YB-1 expression. We hypothesized that the anticancer activity 
of dl520 could be further improved by introducing the RGD motif in the fiber knob
and by deletion of the adenoviral E1B19K protein (Ad-Delo3-RGD). In this study,
the in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity of Ad-Delo3-RGD was investigated
focussing on two pancreatic cancer cell lines MiaPaCa-2 and BxPC3 alone and in
combination with cytotoxic drugs. Furthermore, luciferin-based bioluminescence
imaging was established to study the therapeutic response in vivo. In addition,
to confirm the specificity of Ad-Delo3-RGD for YB-1 a tetracycline-inducible
anti-YB-1 shRNA-expressing cell variant EPG85-257RDB/tetR/YB-1 was used. This
TetON regulatable expression system allows us to measure adenoviral replication
by real-time PCR in the absence of YB-1 expression. The results confirmed the
YB-1 dependency of Ad-Delo3-RGD and showed that Ad-Delo3-RGD has potent activity 
against human pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, which was augmented
by the addition of paclitaxel. However, although high replication capacity was
measured in vitro and in vivo, complete tumor regression was not achieved,
indicating the need for further improvements to treat pancreatic cancer
effectively.

PMID: 19363467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. BMC Neurosci. 2009 Mar 26;10:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-28.

Cellular localization of Y-box binding protein 1 in brain tissue of rats,
macaques, and humans.

Unkrüer B(1), Pekcec A, Fuest C, Wehmeyer A, Balda MS, Horn A, Baumgärtner W,
Potschka H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Pharmacy,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. berni-unkrueer@web.de

BACKGROUND: The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) is considered to be one of the key
regulators of transcription and translation. However, so far only limited
knowledge exists regarding its cellular distribution in the adult brain.
RESULTS: Analysis of YB-1 immunolabelling as well as double-labelling with the
neuronal marker NeuN in rat brain tissue revealed a predominant neuronal
expression in the dentate gyrus, the cornu ammonis pyramidal cell layer, layer
III of the piriform cortex as well as throughout all layers of the
parahippocampal cortex. In the hilus of the hippocampus single neurons expressed 
YB-1. The neuronal expression pattern was comparable in the hippocampus and
parahippocampal cortex of adult macaques and humans. Double-labelling of YB-1
with the endothelial cell marker Glut-1, the multidrug transporter
P-glycoprotein, and the astrocytic marker GFAP did not indicate a
co-localization. Following status epilepticus in rats, no induction of YB-1
occurred in brain capillary endothelial cells and neurons.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our study demonstrates that YB-1 is predominantly
expressed in neurons in the adult brain of rats, macaques and humans. Lack of a
co-localization with Glut-1 and P-glycoprotein argues against a direct role of
YB-1 in the regulation of blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein.

PMCID: PMC2666744
PMID: 19323802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. DNA Repair (Amst). 2009 Jun 4;8(6):704-19. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2009.01.021.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Novel DNA mismatch-repair activity involving YB-1 in human mitochondria.

de Souza-Pinto NC(1), Mason PA, Hashiguchi K, Weissman L, Tian J, Guay D, Lebel
M, Stevnsner TV, Rasmussen LJ, Bohr VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging/Intramural
Research Program (NIA-IRP), National Institutes of Health, 5600 Nathan Shock
Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Maintenance of the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) is essential for proper cellular 
function. The accumulation of damage and mutations in the mtDNA leads to
diseases, cancer, and aging. Mammalian mitochondria have proficient base excision
repair, but the existence of other DNA repair pathways is still unclear.
Deficiencies in DNA mismatch repair (MMR), which corrects base mismatches and
small loops, are associated with DNA microsatellite instability, accumulation of 
mutations, and cancer. MMR proteins have been identified in yeast and coral
mitochondria; however, MMR proteins and function have not yet been detected in
human mitochondria. Here we show that human mitochondria have a robust
mismatch-repair activity, which is distinct from nuclear MMR. Key nuclear MMR
factors were not detected in mitochondria, and similar mismatch-binding activity 
was observed in mitochondrial extracts from cells lacking MSH2, suggesting
distinctive pathways for nuclear and mitochondrial MMR. We identified the repair 
factor YB-1 as a key candidate for a mitochondrial mismatch-binding protein. This
protein localizes to mitochondria in human cells, and contributes significantly
to the mismatch-binding and mismatch-repair activity detected in HeLa
mitochondrial extracts, which are significantly decreased when the intracellular 
levels of YB-1 are diminished. Moreover, YB-1 depletion in cells increases
mitochondrial DNA mutagenesis. Our results show that human mitochondria contain a
functional MMR repair pathway in which YB-1 participates, likely in the
mismatch-binding and recognition steps.

PMCID: PMC2693314
PMID: 19272840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 19;28(11):1421-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.485. Epub 2009 Jan
19.

Profiling YB-1 target genes uncovers a new mechanism for MET receptor regulation 
in normal and malignant human mammary cells.

Finkbeiner MR(1), Astanehe A, To K, Fotovati A, Davies AH, Zhao Y, Jiang H,
Stratford AL, Shadeo A, Boccaccio C, Comoglio P, Mertens PR, Eirew P, Raouf A,
Eaves CJ, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Oncogenomic Research, Departments of Pediatrics and
Experimental Medicine, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Basal-like breast cancers (BLBCs) are aggressive tumors with high relapse rates
and poor survival. We recently reported that >70% of primary BLBCs express the
oncogenic transcription/translation factor Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) and
silencing it with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) attenuates the growth of BLBC
cell lines. To understand the basis of these earlier findings, we profiled
YB-1:DNA complexes by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-on-chip. Several tumor
growth-promoting genes such as MET, CD44, CD49f, WNT and NOTCH family members
were identified. In addition, YB-1 and MET are coordinately expressed in BLBC
cell lines, as well as in normal human mammary progenitor cells. MET was
confirmed to be a YB-1 target through traditional ChIP and gel-shift assays. More
specifically, YB-1 binds to -1018 bp on the MET promoter. Silencing YB-1 with
siRNA decreased MET promoter activity, transcripts, as well as protein levels and
signaling. Conversely, expressing wild-type YB-1 or a constitutively active
mutant YB-1 (D102) increased MET expression. Finally, silencing YB-1 or MET
attenuated anchorage-independent growth of BLBC cell lines. Together, these
findings implicate MET as a target of YB-1 that work in concert to promote BLBC
growth.

PMID: 19151767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. EMBO J. 2009 Jan 7;28(1):58-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.259. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

General RNA-binding proteins have a function in poly(A)-binding protein-dependent
translation.

Svitkin YV(1), Evdokimova VM, Brasey A, Pestova TV, Fantus D, Yanagiya A, Imataka
H, Skabkin MA, Ovchinnikov LP, Merrick WC, Sonenberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The interaction between the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) and eukaryotic
translational initiation factor 4G (eIF4G), which brings about circularization of
the mRNA, stimulates translation. General RNA-binding proteins affect
translation, but their role in mRNA circularization has not been studied before. 
Here, we demonstrate that the major mRNA ribonucleoprotein YB-1 has a pivotal
function in the regulation of eIF4F activity by PABP. In cell extracts, the
addition of YB-1 exacerbated the inhibition of 80S ribosome initiation complex
formation by PABP depletion. Rabbit reticulocyte lysate in which PABP weakly
stimulates translation is rendered PABP-dependent after the addition of YB-1. In 
this system, eIF4E binding to the cap structure is inhibited by YB-1 and
stimulated by a nonspecific RNA. Significantly, adding PABP back to the depleted 
lysate stimulated eIF4E binding to the cap structure more potently if this
binding had been downregulated by YB-1. Conversely, adding nonspecific RNA
abrogated PABP stimulation of eIF4E binding. These data strongly suggest that
competition between YB-1 and eIF4G for mRNA binding is required for efficient
stimulation of eIF4F activity by PABP.

PMCID: PMC2633083
PMID: 19078965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. RNA. 2009 Jan;15(1):104-15. doi: 10.1261/rna.1175909. Epub 2008 Nov 24.

Control of c-myc mRNA stability by IGF2BP1-associated cytoplasmic RNPs.

Weidensdorfer D(1), Stöhr N, Baude A, Lederer M, Köhn M, Schierhorn A, Buchmeier 
S, Wahle E, Hüttelmaier S.

Author information: 
(1)NBL3-NWG6 ZAMED, Department of Medicine, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle, Germany.

The RNA-binding protein IGF2BP1 (IGF-II mRNA binding protein 1) stabilizes the
c-myc RNA by associating with the Coding Region instability Determinant (CRD). If
and how other proteins cooperate with IGF2BP1 in promoting stabilization of the
c-myc mRNA via the CRD remained elusive. Here, we identify various RNA-binding
proteins that associate with IGF2BP1 in an RNA-dependent fashion. Four of these
proteins (HNRNPU, SYNCRIP, YBX1, and DHX9) were essential to ensure stabilization
of the c-myc mRNA via the CRD. These factors associate with IGF2BP1 in a
CRD-dependent manner, co-distribute with IGF2BP1 in non-polysomal fractions
comprising c-myc mRNA, and colocalize with IGF2BP1 in the cytoplasm. A selective 
shift of relative c-myc mRNA levels to the polysomal fraction is observed upon
IGF2BP1 knockdown. These findings suggest that IGF2BP1 in complex with at least
four proteins promotes CRD-mediated mRNA stabilization. Complex formation at the 
CRD presumably limits the transfer of c-myc mRNA to the polysomal fraction and
subsequent translation-coupled decay.

PMCID: PMC2612774
PMID: 19029303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mod Pathol. 2009 Feb;22(2):282-90. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.181. Epub 2008 Oct
31.

Y-Box-binding protein-1 is a promising predictive marker of radioresistance and
chemoradioresistance in nasopharyngeal cancer.

Tay WL(1), Yip GW, Tan PH, Matsumoto K, Yeo R, Ng TP, Kumar SD, Tsujimoto M, Bay 
BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

The Y-Box-binding protein-1, a member of the cold-shock domain DNA- and
RNA-binding protein superfamily, is known to mediate chemoresistance. The aim of 
this study was to determine the expression of Y-Box-binding protein-1 in
nasopharyngeal cancer in vitro and in tumor tissue samples as well as analyze the
clinicopathological significance of Y-Box-binding protein-1 expression in
nasopharyngeal cancer, in particular as a predictor of outcome after treatment.
The Y-Box-binding protein-1 expression profile was evaluated at the mRNA and
protein levels in poorly differentiated CNE-2 nasopharyngeal cancer cells by
real-time RT-PCR, western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry. Y-Box-binding
protein-1 expression in 143 nasopharyngeal cancer specimens was examined by
immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinicopathologic parameters.
Y-Box-binding protein-1 mRNA and protein were found to be expressed in CNE-2
nasopharyngeal cancer cells in vitro. Of 143 patient tissue sections, 137 (96%)
were stained positive for the Y-Box-binding protein-1 protein. Y-Box-binding
protein-1 immunostaining was observed to be predominantly cytoplasmic. A higher
recurrence of nasopharyngeal cancer was found in patients whose tissues had
increased Y-Box-binding protein-1 expression (P<0.001). The Cox proportionate
hazard regression model also established that high Y-Box-binding protein-1
immunoreactivity was significantly correlated with increased risk (2.13 times) of
recurrence as compared to low Y-Box-binding protein-1 immunoreactivity (P=0.01). 
Within groups of patients treated by radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy, recurrent
cases had significantly higher Y-Box-binding protein-1 expression than
nonrecurrent cases (P<0.001 and P=0.0035, respectively). These data suggest that 
Y-Box-binding protein-1 expression has clinicopathological significance with
potential as a predictive marker of recurrence in nasopharyngeal cancer patients 
who undergo radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy.

PMID: 18978732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mutat Res. 2008 Dec 15;648(1-2):46-53. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.09.008. Epub
2008 Sep 25.

Complex germline and somatic mutation processes at a haploid human minisatellite 
shown by single-molecule analysis.

Shanks ME(1), May CA, Dubrova YE, Balaresque P, Rosser ZH, Adams SM, Jobling MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Mutation at most human minisatellites is driven by complex interallelic processes
that give rise to a high degree of length polymorphism and internal structural
variation. MSY1, the only highly variable minisatellite on the non-recombining
region of the Y chromosome, is constitutively haploid and therefore precluded
from interallelic interactions, yet maintains high diversity in both length and
structure. To investigate the basis of its mutation processes, an unbiased
structural analysis of >500 single-molecule MSY1 PCR products from matched sperm 
and blood samples from a single donor was undertaken. The overall mutation
frequencies in sperm and blood DNAs were not significantly different, at 2.68%
and 1.88%, respectively. Sperm DNA showed significantly more length mutants than 
blood DNA, with mutants in both tissues involving small-scale (1-3 repeat units
in a 77 repeat progenitor allele) increases or decreases in repeat block lengths,
with no gain or loss bias. Isometric mutations altering structure but not length 
were found in both tissues, and involved either the apparent shift of a boundary 
between repeat unit blocks (a 'boundary switch') or the conversion of a repeat
within a block to a different repeat type ('modular structure' mutant). There was
a significant excess of boundary switch mutants and deficit of modular structure 
mutants in sperm. A comparison of mutant structures with phylogenetically matched
alleles in population samples showed that alleles with structures resembling the 
blood mutants were unlikely to arise in populations. Mutation seems likely to
involve gene conversion via synthesis-dependent strand annealing, and the
blood-sperm differences may reflect more relaxed constraint on sister chromatid
alignment in blood.

PMCID: PMC2599865
PMID: 18929582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(5):R86. doi: 10.1186/bcr2156. Epub 2008 Oct 16.

Redefining prognostic factors for breast cancer: YB-1 is a stronger predictor of 
relapse and disease-specific survival than estrogen receptor or HER-2 across all 
tumor subtypes.

Habibi G(1), Leung S, Law JH, Gelmon K, Masoudi H, Turbin D, Pollak M, Nielsen
TO, Huntsman D, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Oncogenomic Research, Departments of Pediatrics and
Experimental Medicine, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Gene expression analysis is used to subtype breast cancers such
that the most aggressive tumors are identified, but translating this into
clinical practice can be cumbersome. Our goal is to develop a universal biomarker
that distinguishes patients at high risk across all breast cancer subtypes. We
previously reported that Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1), a
transcription/translation factor, was a marker of poor prognosis in a cohort of
490 patients with breast cancer, but the study was not large enough to subtype
the cancers. We therefore investigated whether YB-1 identifies patients at risk
for either reduced relapse free survival or decreased r breast cancer specific
survival (BCSS) across all tumor subtypes by evaluating 4,049 cases.
METHODS: Tumor tissue microarrays, representing 4,049 cases of invasive breast
cancers with 20 years of follow up, were subtyped by the expression profiles of
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or HER-2. We then addressed whether
YB-1 expression identified patients at higher risk for relapse and/or lower BCSS.
RESULTS: We found YB-1 to be a highly predictive biomarker of relapse (P < 2.5 x 
10(-20)) and poor survival (P < 7.3 x 10(-26)) in the entire cohort and across
all breast cancer subtypes. Patients with node-positive or node-negative cancer
were more likely to die from the disease if YB-1 was expressed. This was further 
substantiated using a Cox regression model, which revealed that it was
significantly associated with relapse and poor survival in a subtype independent 
manner (relapse patients, hazard ratio = 1.28, P < 8 x 10(-3); all patients,
hazard ratio = 1.45, P < 6.7 x 10(-7)). Moreover, YB-1 was superior to estrogen
receptor and HER-2 as a prognostic marker for relapse and survival. For a subset 
of patients who were originally considered low risk and were therefore not given 
chemotherapy, YB-1 was indicative of poor survival (P < 7.1 x 10 (-17)).
Likewise, YB-1 was predictive of decreased BCSS in tamoxifen-treated patients (P 
= 0.001); in this setting a Cox regression model once again demonstrated it to be
an independent biomarker indicating poor survival (hazard ratio = 1.70, P =
0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of YB-1 universally identifies patients at high risk
across all breast cancer subtypes and in situations where more aggressive
treatment may be needed. We therefore propose that YB-1 may re-define high-risk
breast cancer and thereby create opportunities for individualized therapy.

PMCID: PMC2614522
PMID: 18925950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Mol Biol. 2008 Dec 26;384(4):908-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.09.060. Epub 2008 
Oct 2.

RBBP6 interacts with multifunctional protein YB-1 through its RING finger domain,
leading to ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation of YB-1.

Chibi M(1), Meyer M, Skepu A, G Rees DJ, Moolman-Smook JC, Pugh DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Department, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, South
Africa.

RBBP6 (retinoblastoma binding protein 6) is a 250-kDa multifunctional protein
that interacts with both p53 and pRb and has been implicated in mRNA processing. 
It has also been identified as a putative E3 ubiquitin ligase due to the presence
of a RING finger domain, although no substrate has been identified up to now.
Using the RING finger domain as bait in a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified 
YB-1 (Y-box binding protein 1) as a binding partner of RBBP6, localising the
interaction to the last 62 residues of YB-1. We showed, furthermore, that both
full-length RBBP6 and the isolated RING finger domain were able to ubiquitinate
YB-1, resulting in its degradation in the proteosome. As a result, RBBP6 was able
to suppress the levels of YB-1 in vivo and to reduce its transactivational
ability. In the light of the important role that YB-1 appears to play in
tumourigenesis, our results suggest that RBBP6 may be a relevant target for
therapeutic drugs aimed at modifying the activity of YB-1.

PMID: 18851979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. BMC Biochem. 2008 Sep 15;9:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-9-23.

YB-1 promotes microtubule assembly in vitro through interaction with tubulin and 
microtubules.

Chernov KG(1), Mechulam A, Popova NV, Pastre D, Nadezhdina ES, Skabkina OV,
Shanina NA, Vasiliev VD, Tarrade A, Melki J, Joshi V, Baconnais S, Toma F,
Ovchinnikov LP, Curmi PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Structure-Activité des Biomolécules Normales et Pathologiques,
INSERM/UEVE U829 Evry, 91025 France. pcurmi@univ-evry.fr

BACKGROUND: YB-1 is a major regulator of gene expression in eukaryotic cells. In 
addition to its role in transcription, YB-1 plays a key role in translation and
stabilization of mRNAs.
RESULTS: We show here that YB-1 interacts with tubulin and microtubules and
stimulates microtubule assembly in vitro. High resolution imaging via electron
and atomic force microscopy revealed that microtubules assembled in the presence 
of YB-1 exhibited a normal single wall ultrastructure and indicated that YB-1
most probably coats the outer microtubule wall. Furthermore, we found that YB-1
also promotes the assembly of MAPs-tubulin and subtilisin-treated tubulin.
Finally, we demonstrated that tubulin interferes with RNA:YB-1 complexes.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that YB-1 may regulate microtubule assembly in 
vivo and that its interaction with tubulin may contribute to the control of mRNA 
translation.

PMCID: PMC2557009
PMID: 18793384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Pathologe. 2008 Nov;29 Suppl 2:187-90. doi: 10.1007/s00292-008-1030-2.

[YB-1 as a potential target in cancer therapy].

[Article in German]

Lage H(1), Surowiak P, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1,
10117 Berlin. hermann.lage@charite.de

The 42-kDa multifunctional cellular protein Y-box protein 1 (YB-1) is expressed
in various cancers. It is localized in the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus.
In particular, YB-1 is localized in the nuclear compartment following cellular
stress, such as radiation, drug treatment, hyperthermia, or viral infection.
Within the nucleus, YB-1 can act as a transcription factor, and it is involved in
the regulation of important cancer-associated genes. For example, YB-1 triggers
the expression of Her-2 and estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) in breast cancer.
Thus, nuclear YB-1 appears to be a potential target for the inhibition of Her-2- 
and ERalpha-dependent proliferation signals, particularly with regard to
resistance to Her-2-targeting drugs such as trastuzumab. In some cancers, YB-1
may be involved in regulating MDR1/P-glycoprotein, mediating classical multidrug 
resistance (MDR). Furthermore, YB-1 is involved in the replication of adenovirus 
type 5, a commonly used vector in gene therapy. Thus, YB-1 can trigger an
"oncolytic" effect in YB-1 nuclear positive cancer cells treated with
adenoviruses. Besides its impact as a prognostic factor, in the future the
diagnostics of cellular YB-1 status may provide the basis for a virotherapy or a 
gene therapy incorporating adenoviruses.

PMID: 18773210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Virol. 2008 Oct;82(20):10088-101. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01011-08. Epub 2008 Aug 6.

Different types of nsP3-containing protein complexes in Sindbis virus-infected
cells.

Gorchakov R(1), Garmashova N, Frolova E, Frolov I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Alphaviruses represent a serious public health threat and cause a wide variety of
diseases, ranging from severe encephalitis, which can result in death or
neurological sequelae, to mild infection, characterized by fever, skin rashes,
and arthritis. In the infected cells, alphaviruses express only four
nonstructural proteins, which function in the synthesis of virus-specific RNAs
and in modification of the intracellular environment. The results of our study
suggest that Sindbis virus (SINV) infection in BHK-21 cells leads to the
formation of at least two types of nsP3-containing complexes, one of which was
found in association with the plasma membrane and endosome-like vesicles, while
the second was coisolated with cell nuclei. The latter complexes could be
solubilized only with the cytoskeleton-destabilizing detergent. Besides viral
nsPs, in the mammalian cells, both complexes contained G3BP1 and G3BP2 (which
were found in different ratios), YBX1, and HSC70. Rasputin, an insect
cell-specific homolog of G3BP1, was found in the nsP3-containing complexes
isolated from mosquito cells, which was suggestive of a high conservation of the 
complexes in the cells of both vertebrate and invertebrate origin. The endosome- 
and plasma membrane-associated complexes contained a high concentration of
double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs), which is indicative of their function in viral-RNA
synthesis. The dsRNA synthesis is likely to efficiently proceed on the plasma
membrane, and at least some of the protein-RNA complexes would then be
transported into the cytosol in association with the endosome-like vesicular
organelles. These findings provide new insight into the mechanism of SINV
replication and virus-host cell interactions.

PMCID: PMC2566286
PMID: 18684830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008;40(11):2492-507. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.04.011.
Epub 2008 May 15.

The strand separation and nuclease activities associated with YB-1 are
dispensable for cisplatin resistance but overexpression of YB-1 in MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cells generates several chemoresistance signatures.

Guay D(1), Evoy AA, Paquet E, Garand C, Bachvarova M, Bachvarov D, Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, 9 McMahon Street, Québec G1R 2J6, Canada.

YB-1 is a protein involved in DNA repair, transcription, splicing, translation,
and confers cisplatin resistance in several cancers. However, it is unknown which
YB-1 activity is required for this resistance. To identify the mechanism(s) by
which nuclear YB-1 confers cisplatin resistance, we generated several YB-1
mutants and tested their impact on resistance in the mammary tumor cell lines
MCF7 and MDA-MB-231. Transfection of wild type YB-1 bestowed cisplatin resistance
in such cells but a mutant YB-1 with a point mutation at position 175
(YB-1(E175A)) did not. A truncated YB-1(1-205) increased cisplatin resistance
above the levels conferred by wild type YB-1. The truncated YB-1(1-205) has
intact nuclease activities but could not separate a DNA duplex containing a Y-box
sequence (activities associated with DNA repair). Moreover, this truncated
YB-1(1-205) did not alter splicing of the adenovirus E1A pre-mRNA minigene as it 
had low binding affinity for several splicing factors. In contrast, the mutant
YB-1(E175A) protein behaved like wild type YB-1 regarding all these activities
but yet did not confer cisplatin resistance. Finally, transfection of mutant
YB-1(E175A) had low impact on overall transcription. The wild type and truncated 
YB-1(1-205) induced important but different alterations in gene expression as
revealed by microarray analyses. Our results indicate that the splicing and the
nuclease activities associated with YB-1 have minor impact on cisplatin
resistance. In contrast, the global expression profiles displayed by both wild
type and truncated YB-1(1-205) revealed several chemoresistance signatures which 
differed depending on the genetic status of the breast cancer cell line used.

PMID: 18571458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 25;27(43):5729-40. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.180. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Constitutively active Rheb induces oncogenic transformation.

Jiang H(1), Vogt PK.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. hjiang@scripps.edu

Rheb (Ras-homolog enriched in brain) is a component of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) target of rapamycin (TOR) signaling pathway, functioning as a
positive regulator of TOR. Constitutively active mutants of Rheb induce oncogenic
transformation in cell culture. The transformed cells are larger and contain more
protein than their normal counterparts. They show constitutive phosphorylation of
the ribosomal protein S6 kinase and the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding
protein 1, two downstream targets of TOR. The TOR-specific inhibitor rapamycin
strongly interferes with transformation induced by constitutively active Rheb,
suggesting that TOR activity is essential for the oncogenic effects of mutant
Rheb. Rheb-induced transformation is also dependent on a C-terminal farnesylation
signal that mediates localization to a cellular membrane. An engineered
N-terminal myristylation signal can substitute for the farnesylation.
Immunofluorescence localizes wild-type and mutant Rheb to vesicular structures in
the cytoplasm, overlapping with the endoplasmic reticulum.

PMCID: PMC2562864
PMID: 18521078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 18;27(42):5543-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.176. Epub 2008 May
26.

Twist and p53 reciprocally regulate target genes via direct interaction.

Shiota M(1), Izumi H, Onitsuka T, Miyamoto N, Kashiwagi E, Kidani A, Hirano G,
Takahashi M, Naito S, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Twist is basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that binds to E-boxes in
gene promoters. Twist possesses an oncogenic function by interfering with the
tumor suppressor function of p53. Using a membrane pull-down assay, we found that
Twist directly interacts with p53 and that this interaction underlies the
inhibitory effects on p53 target gene expression. Twist interacted with the
DNA-binding domain of p53 and suppressed the DNA-binding activity of p53.
Transcriptional activation of the p21 promoter by p53 was significantly repressed
by the expression of Twist. On the other hand, p53 interacted with the N-terminal
domain of Twist and repressed Twist-dependent YB-1 promoter activity.
Importantly, we found that p53-dependent growth suppression was canceled by the
expression of either Twist or YB-1. Thus, our data suggest that Twist inhibits
p53 function via a direct interaction with p53.

PMID: 18504427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jun 25;582(15):2231-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.05.018. Epub
2008 May 27.

The pathological splicing mutation c.6792C>G in NF1 exon 37 causes a change of
tenancy between antagonistic splicing factors.

Skoko N(1), Baralle M, Buratti E, Baralle FE.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB),
Padriciano 99, Trieste, Italy.

We have previously identified an ESE in NF1 exon 37 whose disruption by the
pathological mutation c.6792C>G caused aberrant splicing. We now investigate the 
RNA-protein complexes affected by the c.6792C>G mutation observing that this
concurrently decreases the affinity for the positive splicing factor YB-1 and
increases the affinity for the negative splicing factors, hnRNPA1, hnRNPA2 and a 
new player in these type of complexes, DAZAP1. Our findings highlight the
complexity of the interplay between positive and negative factors in the exon
inclusion/skipping outcome. Furthermore, our observations stress the role of a
wide genomic context in NF1 exon 37 definition.

PMID: 18503770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Curr Med Chem. 2008;15(6):528-37.

Preclinical and clinical studies of novel breast cancer drugs targeting molecules
involved in protein kinase C signaling, the putative metastasis-suppressor gene
Cap43 and the Y-box binding protein-1.

Fujii T(1), Yokoyama G, Takahashi H, Toh U, Kage M, Ono M, Shirouzu K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)National Hospital Organization Kyushu Medical Cancer, Department of Surgery,
Clinical Research Institute, Fukuoka, Japan. tfujii@qmed.hosp.go.jp

Breast cancer is a common cause of tumors in women. The development of effective 
adjuvant therapies using drugs such as anthracyclines, taxanes, and aromatase
inhibitors has improved the survival of breast cancer patients. Molecular cancer 
therapeutics are also attracting attention, and targeted molecular therapies,
such as trastuzumab, have already contributed to effective new treatments for
breast cancer. Other candidate targeted molecular therapies for breast cancer,
including erlotinib, gefitinib, lapatinib, bevacizumab, and celecoxib, are
currently undergoing clinical evaluation, and promising results are expected. The
current review provides an up-to-date summary of the preclinical and clinical
development of these drugs for breast cancer. In particular, we focus on
therapies targeting protein kinase C (PKC) signaling, the putative
metastasis-suppressor gene Cap43/N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1
(NDRG1)/differentiation-related gene-1 (Drg-1), and the Y-box binding protein-1
(YB-1). The PKC signaling pathway is widely considered to be a promising target
for the development of novel therapeutics. Cap43 expression is significantly
modulated by estrogen and/or anti-estrogens in breast cancer cells that are
positive for estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha). Cap43 is therefore of particular
interest as a molecular indicator of the therapeutic efficacy of anti-estrogenic 
agents in breast cancer. The nuclear expression of YB-1 plays an essential role
in the acquisition of malignant characteristics by breast cancer cells, through
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-Akt-dependent pathways. Basic research 
investigating the key selective molecular changes that sustain breast cancer
growth and progression, as demonstrated for PKC, Cap43, and YB-1, is allowing the
development of specific targeted molecular diagnostics and therapeutics.

PMID: 18336267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Jul;86(9):1994-2002. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21655.

MBNL1 associates with YB-1 in cytoplasmic stress granules.

Onishi H(1), Kino Y, Morita T, Futai E, Sasagawa N, Ishiura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The muscleblind-like (MBNL) protein family is thought to be involved in the
molecular mechanism of myotonic dystrophy (DM). Although it has been shown to
have splicing activity, a broader function in cellular RNA metabolism has been
implicated. In this study, we attempted to find the binding proteins of MBNL1 in 
order to elucidate its physiological function. First, we performed a GST
pull-down assay using GST-MBNL1-6xHis as bait. Several proteins were identified, 
including YB-1, a multifunctional DNA/RNA-binding protein, and DDX1, a DEAD box
RNA helicase. MBNL1 formed an RNP complex with YB-1 and DDX1 in binding assays.
YB-1 also showed a weak but significant effect on alpha-actinin splice site
selection. Interestingly, in response to stress, MBNL1 moved to cytoplasmic
stress granules, where it colocalized with YB-1, which was previously reported to
be a component of stress granules. We found that DDX1 also colocalized with MBNL1
at stress granules. These results provide new insight into the dynamics of MBNL1 
in response to stress, and they suggest a role for MBNL1 in mRNA metabolism in
the cytoplasm.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18335541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9113-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708205200. Epub 2008
Feb 7.

Isolation and characterization of a novel H1.2 complex that acts as a repressor
of p53-mediated transcription.

Kim K(1), Choi J, Heo K, Kim H, Levens D, Kohno K, Johnson EM, Brock HW, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Linker histone H1 has been generally viewed as a global repressor of
transcription by preventing the access of transcription factors to sites in
chromatin. However, recent studies suggest that H1 can interact with other
regulatory factors for its action as a negative modulator of specific genes. To
investigate these aspects, we established a human cell line expressing H1.2, one 
of the H1 subtypes, for the purification of H1-interacting proteins. Our results 
showed that H1.2 can stably associate with sets of cofactors and ribosomal
proteins that can significantly repress p53-dependent, p300-mediated chromatin
transcription. This repressive action of H1.2 complex involves direct interaction
of H1.2 with p53, which in turn blocks p300-mediated acetylation of chromatin.
YB1 and PURalpha, two factors present in the H1.2 complex, together with H1.2 can
closely recapitulate the repressive action of the entire H1.2 complex in
transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and RNA interference analyses
further confirmed that the recruitment of YB1, PURalpha, and H1.2 to the p53
target gene Bax is required for repression of p53-induced transcription.
Therefore, these results reveal a previously unrecognized function of H1 as a
transcriptional repressor as well as the underlying mechanism involving specific 
sets of factors in this repression process.

PMCID: PMC2431041
PMID: 18258596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Breast Cancer. 2008;15(1):73-8. doi: 10.1007/s12282-007-0015-y.

Preclinical studies of molecular-targeting diagnostic and therapeutic strategies 
against breast cancer.

Fujii T(1), Yokoyama G, Takahashi H, Namoto R, Nakagawa S, Toh U, Kage M,
Shirouzu K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kurume University, Asahimachi 67, Fukuoka 830-0011,
Japan. tfujii@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

We have investigated protein kinase C (PKC) signaling, a putative
differentiation-related and metastasis suppressor gene Cap43/NDRG1/Drg-1, and
Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) to identify new molecular targeting for breast
cancer. PKC is a family of serine/threonine kinases that is involved in the
regulation of cell growth. We have demonstrated that PKC caused G(1) arrest in a 
breast cancer cell line through a mechanism involving a PKC-ERK MAPK-JNK-Rb
protein signaling pathway. We have also characterized a novel mechanism through
which all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and antineoplaston, anticancer drug, caused 
cell growth inhibition in breast cancer cells through effects on intracellular
pathways. ATRA decreased the expression of PKCalpha, as well as reduced ERK MAPK 
phosphorylation, and consequently caused G(1) arrest. Antineoplaston caused the
down-regulation of PKCalpha protein expression, resulting in inhibition of ERK
MAPK phosphorylation, with resultant inhibition of Rb phosphorylation leading to 
G(1) arrest. PKC signaling represents a promising target for development of novel
therapeutic agents. Cap43 is known as N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (NDRG1). 
Treatment with estradiol (E(2)) significantly decreased the expression of Cap43
in ER-alpha-positive breast cancer cell lines. Co-administration of tamoxifen
abrogated the E(2)-induced downregulation of Cap43 in ER-alpha-positive cell
lines. These results suggested that Cap43 may hold the potential of being a
molecular marker to determine the therapeutic efficacy of anti-estrogenic
anticancer agents in breast cancer. YB-1 is a member of the cold shock domain
protein family. The expression of nuclear YB-1 was correlated with HER2
positively in clinical specimens of human breast cancer. Immunostaining studies
showed that nuclear YB-1 expression was an independent prognostic factor of
overall survival. Expression of nuclear YB-1 played an essential role in
acquirement of malignant characteristics through HER2-dependent pathways in
breast cancer patients. PKC, Cap43 and YB-1 may be useful in new
molecular-targeting diagnosis and therapeutics in breast cancer.

PMID: 18224398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 2008 Apr 1;111(7):3714-22. Epub 2007 Nov 15.

The Y-box binding protein YB-1 is associated with progressive disease and
mediates survival and drug resistance in multiple myeloma.

Chatterjee M(1), Rancso C, Stühmer T, Eckstein N, Andrulis M, Gerecke C, Lorentz 
H, Royer HD, Bargou RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Würzburg, Germany. 
chatterjee_m@medizin.uni-wuerzburg.de

Current knowledge about molecular mechanisms underlying disease progression and
drug resistance in multiple myeloma (MM) is still limited. Here, we analyzed the 
potential pathogenetic role of the Y-box binding protein YB-1 in MM. YB-1 is a
member of the cold-shock domain protein superfamily and involved in various
cellular functions such as proliferation. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed
that neither normal bone marrow (BM) plasma cells (PCs), premalignant PCs of
patients with monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS), nor MM cells 
with a mature morphology showed expression of YB-1 in situ. In contrast, YB-1 was
strongly expressed in situ in normal PC precursor blasts as well as in a MM
subset and in vitro in all of the evaluated MM cell lines. The YB-1-expressing MM
cells were characterized by an immature morphology and a highly proliferative
phenotype as defined by Ki 67 expression. We observed that siRNA-mediated
knockdown of YB-1 decreased proliferation and induced apoptosis in MM cells even 
in the presence of BM stromal cells. Furthermore, we found that overexpression of
YB-1 mediated resistance toward doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in MM cells. Thus, 
YB-1 contributes to disease progression, survival, and drug resistance in MM and 
might therefore provide an attractive therapeutic target.

PMID: 18006704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Radiother Oncol. 2008 Mar;86(3):419-27. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Impact of radiation therapy on the oncolytic adenovirus dl520: implications on
the treatment of glioblastoma.

Bieler A(1), Mantwill K, Holzmüller R, Jürchott K, Kaszubiak A, Stärk S, Glockzin
G, Lage H, Grosu AL, Gansbacher B, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Oncology, Technical University of Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Viral oncolytic therapy is emerging as a new form of
anticancer therapy and has shown promising preclinical results, especially in
combination with radio- and chemotherapy. We recently reported that nuclear
localization of the human transcription factor YB-1 in multidrug-resistant cells 
facilitates E1-independent adenoviral replication. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the combined treatment of the conditionally-replicating adenovirus dl520
and radiotherapy in glioma cell lines in vitro and in human tumor xenografts.
Furthermore, the dependency of YB-1 on dl520 replication was verified by shRNA
directed down regulation of YB-1.
METHODS AND MATERIAL: Localization of YB-1 was determined by immunostaining.
Glioma cell lines LN-18, U373 and U87 were infected with dl520. Induction of
cytopathic effect (CPE), viral replication, viral yield and viral release were
determined after viral infection, radiation therapy and the combination of both
treatment modalities. The capacity of treatments alone or combined to induce
tumor growth inhibition of subcutaneous U373 tumors was tested also in nude mice.
RESULTS: Quantitative real-time PCR demonstrated that the shRNA-mediated down
regulation of YB-1 is leading to a dramatic decrease in adenoviral replication of
dl520. Immunostaining analysis showed that the YB-1 protein was predominantly
located in the cytoplasm in the perinuclear space and less abundant in the
nucleus. After irradiation we found an increase of nuclear YB-1. The addition of 
radiotherapy increased the oncolytic effect of dl520 with enhanced viral
replication, viral yield and viral release. The oncolytic activity of dl520 plus 
radiation inhibited the growth of subcutaneous U373 tumors in a xenograft mouse
model.
CONCLUSIONS: Radiation mediated increase of nuclear YB-1 in glioma cells enhanced
the oncolytic potential of adenovirus dl520.

PMID: 17967494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):525-31. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

YB-1 binds to the MMP-13 promoter sequence and represses MMP-13 transactivation
via the AP-1 site.

Samuel S(1), Beifuss KK, Bernstein LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University System
Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are key enzymes that implement degradation of
the extracellular matrix during cellular invasion in development, tissue
remodeling, and pathogenic disease states. MMP-13 has pivotal roles in the
pathogenesis of invasive cancers and arthritis. Here we report the identification
of Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) as a new repressor of MMP-13 transactivation.
YB-1 binds in vitro in DNA affinity chromatography to the activator protein-1
(AP-1) DNA sequence within the MMP-13 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays reveal that YB-1 binds in living cells to the MMP-13 gene promoter to a
region of the MMP-13 promoter containing the AP-1 site. YB-1 represses tumor
promoter-induced MMP-13 promoter transactivation at the AP-1 site. This is the
first report demonstrating YB-1 binding in vitro and in living cells to a
mammalian AP-1 target gene, and the first report of YB-1 regulation of the MMP-13
promoter.

PMCID: PMC2043501
PMID: 17822788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 28;282(39):28474-84. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Stimulation of NEIL2-mediated oxidized base excision repair via YB-1 interaction 
during oxidative stress.

Das S(1), Chattopadhyay R, Bhakat KK, Boldogh I, Kohno K, Prasad R, Wilson SH,
Hazra TK.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine and Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555,
USA.

The recently characterized enzyme NEIL2 (Nei-like-2), one of the four oxidized
base-specific DNA glycosylases (OGG1, NTH1, NEIL1, and NEIL2) in mammalian cells,
has poor base excision activity from duplex DNA. To test the possibility that one
or more proteins modulate its activity in vivo, we performed mass spectrometric
analysis of the NEIL2 immunocomplex and identified Y box-binding (YB-1) protein
as a stably interacting partner of NEIL2. We show here that YB-1 not only
interacts physically with NEIL2, but it also cooperates functionally by
stimulating its base excision activity by 7-fold. Moreover, YB-1 interacts with
the other NEIL2-associated BER proteins, namely, DNA ligase III alpha and DNA
polymerase beta and thus could form a large multiprotein complex. YB-1, normally 
present in the cytoplasm, translocates to the nucleus during UVA-induced
oxidative stress, concomitant with its increased association with and activation 
of NEIL2. NEIL2-initiated base excision activity is significantly reduced in
YB-1-depleted cells. YB-1 thus appears to have a novel regulatory role in
NEIL2-mediated repair under oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC2679419
PMID: 17686777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Jul;14(7):630-8. Epub 2007 Jun 17.

Alternative splicing regulation by interaction of phosphatase PP2Cgamma with
nucleic acid-binding protein YB-1.

Allemand E(1), Hastings ML, Murray MV, Myers MP, Krainer AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
11724, USA.

Kinases and phosphatases participate in precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA)
splicing regulation, but their precise roles and the identities of their
cofactors and substrates remain poorly understood. The human Ser/Thr phosphatase 
PP2Cgamma promotes spliceosome assembly. We show that PP2Cgamma's distinctive
acidic domain is essential for its activity in splicing and interacts with YB-1, 
a spliceosome-associated factor. Moreover, PP2Cgamma is a phosphoprotein in vivo,
and its acidic domain is phosphorylated under splicing conditions in vitro.
PP2Cgamma phosphorylation enhances its interaction with YB-1 and is reversed by
the phosphatase in cis. PP2Cgamma knockdown leaves constitutive splicing
unaffected but inhibits cell proliferation and affects alternative splicing of
CD44, a YB-1 target. This effect on splicing regulation is mediated by
PP2Cgamma's acidic domain, which is essential to promote inclusion of CD44 exons 
v4 and v5 in vivo. We propose that PP2Cgamma modulates alternative splicing of
specific pre-mRNAs coregulated by YB-1.

PMID: 17572683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 May 25;357(1):295-301. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Regulation of MDR1 gene expression in multidrug-resistant cancer cells is
independent from YB-1.

Kaszubiak A(1), Kupstat A, Müller U, Hausmann R, Holm PS, Lage H.

Author information: 
(1)Charité Campus Mitte, Institute of Pathology, Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, 
Germany.

The MDR1 gene encoded transmembrane ABC-transporter MDR1/P-glycoprotein can
mediate the phenotype of multidrug resistance (MDR), a major obstacle in the
clinical management of cancer patients. It was hypothesized that YB-1 is a
fundamental regulatory factor of the MDR1 gene in tumor cells and can therewith
enhance drug resistance. To analyze the potential impact of YB-1 in MDR cancer
cells, two specific anti-YB-1 small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) were designed for
transient triggering the gene-silencing RNA interference (RNAi) pathway in the
MDR cell lines EPG85-257RDB and EPP85-181RDB as well as in their drug-sensitive
counterparts EPG85-257P and EPP85-181P. Since both siRNAs showed biological
activity, for stable inhibition of YB-1 corresponding tetracycline-inducible
short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-encoding expression vectors were designed. By treatment
of the cancer cells with these constructs, the expression of the targeted YB-1
encoding mRNA and protein was completely inhibited following tetracycline
exposure. These gene-silencing effects were not accompanied by modulation of the 
MDR1 expression or by reversal of the drug-resistant phenotype. In conclusion,
the data demonstrate the utility of the analyzed RNAs as powerful laboratory
tools and indicate that YB-1 is not involved in the regulation of the MDR1 gene
or the development of the drug-resistant phenotype in MDR cancer cells.

PMID: 17418094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 1;25(10):1196-208.

Molecular profiling identifies prognostic subgroups of pediatric glioblastoma and
shows increased YB-1 expression in tumors.

Faury D(1), Nantel A, Dunn SE, Guiot MC, Haque T, Hauser P, Garami M, Bognár L,
Hanzély Z, Liberski PP, Lopez-Aguilar E, Valera ET, Tone LG, Carret AS, Del
Maestro RF, Gleave M, Montes JL, Pietsch T, Albrecht S, Jabado N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hemato-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Montréal Children's
Hospital Research Institute, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Pediatric glioblastoma (pGBM) is a rare, but devastating brain tumor. In
contrast to GBM in adults (aGBM), little is known about the mechanisms underlying
its development. Our aim is to gain insight into the molecular pathways of pGBM.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-two pGBM and seven aGBM samples were investigated
using biochemical and transcriptional profiling. Ras and Akt pathway activation
was assessed through the phosphorylation of downstream effectors, and gene
expression profiles were generated using the University Health Network Human 19K 
cDNA arrays. Results were validated using real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry and compared with existing data sets on aGBM.
RESULTS: There are at least two subsets of pGBM. One subset, associated with Ras 
and Akt pathway activation, has very poor prognosis and exhibits increased
expression of genes related to proliferation and to a neural stem-cell phenotype,
similar to findings in aggressive aGBM. This subset was still molecularly
distinguishable from aGBM after unsupervised and supervised analysis of
expression profiles. A second subset, with better prognosis, is not associated
with activation of Akt and Ras pathways, may originate from astroglial
progenitors, and does not express gene signatures and markers shown to be
associated with long-term survival in aGBM. Both subsets of pGBM show
overexpression of Y-box-protein-1 that may help drive oncogenesis in this tumor.
CONCLUSION: Our work, the first study of gene expression profiles in pGBM,
provides valuable insight into active pathways and targets in a cancer with
minimal survival, and suggests that these tumors cannot be understood exclusively
through studies of aGBM.

PMID: 17401009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. RNA. 2007 May;13(5):704-12. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Probing the mRNA processing body using protein macroarrays and
"autoantigenomics".

Yang WH(1), Bloch DB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases of the General Medical
Services, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Messenger RNA processing bodies (P-bodies) are cellular structures that have a
direct role in mRNA degradation. P-bodies have also been implicated in
RNAi-mediated post-transcriptional gene silencing. Despite the important roles of
P-bodies in cellular biology, the constituents of P-bodies and their organization
have been only partially defined. Approximately 5% of patients with the
autoimmune disease primary biliary cirrhosis have antibodies directed against
these structures. Recent advances in protein macroarray technology permit the
simultaneous screening of thousands of proteins for reactivity with
autoantibodies. We used serum from patients with anti-P-body autoantibodies to
screen a protein macroarray and identified 67 potential autoantigens.
Immunoreactive proteins included four known P-body components and three
additional primary biliary cirrhosis autoantigens. Y-box protein 1 (YB-1), a
50-kDa RNA-binding protein that was not previously known to be a P-body
component, was recognized by serum from four of seven patients. YB-1 colocalized 
with P-body components DCP1a and Ge-1. In cells subjected to arsenite-induced
oxidative stress, YB-1 localized to TIA-containing stress granules. Both YB-1 and
the previously identified P-body component RAP55 translocated from P-bodies to
stress granules during oxidative stress. During recovery, however, the
reappearance of YB-1 in P-bodies was delayed compared with that of RAP55,
suggesting that YB-1 and RAP55 may have different functions. This study
demonstrates that the combination of human autoantibodies and protein macroarray 
technology provides a novel method for identifying and characterizing components 
of mRNA P-bodies.

PMCID: PMC1852818
PMID: 17339575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 Jan;38(1):132-4, 149.

[Serological screening of autoantigens associated with vasculitis in systemic
lupus erythematosus].

[Article in Chinese]

Qin W(1), Feng SG, Deng HX, Fan JM, Zhou Q, Wei YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen autoantigens associated with vasculitis in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) by serological analysis of recombinant cDNA expression
library (SEREX).
METHODS: A cDNA expression library derived from human microvascular endothelial
cells (HMVEC) was screened with pooled sera from patients with SLE. Pooled sera
were preadsorbed to reduce the background sera activity. The obtained preadsorbed
pooled sera of patients were used for immunoscreening. Immunoscreening procedure 
was done according to the instruction manual provided by the manufacturer
(Stratagene).
RESULTS: Eleven distinct positive clones were identified. Bioinformatic analysis 
revealed these 11 positive clones encoding three different proteins: SSA, SSB and
YB-1. As for YB-1, there are hitherto no reports unveiling its association with
vasculitis in SLE.
CONCLUSION: The association of YB-1 with vasculitis in SLE was found for the
first time in this study. SEREX has offered a new strategy to explore the
autoantigens related to SLE. By SEREX, we may find out the autoantigen which is
helpful to the diagnosis and treatment of SLE, and to the prognostication
concerned.

PMID: 17294748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Histol Histopathol. 2007 Apr;22(4):465-8.

Relevance of multidrug resistance 1 and P-glycoprotein to drug resistance in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Tsujimura S(1), Saito K, Nakayamada S, Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational & Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Although corticosteroids and immunosuppressants are widely used for the
treatments of various autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), we often experience patients with SLE who are resistant to these
treatments. P-glycoprotein (P-gp) of membrane transporters, a product of the
multiple drug resistance (MDR)-1 gene, is known to play a pivotal role in the
acquisition of drug resistance to chemotherapies in malignancy. However, the
relevance of MDR-1 and P-gp to resting and activated lymphocyte, major targets of
the treatments in autoimmune diseases, remains unclear. We found that peripheral 
lymphocytes in patients with SLE express P-gp on the surface and its expression
is highly correlated with disease activity. P-gp on lymphocytes is induced by not
only genotoxic stresses but also activation stimuli such as cytokines, resulting 
in active efflux of corticosteroids from cytoplasm of lymphocytes, resulting in
drug-resistance and high disease activity. However, the addition of P-gp
antagonists such as ciclosporin A and inhibitors of P-gp synthesis successfully
reduce efflux of corticosteroids from lymphocytes in vitro and these results
imply that P-gp antagonists and P-gp synthesis inhibitors could work in order to 
overcome drug-resistance in vivo. Therefore, we propose that the measurement of
P-gp on lymphocytes is a useful marker to indicate drug resistance and
requirement of antagonists and/or intensive treatments to overcome drug
resistance in active SLE patients.

PMID: 17290357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2007 Apr 26;26(19):2736-46. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Akt-dependent nuclear localization of Y-box-binding protein 1 in acquisition of
malignant characteristics by human ovarian cancer cells.

Basaki Y(1), Hosoi F, Oda Y, Fotovati A, Maruyama Y, Oie S, Ono M, Izumi H, Kohno
K, Sakai K, Shimoyama T, Nishio K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Station-II for Collaborative Research, Department of Anatomic Pathology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
yubasaki@yahoo.co.jp

Y-box-binding protein 1 (YB-1), which is a member of the DNA-binding protein
family containing a cold-shock domain, has pleiotropic functions in response to
various environmental stimuli. As we previously showed that YB-1 is a global
marker of multidrug resistance in ovarian cancer and other tumor types. To
identify YB-1-regulated genes in ovarian cancers, we investigated the expression 
profile of YB-1 small-interfering RNA (siRNA)-transfected ovarian cancer cells
using a high-density oligonucleotide array. YB-1 knockdown by siRNA upregulated
344 genes, including MDR1, thymidylate synthetase, S100 calcium binding protein
and cyclin B, and downregulated 534 genes, including CXCR4, N-myc downstream
regulated gene 1, E-cadherin and phospholipase C. Exogenous serum addition
stimulated YB-1 translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and treatment
with Akt inhibitors as well as Akt siRNA and integrin-linked kinase (ILK) siRNA
specifically blocked YB-1 nuclear localization. Inhibition of Akt activation
downregulated CXCR4 and upregulated MDR1 (ABCB1) gene expression. Administration 
of Akt inhibitor resulted in decrease in nuclear YB-1-positive cancer cells in a 
xenograft animal model. Akt activation thus regulates the nuclear translocation
of YB-1, affecting the expression of drug-resistance genes and other genes
associated with the malignant characteristics in ovarian cancer cells. Therefore,
the Akt pathway could be a novel target of disrupting the nuclear translocation
of YB-1 that has important implications for further development of therapeutic
strategy against ovarian cancers.

PMID: 17072343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):38089-97. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Fragmented hyaluronan induces transcriptional up-regulation of the multidrug
resistance-1 gene in CD4+ T cells.

Tsujimura S(1), Saito K, Kohno K, Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Molecular Biology,
School of Medicine, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

P-glycoprotein, encoded by the multidrug resistance (MDR)-1 gene, expels various 
drugs from cells resulting in multidrug resistance. We found previously that
interleukin-2, a lymphocyte-activation cytokine, induces P-glycoprotein
expression on lymphocytes. Lymphocyte activation involves adhesion with the
extracellular matrix, such as hyaluronan, through adhesion molecules on
lymphocytes. We investigated the transcriptional regulation of MDR-1 in
lymphocytes by fragmented hyaluronan. Fragmented hyaluronan (especially the
6.9-kDa form), not native high molecular hyaluronan, induced translocation of
YB-1, a specific transcriptional factor for MDR-1, from the cytoplasm into the
nucleus and resulted in the transcription of MDR-1 and the expression of
P-glycoprotein on lymphocytes in a dose-dependent manner. Transfection of YB-1
antisense oligonucleotides inhibited P-glycoprotein expression induced by
fragmented hyaluronan. The fragmented hyaluronan induced significant
P-glycoprotein expression on only activated CD4+ T cells, which highly expressed 
CD69, and resulted in excretion of intracellular dexamethasone added in vitro.
Cyclosporin A, a competitive P-glycoprotein inhibitor, restored intracellular
dexamethasone levels in CD4+ T cells. Anti-CD44 monoclonal antibody (Hermes-1)
inhibited fragmented hyaluronan-induced YB-1 activation and P-glycoprotein
expression in CD4+ T cells. We provide the first evidence that binding of
fragmented hyaluronan to CD44 induces YB-1 activation followed by P-glycoprotein 
expression in accordance with activation of CD4+ T cells. Our findings imply that
CD4+ T cell activation by fragmented hyaluronan, induced by characteristic
extracellular matrix changes in inflammation, tumors, and other conditions,
results in P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance.

PMID: 17038319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2007 May;22(5):515-20. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Different matrix micro-environments in colon cancer and diverticular disease.

Klinge U(1), Rosch R, Junge K, Krones CJ, Stumpf M, Lynen-Jansen P, Mertens PR,
Schumpelick V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery of the RWTH-Aachen, RWTH-Aachen University, Pauwelsstr. 
30, 52074, Aachen, Germany, r.rosch@chir.rwth-aachen.de.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The extracellular matrix and the interactive signalling
between its components are thought to play a pivotal role for tumour development 
and metastasis formation. An altered matrix composition as potential underlying
pathology for the development of colorectal cancer was hypothesized.
METHODS: In a retrospective study of patients with colon cancer, the
extracellular matrix in tumour-free bowel specimen was investigated in comparison
with non-infected bowel specimen from patients operated on for colonic
diverticulosis. The following matrix parameters with known associations to tumour
formation, cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis were analysed by
immunohistochemistry and quantified by a scoring system: VEGF, TGF-beta, ESDN,
CD117, c-erb-2, cyclin D1, p53, p27, COX-2, YB-1, collagen I/III, MMP-13, PAI and
uPAR. Expression profiles and correlations were calculated.
RESULTS: The comparison of the two groups revealed a significantly decreased
immunostaining for CD117 and TGF-beta in the cancer group (8.5+/-2.6 vs
10.3+/-2,1 and 4.9+/-1.5 vs 8.1+/-3, respectively), whereas PAI scores were
significantly higher than in patients with diverticular disease (8.1+/-1.6 vs
6.2+/-0.9). Overall correlation patterns of matrix parameters indicated
pronounced differences between tumour-free tissue in cancer patients compared
with patients with diverticular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate distinct differences in the colonic tissue
architecture between cancer patients and patients with diverticulitis that
support the notion of an altered matrix composition predisposing to the
development of colon cancer.

PMID: 17021746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):7195-202.

Inhibition of the multidrug-resistant phenotype by targeting YB-1 with a
conditionally oncolytic adenovirus: implications for combinatorial treatment
regimen with chemotherapeutic agents.

Mantwill K(1), Köhler-Vargas N, Bernshausen A, Bieler A, Lage H, Kaszubiak A,
Surowiak P, Dravits T, Treiber U, Hartung R, Gansbacher B, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Oncology and Department of Urology, Technical
University of Munich, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Germany. klaus.mantwill@web.de

Bearing in mind the limited success of available treatment modalities for the
therapy of multidrug-resistant tumor cells, alternative and complementary
strategies need to be developed. It is known that the transcriptional activation 
of genes, such as MDR1 and MRP1, which play a major role in the development of a 
multidrug-resistant phenotype in tumor cells, involves the Y-box protein YB-1.
Thus, YB-1 is a promising target for new therapeutic approaches to defeat
multidrug resistance. In addition, it has been reported previously that YB-1 is
an important factor in adenoviral replication because it activates transcription 
from the adenoviral E2-late promoter. Here, we report that an oncolytic
adenovirus, named Xvir03, expressing the viral proteins E1B55k and E4orf6, leads 
to nuclear translocation of YB-1 and in consequence to viral replication and cell
lysis in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we show that Xvir03 down-regulates the
expression of MDR1 and MRP1, indicating that recruiting YB-1 to the adenoviral
E2-late promoter for viral replication is responsible for this effect. Thus,
nuclear translocation of YB-1 by Xvir03 leads to resensitization of tumor cells
to cytotoxic drugs. These data reveal a link between chemotherapy and virotherapy
based on the cellular transcription factor YB-1 and provide the basis for
formulating a model for a novel combined therapy regimen named Mutually
Synergistic Therapy.

PMID: 16849566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2006 Aug;6(4):323-31. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

Predicting the outcome of chemotherapy for lung cancer.

Rosell R(1), Cecere F, Santarpia M, Reguart N, Taron M.

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Ctra Canyet,
s/n, 08916 Badalona, Spain, and Medical Oncology Unit, University of Messina,
Italy. rrosell@ico.scs.es

Erratum in
    Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2007 Feb;7(1):119.

Lung cancer is a worldwide problem. At the time of diagnosis, 50% of patients
have advanced incurable disease. Different chemotherapy combinations--with or
without targeted therapies--yield similar results despite the continuous efforts 
of clinicians. However, molecular biological studies have already shed a great
deal of light on the existence of multiple genetic aberrations that can be useful
for customizing treatment. mRNA transcripts involved in DNA repair pathways, such
as ERCC1 and BRCA1, confer selective resistance to cisplatin or taxanes, whereas 
thioredoxin confers a broad spectrum of chemoresistance. Polymorphisms in DNA
repair genes and methylation of checkpoint genes in circulating serum DNA could
become important predictive markers of survival in certain cisplatin-based
regimens. Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase mutations are the crux
of targeted therapies, whereas epithelial-mesenchymal transitions and HER3 mRNA
levels are promising ancillary markers for treatment with epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

PMID: 16765644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2006;38(8):1300-13. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Formation of a nuclear complex containing the p53 tumor suppressor, YB-1, and the
Werner syndrome gene product in cells treated with UV light.

Guay D(1), Gaudreault I, Massip L, Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 9 McMahon St, Que., Canada
G1R 2J6.

YB-1 is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of transcription,
translation, and mRNA splicing. In recent years, several laboratories have
demonstrated that YB-1 is also directly involved in the cellular response to
genotoxic stress. Accordingly, one report has indicated that the Werner syndrome 
gene product (WRN) is eluted from an YB-1 affinity chromatography column. Werner 
syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the premature onset of a number of
age-related diseases, including cancer. The gene responsible for Werner syndrome 
encodes a DNA helicase/exonuclease protein believed to be involved in some aspect
of DNA repair with p53. In this study, we demonstrate that the tumor suppressor, 
p53, bridges the WRN and YB-1 proteins in vitro. Microscopic analyses of
fluorescent-tagged proteins and co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the 
formation of an YB-1/p53/WRN complex in human cells, but only after treatment
with UV light. We also confirmed that p53 is a major player in the translocation 
of GFP-YB-1 fusion proteins from the cytoplasm to several nuclear foci containing
WRN proteins upon UV irradiation. Such translocation did not occur in cells
treated with the topoisomerase inhibitor, etoposide, or the radiomimetic drug,
bleomycin. Such results suggest that an YB-1/p53/WRN complex is formed in
response to the emergence of specific DNA lesions in cells.

PMID: 16584908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Jun;13(6):984-93.

Some p53-binding proteins that can function as arbiters of life and death.

Braithwaite AW(1), Del Sal G, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand. antony.braithwaite@stonebow.otago.ac.nz

Four sets of p53-binding proteins are discussed in this review. These are the E2F
family, the ASPP family, Y-box-binding protein YB1, and the prolyl isomerase
Pin1. Each appears to play a role in the decision by p53 to induce an arrest of
cell proliferation or apoptosis and they may also be independent markers of
cancer. Their activities appear to be linked with the cell cycle and they may
also interact with each other. In this review, the properties of each protein
class are discussed as well as how they affect p53 functions. A model is proposed
as to how their activities might be coordinated.

PMID: 16575404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(8):3904-11.

Characterization of the recombinant adenovirus vector AdYB-1: implications for
oncolytic vector development.

Glockzin G(1), Mantwill K, Jurchott K, Bernshausen A, Ladhoff A, Royer HD,
Gansbacher B, Holm PS.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Experimentelle Onkologie und Therapieforschung, Technische
Universitaet Muenchen, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675
Munich, Germany.

Conditionally replicating adenoviruses are a promising new modality for the
treatment of cancer. However, early clinical trials demonstrate that the efficacy
of current vectors is limited. Interestingly, DNA replication and production of
viral particles do not always correlate with virus-mediated cell lysis and virus 
release depending on the vector utilized for infection. However, we have
previously reported that nuclear accumulation of the human transcription factor
YB-1 by regulating the adenoviral E2 late promoter facilitates viral DNA
replication of E1-deleted adenovirus vectors which are widely used for cancer
gene therapy. Here we report the promotion of virus-mediated cell killing as a
new function of the human transcription factor YB-1. In contrast to the
E1A-deleted vector dl312 the first-generation adenovirus vector AdYB-1, which
overexpresses YB-1 under cytomegalovirus promoter control, led to necrosis-like
cell death, virus production, and viral release after infection of A549 and U2OS 
tumor cell lines. Our data suggest that the integration of YB-1 in oncolytic
adenoviruses is a promising strategy for developing oncolytic vectors with
enhanced potency against different malignancies.

PMCID: PMC1440461
PMID: 16571807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):14263-72. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

A novel Ded1-like RNA helicase interacts with the Y-box protein ctYB-1 in nuclear
mRNP particles and in polysomes.

Nashchekin D(1), Zhao J, Visa N, Daneholt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

We have characterized a novel mRNA-binding protein, designated hrp84, in the
dipteran Chironomus tentans and identified it as a DEAD-box RNA helicase. The
protein contains the typical helicase core domain, a glycine-rich C-terminal part
and a putative nuclear export signal in the N terminus. The protein belongs to
the Ded1 subgroup of DEAD-box helicases, which is highly conserved from yeast
(Ded1p) to mammals (DDX3). In tissue culture cells, hrp84 is present both in the 
nucleus and cytoplasm and, as shown by in vivo UV cross-linking, is bound to mRNA
in both compartments. Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that hpr84 is
associated with the C. tentans homologue (ctYB-1) of the vertebrate Y-box protein
YB-1 both in the nucleus and cytoplasm, and the two proteins also appear together
in polysomes. The interaction is likely to be direct as shown by in vitro binding
of purified components. We conclude that the mRNA-bound hrp84.ctYB-1 complex is
formed in the nucleus and is translocated with mRNA into the cytoplasm and
further into polysomes. As both Ded1 and YB-1 are known to regulate the
initiation of translation, we propose that the RNA helicase-Y-box protein complex
affects the efficiency of mRNA translation, presumably by modulating the
conformation of the mRNP template.

PMID: 16556597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2006 Feb;71(2):146-54.

Intracellular localization and content of YB-1 protein in multidrug resistant
tumor cells.

Vaiman AV(1), Stromskaya TP, Rybalkina EY, Sorokin AV, Guryanov SG, Zabotina TN, 
Mechetner EB, Ovchinnikov LP, Stavrovskaya AA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, 115478 Moscow, Russia. vaiman@yandex.ru

The multifunctional mammalian protein YB-1 is a member of the large DNA- and
RNA-binding protein family with an evolutionarily ancient cold-shock domain. YB-1
is involved in multiple DNA- and mRNA-dependent events and regulates gene
expression at various levels. It can be found both in the nucleus and the
cytoplasm. Bound to DNA in the cell nucleus, YB-1 functions as a transcription
factor interacting with inverted CCAAT-box (Y-box) in promoters and enhancers of 
multiple genes. In particular, YB-1 regulates activity of the multidrug
resistance (MDR) genes MDR1 and LRP. In tumors, YB-1 has been suggested to be an 
early and global marker of MDR. In this study, we compared amounts of YB-1 mRNAs 
and intracellular localization of YB-1 protein in six pairs of drug sensitive and
drug resistant sublines of diverse tumors. We have shown that neither great
increase in the level of YB-1 mRNA nor substantial increase in the number of
cells with nuclear localization of YB-1 are obligatory traits of drug resistant
tumor cell populations. However, the cells with highest amounts of YB-1 mRNA also
demonstrated increased quantities of MDR1, MRP1, BCRP, and LRP mRNAs encoding
different MDR proteins. Transfection of two different populations of
drug-sensitive cells with YB-1 cDNA led to increase in the amount of YB-1 mRNA.
The quantities of MRP1 and LRP mRNAs increased in both populations. Introduction 
of YB-1 small hairpin RNA (shRNA) resulted in decreased amounts of YB-1 mRNA, as 
well as MRP1, LRP, and MDR1 mRNAs (in three different cell lines). Our data
suggest that although YB-1 regulates several MDR genes, it could not be regarded 
as a global marker of already formed drug resistant tumor cell populations. It is
most likely that at the first steps of MDR development YB-1 activity is necessary
for propagation of resistant cell populations rather than for maintenance of drug
resistance.

PMID: 16489918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Virology. 2006 Jan 5;344(1):131-8.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinase: from viral oncoprotein to drug target.

Vogt PK(1), Bader AG, Kang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road BCC 239, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
pkvogt@scripps.edu

The catalytic subunit p110alpha of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and the
serine-threonine protein kinase Akt have been extensively studied as retroviral
oncoproteins. The experimental tools developed with the retroviral vectors are
now being applied to PI3K mutations in human cancer. The most frequently
occurring mutants of p110alpha are oncogenic in vitro and in vivo, show gain of
enzymatic function, activate Akt, and their oncogenic activity is sensitive to
rapamycin. The related isoforms p110beta, gamma and delta induce oncogenic
transformation as wild-type proteins. Mutated p110alpha proteins are ideal drug
targets. Identification of small molecule inhibitors that specifically target
these mutant proteins is a realistic and urgent goal.

PMID: 16364744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Oct;16(10):4931-40. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

YB-1 coordinates vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene activation by
transforming growth factor beta1 and thrombin during differentiation of human
pulmonary myofibroblasts.

Zhang A(1), Liu X, Cogan JG, Fuerst MD, Polikandriotis JA, Kelm RJ Jr, Strauch
AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, The Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung
Research Institute, The Ohio State University College of Medicine and Public
Health, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Profibrotic regulatory mechanisms for tissue repair after traumatic injury have
developed under strong evolutionary pressure to rapidly stanch blood loss and
close open wounds. We have examined the roles played by two profibrotic
mediators, transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) and thrombin, in directing
expression of the vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMalphaA) gene, an
important determinant of myofibroblast differentiation and early protein marker
for stromal cell response to tissue injury. TGFbeta1 is a well known
transcriptional activator of the SMalphaA gene in myofibroblasts. In contrast,
thrombin independently elevates SMalphaA expression in human pulmonary
myofibroblasts at the posttranscriptional level. A common feature of SMalphaA
up-regulation mediated by thrombin and TGFbeta1 is the involvement of the cold
shock domain protein YB-1, a potent repressor of SMalphaA gene transcription in
human fibroblasts that also binds mRNA and regulates translational efficiency.
YB-1 dissociates from SMalphaA enhancer DNA in the presence of TGFbeta1 or its
Smad 2, 3, and 4 coregulatory mediators. Thrombin does not effect SMalphaA gene
transcription but rather displaces YB-1 from SMalphaA exon 3 coding sequences
previously shown to be required for mRNA translational silencing. The release of 
YB-1 from promoter DNA coupled with its ability to bind RNA and shuttle between
the nucleus and cytoplasm is suggestive of a regulatory loop for coordinating
SMalphaA gene output in human pulmonary myofibroblasts at both the
transcriptional and translational levels. This loop may help restrict
organ-destructive remodeling due to excessive myofibroblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1243245
PMID: 16093352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Gastroenterology. 2005 Jul;129(1):259-68.

Cell type-specific intervention of transforming growth factor beta/Smad signaling
suppresses collagen gene expression and hepatic fibrosis in mice.

Inagaki Y(1), Kushida M, Higashi K, Itoh J, Higashiyama R, Hong YY, Kawada N,
Namikawa K, Kiyama H, Bou-Gharios G, Watanabe T, Okazaki I, Ikeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Fibrosis Research Unit, Department of Community Health, Tokai University
School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan. yutakai@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Transforming growth factor beta and its intracellular
mediators, Smad proteins, play important roles in stimulating collagen gene
transcription and, thus, could be the targets for treating hepatic fibrosis.
However, intervention of transforming growth factor beta/Smad signaling affects
physiological signal transduction as well and may cause serious adverse effects
on clinical application. Here we have attempted to suppress hepatic fibrosis by
expressing a transforming growth factor beta/Smad antagonist selectively in
collagen-producing cells only in the fibrotic liver.
METHODS: Recombinant adenoviruses expressing either green fluorescent protein or 
a transforming growth factor beta/Smad signal repressor, YB-1, were injected into
mice untreated or treated with carbon tetrachloride. Green fluorescent protein
expression was analyzed under a confocal laser scanning microscope. Antifibrotic 
effects of YB-1 overexpression were examined by luciferase assays and
histological examination with transgenic reporter mice.
RESULTS: When the CAG expression unit was used as a control, green fluorescent
protein was strongly expressed in a large number of hepatocytes in both normal
and carbon tetrachloride-treated liver. In contrast, green fluorescent protein
expression driven by a tissue-specific enhancer of the mouse alpha2(I) collagen
gene ( COL1A2 ) was detected in activated hepatic stellate cells in carbon
tetrachloride-induced fibrotic liver, but not in untreated normal liver. No green
fluorescent protein fluorescence was observed in any other organs when the COL1A2
enhancer was used. Adenovirus-mediated YB-1 expression under the control of the
COL1A2 enhancer significantly decreased COL1A2 promoter activity after carbon
tetrachloride injection and subsequently suppressed the progression of hepatic
fibrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results validate a new concept of the therapy for hepatic
fibrosis to achieve cell type-specific gene expression only in the fibrotic
liver, with little damage to other organs.

PMID: 16012952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cancer Res. 2005 May 15;65(10):4078-87.

YB-1 provokes breast cancer through the induction of chromosomal instability that
emerges from mitotic failure and centrosome amplification.

Bergmann S(1), Royer-Pokora B, Fietze E, Jürchott K, Hildebrandt B, Trost D,
Leenders F, Claude JC, Theuring F, Bargou R, Dietel M, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Charité, Humboldt, University,
Berlin, Germany.

YB-1 protein levels are elevated in most human breast cancers, and high YB-1
levels have been correlated with drug resistance and poor clinical outcome. YB-1 
is a stress-responsive, cell cycle-regulated transcription factor with additional
functions in RNA metabolism and translation. In this study, we show in a novel
transgenic mouse model that human hemagglutinin-tagged YB-1 provokes remarkably
diverse breast carcinomas through the induction of genetic instability that
emerges from mitotic failure and centrosome amplification. The increase of
centrosome numbers proceeds during breast cancer development and explanted tumor 
cell cultures show the phenotype of ongoing numerical chromosomal instability.
These data illustrate a mechanism that might contribute to human breast cancer
development.

PMID: 15899797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. BMC Cell Biol. 2005 Apr 24;6(1):20.

Identification of a novel Rev-interacting cellular protein.

Kramer-Hämmerle S(1), Ceccherini-Silberstein F, Bickel C, Wolff H, Vincendeau M, 
Werner T, Erfle V, Brack-Werner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, GSF-National Research Center for Environment 
and Health, Ingolstädter Landstrasse 1, D-85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
haemmerle@gsf.de

BACKGROUND: Human cell types respond differently to infection by human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Defining specific interactions between host cells
and viral proteins is essential in understanding how viruses exploit cellular
functions and the innate strategies underlying cellular control of HIV
replication. The HIV Rev protein is a post-transcriptional inducer of HIV gene
expression and an important target for interaction with cellular proteins.
Identification of Rev-modulating cellular factors may eventually contribute to
the design of novel antiviral therapies.
RESULTS: Yeast-two hybrid screening of a T-cell cDNA library with Rev as bait led
to isolation of a novel human cDNA product (16.4.1). 16.4.1-containing fusion
proteins showed predominant cytoplasmic localization, which was dependent on
CRM1-mediated export from the nucleus. Nuclear export activity of 16.4.1 was
mapped to a 60 amino acid region and a novel transport signal identified.
Interaction of 16.4.1 with Rev in human cells was shown in a mammalian two-hybrid
assay and by colocalization of Rev and 16.4.1 in nucleoli, indicating that Rev
can recruit 16.4.1 to the nucleus/nucleoli. Rev-dependent reporter expression was
inhibited by overexpressing 16.4.1 and stimulated by siRNAs targeted to 16.4.1
sequences, demonstrating that 16.4.1 expression influences the transactivation
function of Rev.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that 16.4.1 may act as a modulator of Rev
activity. The experimental strategies outlined in this study are applicable to
the identification and biological characterization of further novel
Rev-interacting cellular factors.

PMCID: PMC1097722
PMID: 15847701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncogene. 2005 May 19;24(22):3606-18.

YB-1 facilitates basal and 5-fluorouracil-inducible expression of the human major
vault protein (MVP) gene.

Stein U(1), Bergmann S, Scheffer GL, Scheper RJ, Royer HD, Schlag PM, Walther W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13092
Berlin, Germany. ustein@mdc-berlin.de

Vaults have been suggested to play a direct role in multidrug resistance (MDR) to
anticancer drugs. The human major vault protein (MVP) also known as lung
resistance-related protein (LRP) represents the predominant component of vaults
that may be involved in the defense against xenobiotics. Here, we demonstrate
that besides MDR-related cytostatics, also the non-MDR-related drug
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) was able to induce MVP mRNA and protein expression.
Treatment with 5-FU amplified the binding activity and interaction of the
transcription factor Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) with the Y-box of the human
MVP gene promoter in a time-dependent manner. 5-FU also induced reporter
expressions driven by a panel of newly generated MVP promoter deletion mutants.
Interestingly, stably YB-1 overexpressing cell clones showed enhanced binding of 
YB-1 to the Y-box motif, associated with enhanced basal as well as 5-FU-inducible
MVP promoter-driven reporter expressions. Moreover, transduction of YB-1 cDNA led
to increased expression of endogenous MVP protein. Under physiological
conditions, we observed a strong coexpression of MVP and YB-1 in human colon
carcinoma specimen. In summary, our data demonstrate a direct involvement of YB-1
in controlling basal and 5-FU-induced MVP promoter activity. Therefore, YB-1 is
directly linked to MVP-mediated drug resistance.

PMID: 15750632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Oncol. 2005 Mar;26(3):607-13.

Y-box binding protein, YB-1, as a marker of tumor aggressiveness and response to 
adjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer.

Huang J(1), Tan PH, Li KB, Matsumoto K, Tsujimoto M, Bay BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

The Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) regulates gene expression through
transcription and translation. YB-1 has been shown to be associated with
up-regulation of P-glycoprotein (Pgp), an ATP-binding transporter involved in
multi-drug resistance. In this study, we determined the prognostic significance
of YB-1 and its relationship with Pgp in patients with breast cancer. YB-1 and
Pgp expression were evaluated by immunohistochemistry in resected specimens of
infiltrative ductal breast cancers from 99 patients and 57 patients respectively 
and correlated with clinicopathological parameters and adjuvant chemotherapy
regimes. The antibody for the YB-1 protein was prepared by injecting a rabbit
with a purified recombinant chicken YB1 protein. The relationship between YB-1
and Pgp was also evaluated by a computational approach using the Resonant
Recognition Model (RRM). We found that breast tumors which were both estrogen
receptor-negative and lymph node positive were associated with high YB-1
expression (P=0.017). In patients who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy,
recurrence risk was reduced in breast cancers having lower YB-1 expression
(P=0.034), suggesting that high levels of YB-1 expression in breast cancer is
associated with tumor aggressiveness. We were able to demonstrate a direct
interaction between YB-1 and Pgp using the computer-based RRM. Interestingly, we 
found that patients who were on a chemotherapy regime which contained an
anthracycline (a Pgp substrate) and subsequently developed recurrence, had a
higher YB-1 score compared to patients on the
Cyclophosphamide/Methotrexate/5-Fluorouracil regime (P=0.024). YB-1 expression in
breast cancer may be a potential marker of chemoresistance and could possibly aid
in selection of the appropriate adjuvant chemotherapy regime for breast cancers.

PMID: 15703814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochem J. 2005 Jun 15;388(Pt 3):921-8.

YB-1 represses AP1-dependent gene transactivation and interacts with an AP-1 DNA 
sequence.

Samuel S(1), Twizere JC, Bernstein LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Texas A&M University System
Health Science Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA.

Involvement of the AP-1 (activator protein-1) transcription factor has been
demonstrated previously in the regulation of cell proliferation and cell-cycle
progression, in the control of cell migration, invasion and metastasis, and in
signal transduction, stress responsiveness, DNA replication and DNA repair. YB-1 
(Y-box-binding protein-1) has also been implicated in many of these processes.
However, the mechanism by which YB-1 mediates these processes is poorly
understood. In the present study, we report that overexpression of a transfected 
gene encoding YB-1 in human HeLa cervical carcinoma cells significantly represses
the transactivation of a minimal AP-1 reporter construct in response to the
tumour promoter PMA. YB-1 also represses mRNA expression and PMA-induced promoter
transactivation of the endogenous AP-1 target gene encoding matrix
metalloproteinase-12 (metalloelastase). YB-1 transrepression of both the minimal 
and matrix metalloproteinase-12 promoter reporter constructs is dependent on the 
AP-1 sequence. To identify new nuclear proteins that bind specifically to the
AP-1 DNA-binding site, we devised a DNA-affinity-chromatography-based assay
termed NAPSTER (nucleotide-affinity preincubation specificity test of
recognition) and discovered a 49 kDa protein from human cancer cells that binds
in a sequence-specific manner to the AP-1 DNA sequence. By tandem MS
fragmentation sequencing analyses we determined that p49 is a YB-1.
Immunoblotting of the NAPSTER-purified p49 protein using anti-YB-1 antibodies
confirmed YB-1 binding to the AP-1 DNA sequence, as did gel mobility-supershift
assays using YB-1 antibodies. This is the first report of YB-1 transrepression
and interaction at the AP-1 DNA-binding site.

PMCID: PMC1183473
PMID: 15702969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):7702-11. Epub 2004 Dec 21.

Transcription factor YB-1 mediates DNA polymerase alpha gene expression.

En-Nia A(1), Yilmaz E, Klinge U, Lovett DH, Stefanidis I, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital of
Aachen, 52057 Aachen, Germany.

Y-box protein-1 involvement in cyclin A and B1 gene regulation has recently been 
demonstrated. A more generalized role of this protein for cell replication is
hypothesized as numerous regulatory sequences of cell cycle-related genes contain
putative binding sites. In the present study the DNA polymerase alpha (DPA) gene 
is identified as another YB-1-responsive gene with a Y-box and 3' inverted repeat
sequence, designated DPA RE-1, in the serum-responsive promoter region.
Overexpressed YB-1 concentration-dependently trans-activated DPA gene expression 
in reporter assays and Southwestern blotting as well as DNA binding analyses
revealed binding of distinct endogenous proteins to the RE-1 with molecular sizes
of 26, 32 and 52 kDa. Among these, YB-1 binding was confirmed using recombinant
as well as endogenous proteins, with preferential single-stranded DNA binding.
Early serum growth response in mesangial cells was accompanied by a nuclear YB-1 
shift and nucleocomplex formation at the RE-1. Fine mapping of the DPA RE-1
sequence unraveled a dependence on co-factors for trans-regulation with gene
activation in the context of a heterologous SV40 promoter but suppression in the 
context of the abbreviated homologous promoter sequence. A YB-1 knock down
resulted in decreased DPA transcription rates and abrogated the serum-dependent
induction of DPA transcription. These results link YB-1 with serum responsiveness
of DPA gene expression and provide insight into the required sequence and protein
binding context.

PMID: 15615704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genes Cells. 2004 Dec;9(12):1265-73.

Transcriptional regulation of multidrug resistance-1 gene by interleukin-2 in
lymphocytes.

Tsujimura S(1), Saito K, Nakayamada S, Nakano K, Tsukada J, Kohno K, Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, School of Medicine, Yahata-nishi, Kitakyushu, Japan.

P-glycoprotein, encoded by the multidrug resistance (MDR)-1 gene, expels various 
drugs from cells resulting in drug resistance. However, its functional relevance 
to lymphocytes and the regulatory mechanism remain unclear. Although MDR-1 is
known to be induced by various cytotoxic stimuli, it is poorly understood whether
the activation stimuli such as cytokines induce MDR-1 transcription. We
investigated the transcriptional regulation of MDR-1 in lymphocytes by activation
stimuli, particularly by interleukin (IL)-2. IL-2 induced translocation of YB-1, 
a specific transcriptional factor for MDR-1, from the cytoplasm into nucleus of
lymphocytes in a dose-dependent manner and resulted in the sequential events;
transcription of MDR-1, expression of P-glycoprotein on the cell surface, and
excretion of the intracellular dexamethasone added in vitro. Transfection of YB-1
anti-sense oligonucleotides inhibited P-glycoprotein expression induced by IL-2. 
Cyclosporin A, a competitive inhibitor of P-glycoprotein, recovered intracellular
dexamethasone levels in lymphocytes. We provide the first evidence that IL-2, a
representative lymphocyte-activation stimulus, induces YB-1 activation followed
by P-glycoprotein expression in lymphocytes. Our findings imply that lymphocytes 
activation by IL-2 in vivo, in the context of the pathogenesis of autoimmune
diseases, results in P-glycoprotein-mediated multidrug resistance, and that
P-glycoprotein could be an important target for the treatment of refractory
autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 15569157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cancer Ther. 2004 Nov;3(11):1485-92.

The role of nuclear Y-box binding protein 1 as a global marker in drug
resistance.

Kuwano M(1), Oda Y, Izumi H, Yang SJ, Uchiumi T, Iwamoto Y, Toi M, Fujii T,
Yamana H, Kinoshita H, Kamura T, Tsuneyoshi M, Yasumoto K, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Innovative Cancer Therapy of the 21st Century COE Program 
for Medical Science, Kurume University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Gene expression can be regulated by nuclear factors at the transcriptional level.
Many such factors regulate MDR1 gene expression, but what are the sequence
elements and transcription factors that control the basal and inducible
expression of this gene? The general principles through which transcription
factors participate in drug resistance are now beginning to be understood. Here, 
we review the factors involved in the transcriptional regulation of the MDR1
gene. In particular, we focus on the transcription factor Y-box binding protein 1
and discuss the possible links between Y-box binding protein 1 expression and
drug resistance in cancer, which are mediated by the transmembrane P-glycoprotein
or non-P-glycoprotein.

PMID: 15542787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochemistry. 2004 Aug 10;43(31):10237-46.

Cold shock domain of the human Y-box protein YB-1. Backbone dynamics and
equilibrium between the native state and a partially unfolded state.

Kloks CP(1), Tessari M, Vuister GW, Hilbers CW.

Author information: 
(1)NSRIM Centre, Faculty of Science, University of Nijmegen, Toernooiveld 1, 6525
ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The three-dimensional structure of the central cold shock domain (CSD) of the
human Y-box protein (YB-1 CSD) is virtually identical to those available for the 
bacterial cold shock proteins (Csp's). We have further characterized YB-1 CSD by 
studying its dynamics by nuclear magnetic resonance. The observed structural
similarity is reflected in the backbone dynamics, which for YB-1 CSD is very
similar to that of the Escherichia coli protein CspA. The rotational correlation 
time of YB-1 CSD shows that it is a monomer. This indicates that the dimerization
observed for the YB-1 protein is not caused by its CSD, but involves other parts 
of this protein. The YB-1 CSD is only marginally stable as are the mesophilic
bacterial Csp's. In contrast to the rapid two-state folding of the bacterial
Csp's, the formation of the native form of YB-1 CSD is slow and at least a
three-state process. The NMR experiments revealed the presence of a second state 
of YB-1 CSD in equilibrium with the native form. The exchange rates from and to
the folded state are in the order of 0.2 and 0.5 s(-1), respectively. Relaxation 
experiments indicated that the second state is a highly flexible, partly
structured molecule.

PMID: 15287751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 30;24(26):5966-73.

YB-1 and CTCF differentially regulate the 5-HTT polymorphic intron 2 enhancer
which predisposes to a variety of neurological disorders.

Klenova E(1), Scott AC, Roberts J, Shamsuddin S, Lovejoy EA, Bergmann S, Bubb VJ,
Royer HD, Quinn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Essex CO4 3SQ, United 
Kingdom. klenovae@essex.ac.uk

The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene contains a variable number tandem repeat
(VNTR) domain within intron 2 that is often associated with a number of
neurological conditions, including affective disorders. The implications of this 
polymorphism are not yet understood, however, we have previously demonstrated
that the 5-HTT VNTR is a transcriptional regulatory domain, and the allelic
variation supports differential reporter gene expression in vivo and in vitro.
The aim of this study was to identify transcription factors responsible for the
regulation of this VNTR. Using a yeast one-hybrid screen, we found the
transcription factor Y box binding protein 1 (YB-1) interacts with the 5-HTT
VNTR. Consistent with this, we demonstrate in a reporter gene assay that the
polymorphic VNTR domains differentially respond to exogenous YB-1 and that YB-1
will bind to the VNTR in vitro in a sequence-specific manner. Interestingly, the 
transcription factor CCTC-binding factor (CTCF), previously shown to interact
with YB-1, interferes with the ability of the VNTR to support YB-1-directed
reporter gene expression. In addition, CTCF blocks the binding of YB-1 to its DNA
recognition sequences in vitro, thus providing a possible mechanism of regulation
of YB-1 activation of the VNTR by CTCF. Therefore, we have identified YB-1 and
CTCF as transcription factors responsible, at least in part, for modulation of
VNTR function as a transcriptional regulatory domain. Our data suggest a novel
mechanism that explains, in part, the ability of the distinct VNTR copy numbers
to support differential reporter gene expression based on YB-1 binding sites.

PMID: 15229244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Oncol Rep. 2004 May;11(5):1085-90.

Expression of splicing factors in human ovarian cancer.

Fischer DC(1), Noack K, Runnebaum IB, Watermann DO, Kieback DG, Stamm S,
Stickeler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Freiburg University Medical Center,
D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Alternative splicing represents an important nuclear mechanism in the
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, which is frequently altered
during tumorigenesis. Previously, we have described marked changes in alternative
splicing of the CD44 gene in ovarian and breast cancer. In the latter one we
described also a specific induction of splicing factors during tumor development.
Now we have focussed our studies on the expression profiles of splicing factors, 
including classical SR proteins, Tra2 and YB-1 in physiological and malignant
ovarian tissues by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. We detected changed
expression pattern with higher levels of phosphorylated 30 kDa SR proteins as
well as relatively high concentrations of hyperphosphorylated Tra2 protein
isoforms in ovarian cancer. RT-PCR analysis revealed a marked induction of SC35
and ASF/SF2 as well as mRNA levels in malignant ovarian tissue. These results
suggest gene-specific alterations of expression rather than a general induction
of the splicing machinery. Together with previously performed functional studies 
of CD44 splicing these findings implicate that altered expression profiles of SR 
proteins, Tra2beta and YB-1 might be responsible for the known changes of
alternative CD44 splicing in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 15069551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):3953-64.

NFI-Ski interactions mediate transforming growth factor beta modulation of human 
papillomavirus type 16 early gene expression.

Baldwin A(1), Pirisi L, Creek KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of South Carolina School 
of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are present in virtually all cervical cancers. An
important step in the development of malignant disease, including cervical
cancer, involves a loss of sensitivity to transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta). HPV type 16 (HPV16) early gene expression, including that of the E6
and E7 oncoprotein genes, is under the control of the upstream regulatory region 
(URR), and E6 and E7 expression in HPV16-immortalized human epithelial cells is
inhibited at the transcriptional level by TGF-beta. While the URR contains a
myriad of transcription factor binding sites, including seven binding sites for
nuclear factor I (NFI), the specific sequences within the URR or the
transcription factors responsible for TGF-beta modulation of the URR remain
unknown. To identify potential transcription factors and binding sites involved
in TGF-beta modulation of the URR, we performed DNase I footprint analysis on the
HPV16 URR using nuclear extracts from TGF-beta-sensitive HPV16-immortalized human
keratinocytes (HKc/HPV16) treated with and without TGF-beta. Differentially
protected regions were found to be located around NFI binding sites.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays, using the NFI binding sites as probes,
showed decreased binding upon TGF-beta treatment. This decrease in binding was
not due to reduced NFI protein or NFI mRNA levels. Mutational analysis of
individual and multiple NFI binding sites in the URR defined their role in
TGF-beta sensitivity of the promoter. Overexpression of the NFI family members in
HKc/HPV16 decreased the ability of TGF-beta to inhibit the URR. Since the
oncoprotein Ski has been shown to interact with and increase the transcriptional 
activity of NFI and since cellular Ski levels are decreased by TGF-beta
treatment, we explored the possibility that Ski may provide a link between
TGF-beta signaling and NFI activity. Anti-NFI antibodies coimmunoprecipitated
endogenous Ski in nuclear extracts from HKc/HPV16, confirming that NFI and Ski
interact in these cells. Ski levels dramatically decreased upon TGF-beta
treatment of HKc/HPV16, and overexpression of Ski eliminated the ability of
TGF-beta to inhibit the URR. Based on these studies, we propose that TGF-beta
inhibition of HPV16 early gene expression is mediated by a decrease in Ski
levels, which in turn dramatically reduces NFI activity.

PMCID: PMC374275
PMID: 15047811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;65(4):906-16.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (nuclear factor for interleukin 6)
transactivates the human MDR1 gene by interaction with an inverted CCAAT box in
human cancer cells.

Chen GK(1), Sale S, Tan T, Ermoian RP, Sikic BI.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cancer Biology, Division of Oncology, Stanford University Medical
Center, Stanford, CA 94305-5151, USA.

We investigated the mechanisms of MDR1 gene activation by CCAAT/enhancer binding 
protein beta (C/EBPbeta, or nuclear factor for interleukin 6) in human cancer
cells. Transfection of the breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and its
doxorubicin-selected variant MCF-7/ADR by either C/EBPbeta or C/EBPbeta-LIP (a
dominant-negative form of C/EBPbeta) confirmed their roles in the activation or
repression of the endogenous, chromosomally embedded MDR1 gene. Cotransfection
experiments with promoter constructs revealed a C/EBPbeta interaction on the MDR1
promoter via the region within -128 to -75. Deletions within the putative AP-1
box (-123 to -111) increased MDR1 promoter activity when stimulated by C/EBPbeta,
suggesting that the AP-1 site negatively regulates MDR1 activation by C/EBPbeta. 
Mutations within the inverted CCAAT box (Y box) (-82 to -73) abolished the
C/EBPbeta-stimulated MDR1 promoter activity, indicating that the Y box is
required for MDR1 activation by C/EBPbeta. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
revealed that C/EBPbeta precipitates a transcription complex containing
C/EBPbeta, the MDR1 promoter sequences (-250 to +54), and the hBrm protein. In
conclusion, alteration of expression or function of C/EBPbeta plays an important 
role in MDR1 gene regulation. C/EBPbeta activates the endogenous MDR1 gene of
MCF-7 cells, and this activation was associated with a novel C/EBPbeta
interaction region within the proximal MDR1 promoter (-128 to -75). The
mechanisms of MDR1 activation by C/EBPbeta include C/EBPbeta binding of the
chromatin of the MDR1 gene and interactions of C/EBPbeta with the Y box and Y
box-associated proteins.

PMID: 15044620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 29;32(2):611-22. Print 2004.

Characterization of the 5'-untranslated region of YB-1 mRNA and autoregulation of
translation by YB-1 protein.

Fukuda T(1), Ashizuka M, Nakamura T, Shibahara K, Maeda K, Izumi H, Kohno K,
Kuwano M, Uchiumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The eukaryotic Y-box binding protein YB-1 is involved in various biological
processes, including DNA repair, cell proliferation and the regulation of
transcription and translation. YB-1 protein is abundant and expressed
ubiquitously in human cells, functioning in cell proliferation and
transformation. Its concentration is thought to be highly regulated at both the
levels of transcription and translation. Therefore, we investigated whether or
not the 5'-UTR of YB-1 mRNA affects the translation of YB-1 protein, thus
influencing expression levels. Luciferase mRNA ligated to the YB-1 mRNA 5'-UTR
was used as a reporter construct. Ligation of the full-length YB-1 5'-UTR (331
bases) enhanced translation as assessed by in vitro and in vivo translation
assays. Deletion constructs of the YB-1 5'-UTR also resulted in a higher
efficiency of translation, especially in the region mapped to +197 to +331 from
the major transcription start site. RNA gel shift assays revealed that the
affinity of YB-1 for various 5'-UTR probe sequences was higher for the
full-length 5'-UTR than for deleted 5'-UTR sequences. An in vitro translation
assay was used to demonstrate that recombinant YB-1 protein inhibited translation
of the full-length 5'-UTR of YB-1 mRNA. Thus, our findings provide evidence for
the autoregulation of YB-1 mRNA translation via the 5'-UTR.

PMCID: PMC373347
PMID: 14752049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):1928-35.

Bending of adenovirus origin DNA by nuclear factor I as shown by scanning force
microscopy is required for optimal DNA replication.

Mysiak ME(1), Bleijenberg MH, Wyman C, Holthuizen PE, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University Medical Center Utrecht, and 
Centre for Biomedical Genetics, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a transcription factor that binds to the adenovirus
type 5 (Ad5) origin of replication and recruits the adenovirus DNA polymerase,
thereby stimulating initiation of DNA replication in vitro. Using scanning force 
microscopy, we demonstrate that NFI induces a 60 degrees bend upon binding to the
origin. The A/T-rich region preceding the core recognition sequence of NFI
influences the DNA bend angle, since substitution of A/T base pairs by G/C base
pairs severely decreases bending. Mutations in the A/T-rich region do not affect 
binding of NFI to DNA. However, mutations that reduce the protein-induced bend
lead to a loss of NFI-stimulated replication, indicating that DNA bending is
functionally important. In contrast, basal initiation or DNA binding of the
polymerase is not impaired by these origin mutations. We conclude that binding of
NFI to the Ad5 origin causes structural changes in DNA that are essential for the
stimulatory function of NFI in replication. We propose that NFI-induced origin
bending facilitates the assembly of a functional initiation complex.

PMCID: PMC369512
PMID: 14747557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur Respir J. 2004 Jan;23(1):14-9.

Nuclear YB-1 expression as a negative prognostic marker in nonsmall cell lung
cancer.

Gessner C(1), Woischwill C, Schumacher A, Liebers U, Kuhn H, Stiehl P, Jürchott
K, Royer HD, Witt C, Wolff G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Internal Medicine, Pneumology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany. gesc@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

The human Y-box binding protein, YB-1, is a multifunctional protein that
regulates gene expression. Nuclear expression of YB-1 has been associated with
chemoresistance and poor prognosis of tumour patients. Representative samples
from autopsied material of primary tumours from 77 patients with NSCLC were
investigated by immunohistochemistry for subcellular distribution of YB-1 and
p53, in order to evaluate the prognostic role of nuclear expression of YB-1.
Cytoplasmic YB-1 expression was found in all tumour samples, whereas nuclear
expression was only observed in 48%. There was no correlation with histological
classification, clinical parameters or tumour size, stage and metastasis status. 
However, patients with positive nuclear YB-1 expression in tumours showed reduced
survival times when compared with patients without nuclear expression. Including 
information about the histology and mutational status for p53 increased the
prognostic value of nuclear YB-1. Patients with nuclear YB-1 expression and p53
mutations had the worst prognosis (median survival 3 months), while best outcome 
was found in patients with no nuclear YB-1 and wildtype p53 (median survival 15
months). This suggests that the combined analysis of both markers allows a better
identification of subgroups with varying prognosis. Nuclear expression of Y-box
binding protien seems to be an independent prognostic marker.

PMID: 14738225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 12;32(1):316-27. Print 2004.

YB-1 promotes strand separation in vitro of duplex DNA containing either
mispaired bases or cisplatin modifications, exhibits endonucleolytic activities
and binds several DNA repair proteins.

Gaudreault I(1), Guay D, Lebel M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu 
de Québec, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 9 McMahon Street, Québec, 
G1R 2J6, Canada.

YB-1 is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of transcription,
translation, mRNA splicing and probably DNA repair. It contains a conserved cold 
shock domain and it binds strongly to inverted CCAAT box of different promoters. 
In this study, we have found that purified YB-1 oligomerizes readily in solutions
to form trimers, hexamers and oligomers of 12 molecules. The presence of ATP
changed the conformation of YB-1 in such a way that only dimers were detected by 
gel filtration analyses. Purified YB-1 can separate different DNA duplexes
containing blunt ends, 5' or 3' recessed ends, or forked structures. This strand 
separation activity is increased on cisplatin-modified DNA or with duplex
molecules containing mismatches. In addition to its exonuclease activity, YB-1
exhibits endonucleolytic activities in vitro. Finally, YB-1 affinity
chromatography experiments have indicated that in addition to prespliceosome
factors like nucleolin and ALY, YB-1 binds the DNA repair proteins MSH2, DNA
polymerase delta, Ku80 and WRN proteins in vitro. Furthermore, immunofluorescence
studies have shown that YB-1 re-localizes from the cytoplasm to nuclear areas
containing either Ku80 or MSH2 proteins in human 293 embryonic kidney cells.
These results suggest that YB-1 is involved in base excision and mismatch repair 
pathways.

PMCID: PMC373280
PMID: 14718551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(24):9014-24.

Nuclear factor I/thyroid transcription factor 1 interactions modulate surfactant 
protein C transcription.

Bachurski CJ(1), Yang GH, Currier TA, Gronostajski RM, Hong D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. Cindy.Bachurski@cchmc.org

Surfactant protein C (SP-C; Sftpc) gene expression is restricted to pulmonary
type II epithelial cells. The proximal SP-C promoter region contains critical
binding sites for nuclear factor I (NFI) and thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF-1; also called Nkx2.1). To test the hypothesis that NFI isoforms interact
with TTF-1 to differentially regulate SP-C transcription, we performed transient 
transfection assays in JEG-3 cells, a choriocarcinoma cell line with negligible
endogenous NFI or TTF-1 activity. Cotransfection of NFI family members with TTF-1
induced synergistic activation of the SP-C promoter that was further enhanced by 
p300. TTF-1 directly interacts with the conserved DNA binding and dimerization
domain of all NFI family members in coimmunoprecipitation and mammalian
two-hybrid experiments. To determine whether SP-C expression is regulated by NFI 
in vivo, a chimeric fusion protein containing the DNA binding and dimerization
domain of NFI-A and the Drosophila engrailed transcriptional repression domain
(NFIen) was conditionally expressed in mice under control of a
doxycycline-inducible transgene. Induction of NFIen in a subset of type II cells 
inhibited SP-C gene expression without affecting expression of TTF-1 in
doxycycline-treated double-transgenic mice. Taken together, these findings
support the hypothesis that NFI family members interact with TTF-1 to regulate
type II cell function.

PMCID: PMC309647
PMID: 14645514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2003 Apr;8(2):241-54.

The Nuclear Factor I (NFI) gene family in mammary gland development and function.

Murtagh J(1), Martin F, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research and Department of
Pharmacology, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Mammary gland development and function require the coordinated spatial and
temporal expression of a large fraction of the mammalian genome. A number of
site-specific transcription factors are essential to achieve the appropriate
growth, branching, expansion, and involution of the mammary gland throughout
early postnatal development and the lactation cycle. One family of transcription 
factors proposed to play a major role in the mammary gland is encoded by the
Nuclear Factor I (NFI) genes. The NFI gene family is found only in multicellular 
animals, with single genes being present in flies and worms and four genes in
vertebrates. While the NFI family expanded and diversified prior to the evolution
of the mammary gland, it is clear that several mammary-gland specific genes are
regulated by NFI proteins. Here we address the structure and evolution of the NFI
gene family and examine the role of the NFI transcription factors in the
expression of mammary-gland specific proteins, including whey acidic protein and 
carboxyl ester lipase. We discuss current data showing that unique NFI proteins
are expressed during lactation and involution and suggest that the NFI gene
family likely has multiple important functions throughout mammary gland
development.

PMID: 14635798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Hematol. 2003 Oct;78(3):213-8.

High expression of YB-1 gene in erythroid cells in patients with refractory
anemia.

Yokoyama H(1), Harigae H, Takahashi S, Kameoka J, Miyamura K, Ishizawa K, Kaku M,
Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.

It has been shown that aberrant expression of a transcription factor, GATA-1,
leads to maturation arrest and transformation of erythroid cells. We previously
reported that a multifunctional protein, YB-1, was expressed strongly in the
spleen of a GATA-1 mutant mouse, which was filled with transformed erythroblasts.
This finding suggested that YB-1 has roles in erythropoiesis. In this study, we
examined in vivo expression of YB-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in bone marrow erythroid
cells and erythroid leukemic cell lines. During erythroid differentiation of
erythroid leukemic cell lines, the expression level of YB-1 mRNA was highest at
the early phase of differentiation and then decreased. In human bone marrow
cells, the in vivo expression level of YB-1 mRNA was higher in glycophorin
A-positive cells than in glycophorin A-negative cells. An interesting finding was
that expression of YB-1 was higher in erythroblasts in myelodysplastic
syndrome-refractory anemia (MDS-RA) than in normal cells. The findings suggested 
that YB-1 functions in the early stage of erythropoiesis and that aberrant
expression of this protein may induce hematological diseases such as MDS.

PMID: 14604279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7437-47.

Regulation of alternative splicing by SRrp86 and its interacting proteins.

Li J(1), Hawkins IC, Harvey CD, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Patton JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235, USA.

SRrp86 is a unique member of the SR protein superfamily containing one RNA
recognition motif and two serine-arginine (SR)-rich domains separated by an
unusual glutamic acid-lysine (EK)-rich region. Previously, we showed that SRrp86 
could regulate alternative splicing by both positively and negatively modulating 
the activity of other SR proteins and that the unique EK domain could inhibit
both constitutive and alternative splicing. These functions were most consistent 
with the model in which SRrp86 functions by interacting with and thereby
modulating the activity of target proteins. To identify the specific proteins
that interact with SRrp86, we used a yeast two-hybrid library screen and
immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry. We show that SRrp86 interacts
with all of the core SR proteins, as well as a subset of other splicing
regulatory proteins, including SAF-B, hnRNP G, YB-1, and p72. In contrast to
previous results that showed activation of SRp20 by SRrp86, we now show that
SAF-B, hnRNP G, and 9G8 all antagonize the activity of SRrp86. Overall, we
conclude that not only does SRrp86 regulate SR protein activity but that it is,
in turn, regulated by other splicing factors to control alternative splice site
selection.

PMCID: PMC207616
PMID: 14559993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 12;278(50):50061-9. Epub 2003 Sep 30.

In vitro and in vivo dimerization of human endonuclease III stimulates its
activity.

Liu X(1), Choudhury S, Roy R.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Repair Laboratory, Mechanism of Carcinogenesis Program, American Health
Foundation Cancer Center, Institute for Cancer Prevention, Valhalla, New York
10595, USA.

Human endonuclease III (hNTH1), a DNA glycosylase with associated abasic lyase
activity, repairs various mutagenic and toxic-oxidized DNA lesions, including
thymine glycol. We demonstrate for the first time that the full-length hNTH1
positively cooperates in product formation as a function of enzyme concentration.
The protein concentrations that caused cooperativity in turnover also exhibited
dimerization, independent of DNA binding. Earlier we had found that the hNTH1
consists of two domains: a well conserved catalytic domain, and an inhibitory
N-terminal tail. The N-terminal truncated proteins neither undergo dimerization, 
nor do they show cooperativity in turnover, indicating that the homodimerization 
of hNTH1 is specific and requires the N-terminal tail. Further kinetic analysis
at transition states reveals that this homodimerization stimulates an 11-fold
increase in the rate of release of the final product, an AP-site with a 3'-nick, 
and that it does not affect other intermediate reaction rates, including those of
DNA N-glycosylase or AP lyase activities that are modulated by previously
reported interacting proteins, YB-1, APE1, and XPG. Thus, the site of modulating 
action of the dimer on the hNTH1 reaction steps is unique. Moreover, the high
intranuclear (2.3 microM) and cytosolic (0.65 microM) concentrations of hNTH1
determined here support the possibility of in vivo dimerization; indeed, in vivo 
protein cross-linking showed the presence of the dimer in the nucleus of HeLa
cells. Therefore, it is likely that the dimerization of hNTH1 involving the
N-terminal tail masks the inhibitory effect of this tail and plays a critical
role in its catalytic turnover in the cell.

PMID: 14522981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Am Chem Soc. 2003 Oct 1;125(39):12026-34.

Quantitative evaluation of experimental NMR restraints.

Nabuurs SB(1), Spronk CA, Krieger E, Maassen H, Vriend G, Vuister GW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, University of Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) data are an indispensable source of structural
information in biomolecular structure determination by NMR spectroscopy. The
number and type of experimental restraints used in the structure calculation and 
the RMS deviation of the restraints are usually reported. We present a new method
for quantifying the information contained in the experimental NMR restraints. The
method is based on a description of the structure in distance space and concepts 
derived from information theory. It allows for an objective description of the
amount of available experimental information, which we show to be related to the 
positional uncertainty of the NMR ensemble. The measure of information presented 
is not affected by redundancy in the experimental restraints. Using various
examples, we show that the method successfully identifies the crucial restraints 
in a structure determination: those restraints that are both important and
unique. Finally, we demonstrate that the method can detect a wider range of
redundancy in experimental datasets when compared to currently available methods.
Because our method describes the quantitative evaluation of experimental NMR
restraints, we propose the acronym QUEEN.

PMID: 14505424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 4;22(38):6061-70.

The p53 tumor suppressor gene is regulated in vivo by nuclear factor 1-C2 in the 
mouse mammary gland during pregnancy.

Johansson EM(1), Kannius-Janson M, Bjursell G, Nilsson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of CMB/Molecular Biology, Box 462, S-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.
Eva.Johansson@molbio.gu.se

The p53 tumor suppressor protein plays an important role in preventing cancer
development by arresting or killing potential tumor cells. Downregulated p53
levels, or mutations within the p53 gene, leading to the loss of p53 activity,
are found in many breast carcinomas. Here we demonstrate that the p53 gene is
transcriptionally upregulated in the normal mouse mammary gland at midpregnancy. 
We show that the specific isoform nuclear factor 1-C2 (NF1-C2) plays an important
role in this activation. Functional mutation of the NF1-binding site in the mouse
p53 promoter resulted in a reduction of the gene expression to less than 30% in
mammary epithelial cells. By the use of two powerful techniques, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and oligonucleotide decoy, we verify the importance of NF1-C2
in p53 gene activation in vivo. These findings demonstrate a broader role for
NF1-C2 in the mammary gland at midpregnancy, beyond its earlier reported
activation of milk protein genes. We also demonstrate that NF1-A1 proteins are
produced in the mouse mammary gland. However, due to their lower affinity to the 
NF1-binding site, these proteins are not involved in the transcriptional
upregulation of p53 at midpregnancy. This paper constitutes the first report
demonstrating the importance of NF1 proteins in the p53 gene activation in the
mouse mammary gland. It is also the first time that p53 gene activation is
coupled to a specific, endogenously expressed NF1 isoform.

PMID: 12955085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43470-9. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

Interferon-gamma interferes with transforming growth factor-beta signaling
through direct interaction of YB-1 with Smad3.

Higashi K(1), Inagaki Y, Fujimori K, Nakao A, Kaneko H, Nakatsuka I.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. higashik2@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) exert
antagonistic effects on collagen synthesis in human dermal fibroblasts. We have
recently shown that Y box-binding protein YB-1 mediates the inhibitory effects of
IFN-gamma on alpha2(I) procollagen gene (COL1A2) transcription through the
IFN-gamma response element located between -161 and -150. Here we report that
YB-1 counter-represses TGF-beta-stimulated COL1A2 transcription by interfering
with Smad3 bound to the upstream sequence around -265 and subsequently by
interrupting the Smad3-p300 interaction. Western blot and immunofluorescence
analyses using inhibitors for Janus kinases or casein kinase II suggested that
the casein kinase II-dependent signaling pathway mediates IFN-gamma-induced
nuclear translocation of YB-1. Down-regulation of endogenous YB-1 expression by
double-stranded YB-1-specific RNA abrogated the transcriptional repression of
COL1A2 by IFN-gamma in the absence and presence of TGF-beta. In transient
transfection assays, overexpression of YB-1 in human dermal fibroblasts exhibited
antagonistic actions against TGF-beta and Smad3. Physical interaction between
Smad3 and YB-1 was demonstrated by immunoprecipitation-Western blot analyses, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using the recombinant Smad3 and YB-1
proteins indicated that YB-1 forms a complex with Smad3 bound to the Smad-binding
element. Glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays showed that YB-1 binds to the
MH1 domain of Smad3, whereas the central and carboxyl-terminal regions of YB-1
were required for its interaction with Smad3. YB-1 also interferes with the
Smad3-p300 interaction by its preferential binding to p300. Altogether, the
results provide a novel insight into the mechanism by which IFN-gamma/YB-1
counteracts TGF-beta/Smad3. They also indicate that IFN-gamma/YB-1 inhibits
COL1A2 transcription by dual actions: via the IFN-gamma response element and
through a cross-talk with the TGF-beta/Smad signaling pathway.

PMID: 12917425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Sep;285(3):C633-41.

In vitro and in vivo characterization of the minimal promoter region of the human
thiamin transporter SLC19A2.

Reidling JC(1), Said HM.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center-Long Beach and University of
California-Irvine, USA.

The molecular mechanisms involved in the regulation of thiamin transport in
mammalian cells are poorly understood. Previous studies established that a human 
thiamin transporter, SLC19A2, plays a role in thiamin uptake in human tissues. We
cloned the 5' regulatory region of the SLC19A2 gene, identified the minimal
promoter required for basal activity, and located multiple putative cis elements.
To further characterize the SLC19A2 promoter, we investigated, in the present
study, the role of the putative cis elements in regulating the activity of the
SLC19A2 promoter in vitro and confirmed the activity of the SLC19A2 promoter in
vivo. In vitro studies demonstrated that mutation of specific cis elements in the
SLC19A2 minimal promoter [Gut-enriched Krupple-like factor (GKLF), nuclear
factor-1 (NF-1), and stimulating protein-1 (SP-1)] led to a decrease in activity.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, four specific DNA/protein complexes 
were identified. The interacting factors were determined by oligonucleotide
competition and antibody supershift analysis and shown to be GKLF, NF-1, and
SP-1. Cotransfection studies of the SLC19A2 promoter with an SP-1 containing
vector in Drosophila SL2 cells further confirmed a role for SP-1 in regulating
SLC19A2 promoter activity. In vivo studies using transgenic mice established the 
functionality of the full-length and minimal SLC19A2 promoters. Furthermore, our 
studies revealed that the pattern of expression of the SLC19A2
promoter-Luciferase constructs in transgenic mice was similar to the reported
SLC19A2 RNA expression pattern in native human tissues. The results demonstrate
the importance of GKLF, NF-1, and SP-1 in regulating the activity of the SLC19A2 
promoter and provide direct in vivo confirmation of promoter activity.

PMID: 12900388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 12;278(37):35516-23. Epub 2003 Jun 30.

The Y-box-binding protein, YB1, is a potential negative regulator of the p53
tumor suppressor.

Lasham A(1), Moloney S, Hale T, Homer C, Zhang YF, Murison JG, Braithwaite AW,
Watson J.

Author information: 
(1)Genesis Research and Development Corporation Limited, P. O. Box 50, Auckland
1001, New Zealand.

The p53 tumor suppressor plays a major role in preventing tumor development by
transactivating genes to remove or repair potentially tumorigenic cells. Here we 
show that the Y-box-binding protein, YB1, acts as a negative regulator of p53.
Using reporter assays we show that YB1 represses transcription of the p53
promoter in a sequence-specific manner. We also show that YB1 reduces endogenous 
levels of p53, which in turn reduces p53 activity. Conversely, inhibiting YB1 in 
a variety of tumor cell lines induces p53 activity, resulting in significant
apoptosis via a p53-dependent pathway. These data suggest that YB1 may, in some
situations, protect cells from p53-mediated apoptosis, indicating that YB1 may be
a good target for the development of new therapeutics.

PMID: 12835324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Pathol Int. 2003 Jul;53(7):429-33.

Y-box binding protein expression in thyroid neoplasms: its linkage with
anaplastic transformation.

Ito Y(1), Yoshida H, Shibahara K, Uruno T, Nakano K, Takamura Y, Miya A,
Kobayashi K, Yokozawa T, Matsuzuka F, Uchimi T, Kuwano M, Miyoshi E, Matsuura N, 
Kuma K, Miyauchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Japan. ito01@kuma-h.or.jp

Recent studies have demonstrated that Y-box binding protein (YB-1) regulates the 
transcription of genes linked to carcinoma progression. In this study, we
investigated the expression of this protein in thyroid neoplasms to elucidate its
significance. The expression of YB-1 was immunohistochemically investigated using
the monoclonal antibody for various thyroid neoplasms. Normal follicles did not
overexpress YB-1, and only moderate overexpression of YB-1 was observed in some
follicular tumors and papillary carcinoma, especially those of a larger size. In 
contrast, 92.9% of anaplastic carcinoma strongly overexpressed YB-1. YB-1
immunoreactivity was seen in both cytoplasms and cell nuclei, but the former was 
more predominant. These findings suggest that YB-1 plays a role in regulating the
transcription as well as translation of genes contributing to the anaplastic
transformation of thyroid carcinoma.

PMID: 12828607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Bioessays. 2003 Jul;25(7):691-8.

The pleiotropic functions of the Y-box-binding protein, YB-1.

Kohno K(1), Izumi H, Uchiumi T, Ashizuka M, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.

The Y-box-binding protein (YB-1) represents the most evolutionary conserved
nucleic-acid-binding protein currently known. YB-1 is a member of the cold-shock 
domain (CSD) protein superfamily. It performs a wide variety of cellular
functions, including transcriptional regulation, translational regulation, DNA
repair, drug resistance and stress responses to extracellular signals. As a
result, YB-1 expression is closely associated with cell proliferation. In this
review, we will begin by briefly describing the characteristics of YB-1 and will 
then summarize the pleiotropic functions brought about via DNA-RNA transaction
and protein-protein interactions. In addition, we will discuss the diverse range 
of potential physiological and pathological functions of YB-1.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12815724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):30624-33. Epub 2003 May 30.

Repression of the human adenine nucleotide translocase-2 gene in growth-arrested 
human diploid cells: the role of nuclear factor-1.

Luciakova K(1), Barath P, Poliakova D, Persson A, Nelson BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm
University, S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden. Katarina.Luciakova@savba.sk

Adenine nucleotide translocase-2 (ANT2) catalyzes the exchange of ATP for ADP
across the mitochondrial membrane, thus playing an important role in maintaining 
the cytosolic phosphorylation potential required for cell growth. Expression of
ANT2 is activated by growth stimulation of quiescent cells and is down-regulated 
when cells become growth-arrested. In this study, we address the mechanism of
growth arrest repression. Using a combination of transfection, in vivo dimethyl
sulfate mapping, and in vitro DNase I mapping experiments, we identified two
protein-binding elements (Go-1 and Go-2) that are responsible for growth arrest
of ANT2 expression in human diploid fibroblasts. Proteins that bound the Go
elements were purified and identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry as members of the NF1 family of
transcription factors. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that NF1 was
bound to both Go-1 and Go-2 in quiescent human diploid cells in vivo, but not in 
the same cells stimulated to growth by serum. NF1 binding correlated with the
disappearance of ANT2 transcripts in quiescent cells. Furthermore, overexpression
of NF1-A, -C, and -X in NIH3T3 cells repressed expression of an ANT2-driven
reporter gene construct. Two additional putative repressor elements in the ANT2
promoter, an Sp1 element juxtaposed to the transcription start site and a
silencer centered at nucleotide -332, did not appear to contribute to growth
arrest repression. Thus, enhanced binding of NF1 is a key step in the growth
arrest repression of ANT2 transcription. To our knowledge, this is the first
report showing a role for NF1 in growth arrest.

PMID: 12777383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2782-94.

Nuclear localization of Y-box factor YB1 requires wild-type p53.

Zhang YF(1), Homer C, Edwards SJ, Hananeia L, Lasham A, Royds J, Sheard P,
Braithwaite AW.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of Otago, Box
913, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Nuclear localization and high levels of the Y-box binding protein YB1 appear to
be important indicators of drug resistance and tumor prognosis. YB1 also
interacts with the p53 tumor suppressor protein. In this paper, we explore a role
for p53 in the nuclear localization of YB1. We report that various genotoxic
stresses induce nuclear localization of YB1 in a small proportion of treated
cells, but only in cells with wild-type p53. We go on to show directly that
functional p53 is required for YB1 to translocate to the nucleus.
Tumor-associated p53 mutants however are attenuated for YB1 nuclear localization 
as are mutants mutated in the proline-rich domain of p53. These data link the
DNA-damage response of p53 to YB1 nuclear translocation. In addition, we find
that YB1 inhibits p53-induced cell death and its ability to trans-activate
promoters of genes involved in cell death signaling. Together these data suggest 
that some forms of p53 cause YB1 to accumulate in the nucleus, which in turn
inhibits p53 activity. These results provide a possible explanation for the
correlation of nuclear YB1 with drug resistance and poor prognosis in some tumor 
types, and for the first time implicate p53 in the process of nuclear
translocation.

PMID: 12743601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cancer Sci. 2003 Jan;94(1):9-14.

The basic and clinical implications of ABC transporters, Y-box-binding protein-1 
(YB-1) and angiogenesis-related factors in human malignancies.

Kuwano M(1), Uchiumi T, Hayakawa H, Ono M, Wada M, Izumi H, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582. kuwano@biochem1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

In our laboratories, we have been studying molecular targets which might be
advantageous for novel cancer therapeutics. In this review, we focus on how
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily genes, Y-box-binding protein-1
(YB-1), and tumor angiogenesis-associated factors could contribute to the
development of novel strategies for molecular cancer therapeutics. ABC
transporters such as P-glycoprotein/MDR1 and several MRP family proteins function
to protect cells from xenobiotics, drugs and poisons, suggesting that ABC
transporters are a double-edged sword. In this regard, P-glycoprotein/MDR1 is a
representative ABC transporter which plays a critical role in the efflux of a
wide range of drugs. We have reported that gene amplification, gene
rearrangements, transcription factor YB-1 and CpG methylation on the promoter are
involved in MDR1 gene overexpression in cultured cancer cells. Among them, two
mechanisms appear to be relevant to the up-regulation of MDR1 gene in human
malignancies. We first reported that MDR1 gene promoter is activated in response 
to environmental stimuli, and is modulated by methylation/demethylation of CpG
sites on the MDR1 promoter. We also demonstrated that YB-1 modulates not only
transcription of various genes associated with cell growth, drug resistance and
DNA synthesis, but also translation, mRNA stabilization and DNA
repair/self-defense processes. Angiogenesis is also involved in tumor growth,
invasion and metastasis of various malignancies, and so angiogenesis-related
molecules also offer novel molecular targets for anticancer therapeutics.

PMID: 12708467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 25;278(30):27988-96. Epub 2003 Apr 14.

YB-1 as a cell cycle-regulated transcription factor facilitating cyclin A and
cyclin B1 gene expression.

Jurchott K(1), Bergmann S, Stein U, Walther W, Janz M, Manni I, Piaggio G, Fietze
E, Dietel M, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13092
Berlin, Germany. karsten.juerchott@charite.de

Expression of the Y-box protein YB-1 is increased in proliferating normal and
cancer cells, but its role in cell proliferation and cell cycle progression is
unclear. We have identified a cell cycle-dependent relocalization of YB-1 from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus at the G1/S phase transition and demonstrate that
both the charged zipper and the cold shock domain are involved in regulating this
process. Using cell lines that constitutively overexpress YB-1, we show that
nuclear accumulation of YB-1 is associated with increased cyclin A and cyclin B1 
mRNA and protein expression. We provide evidence that deregulated YB-1 expression
is linked to adhesion-independent cell proliferation through the induction of
cyclin A. Thus, we have identified YB-1 as a cell cycle stage-specific
transcription factor important for cell proliferation.

PMID: 12695516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Mar 17;111(1-2):61-73.

Identification of nuclear factor 1 (NF1) as a transcriptional modulator of rat
A(2A) adenosine receptor.

Lee YC(1), Lai HL, Sun CN, Chien CL, Chern Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

By a combination of PCR and DNA walking technique, we isolated a 4.8-kb DNA
fragment containing a 4.3 kb 5'-flanking region and a 0.5-kb 5'-untranslated
region of the rat A(2A) adenosine receptor (A(2A)-R) gene. Various lengths of the
5'-flanking region of the A(2A)-R gene were inserted into an expression vector
and transfected into several different cell lines for promoter analysis. Our
results reveal that a consensus NF1 element (designated as A(2A)-R/NF1), located 
between bases -2846 and -2827 of the A(2A)-R gene, functions as a repressor for
A(2A)-R promoters in the rat brain-derived type-2 astrocyte cell line (RBA2),
which expresses no A(2A)-R. Electrophoretic gel mobility shift assay (EMSA)
revealed that two A(2A)-R/NF1-protein complexes of RBA2 nuclear extract were
formed. Supershift experiments using an anti-NF1 antibody suggest that NF1
proteins exist in both A(2A)-R/NF1-protein complexes. Furthermore, mutations in
the conserved NF1 binding site of this A(2A)-R/NF1 element disturbed DNA-protein 
formation. Thus, NF1 proteins appear to mediate this cell line-specific
suppression of A(2A)-R promoters in RBA2 cells. The importance of NF1 proteins in
regulating A(2A)-R promoters was further confirmed in another cell line (Siha)
which expresses no endogenous A(2A)-R. Moreover, addition of the
A(2A)-R/NF1element upstream of an irrelevant thymidine kinase (TK) promoter
suppressed its promoter activity in Siha cells, but not in RBA2 cells. Thus, the 
NF1-mediated inhibition of the A(2A)-R promoter was promoter- and cell
line-specific. In summary, we have defined a distal negative element
(A(2A)-R/NF1) that plays a functional role in modulating the expression of
A(2A)-R.

PMID: 12654506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):18191-8. Epub 2003 Mar 19.

Poly(A)-binding protein positively affects YB-1 mRNA translation through specific
interaction with YB-1 mRNA.

Skabkina OV(1), Skabkin MA, Popova NV, Lyabin DN, Penalva LO, Ovchinnikov LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region 142290, Russian Federation.

The major protein of cytoplasmic mRNPs from rabbit reticulocytes, YB-1, is a
member of an ancient family of proteins containing a common structural feature,
cold-shock domain. In eukaryotes, this family is represented by multifunctional
mRNA/Y-box DNA-binding proteins that control gene expression at different stages.
To address possible post-transcriptional regulation of YB-1 gene expression, we
examined effects of exogenous 5'- and 3'-untranslatable region-containing
fragments of YB-1 mRNA on its translation and stability in a cell-free system.
The addition of the 3' mRNA fragment as well as its subfragment I shut off
protein synthesis at the initiation stage without affecting mRNA stability. UV
cross-linking revealed four proteins (69, 50, 46, and 44 kDa) that specifically
interacted with the 3' mRNA fragment; the inhibitory subfragment I bound two of
them, 69- and 50-kDa proteins. We have identified these proteins as PABP
(poly(A)-binding protein) (69 kDa) and YB-1 (50 kDa) and demonstrated that
titrating out of PABP by poly(A) strongly and specifically inhibits YB-1 mRNA
cap(+)poly(A)(-) translation in a cell-free system. Thus, PABP is capable of
positively affecting YB-1 mRNA translation in a poly(A) tail-independent manner.

PMID: 12646583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):140-5.

Regulation of YB-1 gene expression by GATA transcription factors.

Yokoyama H(1), Harigae H, Takahashi S, Takahashi S, Furuyama K, Kaku M, Yamamoto 
M, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Hematology, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

GATA-1 is a transcription factor essential for erythroid cell development, and
knockdown of GATA-1 gene results in maturation arrest and transformation of
erythroblasts. To clarify the mechanism that gives rise to this abnormal
phenotype, genes that are aberrantly expressed in the spleen of heterozygous
GATA-1 knockdown mutant mouse (referred to as GATA-1 mutant mouse) were
identified by using cDNA array. One of these genes, YB-1, was found to be highly 
expressed in the spleen of GATA-1 mutant mouse. Reporter and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that the proximal GATA element in 5'-UTR region of
YB-1 gene functions positively in K562 cells. Furthermore, both GATA-1 and
GATA-2, which were transiently expressed in COS-7 cells, bound to this element
and activated the YB-1 promoter through this element. These results suggest that 
YB-1 functions under the regulation of GATA factors in erythroid differentiation 
and aberrant expression of YB-1 gene may result in dyserythropoiesis.

PMID: 12646178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2003 Feb;19(2):117-23.

Surface CD4 expression modulated by a cellular factor induced by HIV type 1
infection.

Sheeter D(1), Du P, Rought S, Richman D, Corbeil J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093-0679, USA.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) alters gene expression in infected
cells, leading to cellular dysfunction. We uncovered a number of host cell genes 
that are modulated in both CD4(+) T cell lines and primary CD4(+) T lymphocytes
infected with HIV-1, using high-density oligonucleotide probe microarray
technology. We focused on one gene in particular, nuclear factor I-B2 (NFI-B2),
because of its high level of expression. NFI-B2 is a member of the nuclear factor
I family of nuclear proteins, which are known to be involved in viral and
cellular transcription. To better understand the role of NFI-B2 during HIV-1
infection, we generated a Jurkat T cell line that constitutively expressed
NFI-B2. After infection with HIV-1, these cells produced fewer viruses because of
a downregulation of surface CD4 expression. The surface expression of the
coreceptor, CXCR4, remained unchanged. Furthermore, levels of CD4 mRNA were
reduced in NFI-B2-producing cells, suggesting that expression of NFI-B2 impairs
CD4 transcription. Modulation of NFI-B2 by HIV-1 may represent yet another
mechanism by which HIV infection reduces cell surface expression of CD4.

PMID: 12639247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;17(6):1027-38. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

RFX1 and NF-1 associate with P sequences of the human growth hormone locus in
pituitary chromatin.

Norquay LD(1), Yang X, Sheppard P, Gregoire S, Dodd JG, Reith W, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, 730 William Avenue,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3J7.

The human GH family consists of five genes, including the placental chorionic
somatomammotropins (CS), within a single locus on chromosome 17. Based on
nuclease sensitivity, the entire GH/CS locus is accessible in pituitary
chromatin, yet only GH-N is expressed. Previously, we reported a P sequence
element (263P) capable of repressing placental CS promoter activity in
transfected pituitary (GC) cells. Regions of protein binding within 263P include 
P sequence elements A and B (PSE-A and PSE-B), and we reported nuclear factor-1
(NF-1) recognition of PSE-B. We now provide evidence for multiple interactions on
PSE-A, including binding of the regulatory factor X (RFX) family. Disruption of
the RFX site within 263P blunts repressor activity in transfected GC cells;
however, repression is only abolished when both PSE-A/RFX and PSE-B/NF-1 sites
are mutated. The capacity of RFX and NF-1 to participate in a novel common
complex is further suggested by coimmunoprecipitation of RFX1 and epitope-tagged 
NF-1 family members. Finally, we confirm the association of NF-1 and RFX1 with P 
sequences in human pituitary tissue by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Taken
together, our data suggest that an inverse relationship exists between 263P and
CS promoter histone hyperacetylation and the association of these factors in
vivo.

PMID: 12624117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):18241-8. Epub 2003 Feb 25.

Splicing factor SRp30c interaction with Y-box protein-1 confers nuclear YB-1
shuttling and alternative splice site selection.

Raffetseder U(1), Frye B, Rauen T, Jürchott K, Royer HD, Jansen PL, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital of Aachen,
52057 Aachen, Germany.

The multifunctional DNA- and RNA-associated Y-box protein 1 (YB-1) specifically
binds to splicing recognition motifs and regulates alternative splice site
selection. Here, we identify the arginine/serine-rich SRp30c protein as an
interacting protein of YB-1 by performing a two-hybrid screen against a human
mesangial cell cDNA library. Co-immunoprecipitation studies confirm a direct
interaction of tagged proteins YB-1 and SRp30c in the absence of RNA via two
independent protein domains of YB-1. A high affinity interaction is conferred
through the N-terminal region. We show that the subcellular YB-1 localization is 
dependent on the cellular SRp30c content. In proliferating cells, YB-1 localizes 
to the cytoplasm, whereas FLAG-SRp30c protein is detected in the nucleus. After
overexpression of YB-1 and FLAG-SRp30c, both proteins are co-localized in the
nucleus, and this requires the N-terminal region of YB-1. Heat shock treatment of
cells, a condition under which SRp30c accumulates in stress-induced Sam68 nuclear
bodies, abrogates the co-localization and YB-1 shuttles back to the cytoplasm.
Finally, the functional relevance of the YB-1/SRp30c interaction for in vivo
splicing is demonstrated in the E1A minigene model system. Here, changes in
splice site selection are detected, that is, overexpression of YB-1 is
accompanied by preferential 5' splicing site selection and formation of the 12 S 
isoform.

PMID: 12604611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 20;1625(3):280-90.

Regulation of renin enhancer activity by nuclear factor I and Sp1/Sp3.

Pan L(1), Glenn ST, Jones CA, Gronostajski RM, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263-0001, USA.

Transcription of the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in kidney tumor-derived As4.1 cells,
which express high levels of renin mRNA, is dependent on a proximal promoter
element and a 242-bp enhancer region located 2.6 kb upstream of the transcription
start site. We showed previously that the enhancer contains a cAMP responsive
element (CRE) and an E-box. Mutation of either element resulted in almost
complete loss of the Ren-1(c) expression. In this report we show that there are
additional transcription factor-binding sites within the Ren-1(c) enhancer
contributing to the enhancer activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift and
supershift assays have identified four nuclear factor I (NFI)-binding sites, an
Sp1/Sp3 site and an unidentified transcription factor-binding site (Ei) located
upstream of the CRE and E-box. Mutation of the Sp1/Sp3 site or Ei reduced
Ren-1(c) expression by 40% or 30%, respectively, while mutations of four
NFI-binding sites resulted in an 89% decrease in expression. Thus, these
protein-DNA interaction sites are essential for transcription of mouse renin
genes. There are four homologous NFI genes (NFI-A, -B, -C and -X) in vertebrates 
and multiple alternatively spliced isoforms from each gene. Real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays have demonstrated that
NFI-X is the predominant NFI mRNA expressed in As4.1 cells. Direct study of
involvement of NFI-X in regulation of renin genes is underway.

PMID: 12591615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 18;278(16):13936-43. Epub 2003 Feb 11.

The mRNA-binding protein YB-1 (p50) prevents association of the eukaryotic
initiation factor eIF4G with mRNA and inhibits protein synthesis at the
initiation stage.

Nekrasov MP(1), Ivshina MP, Chernov KG, Kovrigina EA, Evdokimova VM, Thomas AA,
Hershey JW, Ovchinnikov LP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Protein Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow 
Region, 142290 Russian Federation, Russia.

The cytoplasmic messenger ribonucleoprotein particles of mammalian somatic cells 
contain the protein YB-1, also called p50, as a major core component. YB-1 is
multifunctional and involved in regulation of mRNA transcription and translation.
Our previous studies demonstrated that YB-1 stimulates initiation of translation 
in vitro at a low YB-1/mRNA ratio, whereas an increase of YB-1 bound to mRNA
resulted in inhibition of protein synthesis in vitro and in vivo. Here we show
that YB-1-mediated translation inhibition in a rabbit reticulocyte cell-free
system is followed by a decay of polysomes, which is not a result of mRNA
degradation or its functional inactivation. The inhibition does not change the
ribosome transit time, and therefore, it affects neither elongation nor
termination of polypeptide chains and only occurs at the stage of initiation.
YB-1 induces accumulation of mRNA in the form of free messenger ribonucleoprotein
particles, i.e. it blocks mRNA association with the small ribosomal subunit. The 
accumulation is accompanied by eukaryotic initiation factor eIF4G dissociation
from mRNA. The C-terminal domain of YB-1 is responsible for inhibition of
translation as well as the disruption of mRNA interaction with eIF4G.

PMID: 12582179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Gene. 2003 Jan 30;304:171-81.

Genomic organization, splice products and mouse chromosomal localization of genes
for transcription factor Nuclear Factor One.

Gründer A(1), Qian F, Ebel TT, Mincheva A, Lichter P, Kruse U, Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III/Genetik, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,
Schaenzlestrasse 1, D-79104, Freiburg, Germany.

Transcription factor Nuclear Factor One (NFI) proteins are derived from a small
family of four vertebrate genes (NFIA, B, C and X), all of which produce a fair
number of protein variants by alternative splicing. In order to ultimately locate
RNA signal sequences around exon/intron borders for the production of regulated
splice variants, we have determined the exon structure of the chicken NFIB gene
as the last of the four vertebrate genes for which the gene structure was not yet
elucidated. This made it possible to compile nine newly isolated and sequenced
mouse NFI cDNA sequences together with all previously available ones and to
deduce corresponding splicing patterns for the orthologous vertebrate genes of
all four paralogous gene types. Results from the analysis of alternative splicing
and of NFI gene mapping in the genome of human and mouse argue for a phylogenetic
route in which the four vertebrate NFI genes result from a single duplication of 
a genomic segment containing two NFI intermediate genes rather than from two
independent duplications of two separated single ancestor genes.

PMID: 12568726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Gene. 2003 Jan 30;304:163-70.

Gene structure and promoter analysis of the rat BTEB2 gene.

Mori D(1), Okuro N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, Aoba-ku, 980-8578, Sendai, Japan.

Rat BTEB2 protein is a transcription factor with three zinc fingers that binds to
GC box, and is expressed in the placenta, intestine, and testis. To understand
mechanisms of gene expression of BTEB2, we have cloned the rat BTEB2 gene from a 
rat liver genomic library and determined the gene structure. The BTEB2 gene
contained 4 exons. In the process of cloning of the BTEB2 gene, we cloned two
pseudogenes for BTEB2, one of which was a processed gene. The upstream region of 
the bona fide gene was fused to a luciferase reporter gene, and the generated
BTEB2-luciferase chimeric plasmid was transiently transfected into HeLa cells
that expressed endogenous BTEB2 mRNA. Significant expression of luciferase
activity was observed. Deletion analysis of the promoter region of the BTEB2 gene
revealed that at least three regions are important for the activity. Upon
investigation of cis-acting elements in the regions, the GC box, CCAAT box and
NF-1 binding site were found. As binding factors, Sp1, CBFa, and NF-1 were
identified to the DNA elements by gel mobility shift assays using specific
antibodies.

PMID: 12568725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cancer Lett. 2003 Feb 20;190(2):191-7.

Nuclear expression of YB-1 protein correlates with P-glycoprotein expression in
human breast carcinoma.

Saji H(1), Toi M, Saji S, Koike M, Kohno K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, 3-18-22, Honkomagome,
Bunkyo-ku, 113-8677, Tokyo, Japan.

Drug resistance is a common clinical problem in cancer treatment. The
overexpression of P-glycoprotein appears to be closely associated with multi-drug
resistance to anticancer agents. YB-1 binds to the Y-box in the promoter region
of MDR1, which encodes P-glycoprotein. We evaluated the correlation between
nuclear YB-1 and P-glycoprotein expression and other molecules, such as hormonal 
receptors, angiogenic factors, immune factors, and methalloprotease in 63 human
breast cancers. Nuclear YB-1 expression had a significant correlation with
P-glycoprotein and PgR expression, and also with CD68 grade, concerning
accumulation of tumor associated macrophages. This series did not demonstrate
P-glycoprotein and nuclear YB-1 expression might be one of the useful prognostic 
marker of breast cancer.

PMID: 12565174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. EMBO J. 2003 Feb 3;22(3):588-99.

Histone H1 enhances synergistic activation of the MMTV promoter in chromatin.

Koop R(1), Di Croce L, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität,
E.-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

Minichromosomes assembled on the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter in
vitro exhibit positioned nucleosomes, one of which covers the binding sites for
progesterone receptor (PR) and nuclear factor 1 (NF1). Incorporation of histone
H1 into MMTV minichromosomes improves the stability of this nucleosome and
decreases basal transcription from the MMTV promoter, as well as its response to 
either PR or NF1. However, histone H1-containing minichromosomes display better
PR binding and support a more efficient synergism between PR and NF1, leading to 
enhanced transcription initiation. A mutant MMTV promoter lacking positioned
nucleosomes does not display enhanced transcriptional synergism in the presence
of H1. Binding of PR leads to phosphorylation of H1, which leaves the promoter
upon transcription initiation. Thus, H1 assumes a complex and dynamic role in the
regulation of the MMTV promoter.

PMCID: PMC140736
PMID: 12554659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. EMBO J. 2003 Feb 3;22(3):479-93.

Identification of YB-1 as a regulator of PTP1B expression: implications for
regulation of insulin and cytokine signaling.

Fukada T(1), Tonks NK.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

Changes in expression of PTP1B, the prototypic protein tyrosine phosphatase, have
been associated with various human diseases; however, the mechanisms by which
PTP1B expression is regulated have not been defined. We have identified an
enhancer sequence within the PTP1B promoter which serves as a binding site for
the transcription factor Y box-binding protein-1 (YB-1). Overexpression of YB-1
resulted in increased levels of PTP1B. Furthermore, depletion of YB-1 protein, by
expression of a specific antisense construct, led to an approximately 70%
decrease in expression of PTP1B, but no change in the level of its closest
relative, TC-PTP. Expression of antisense YB-1 resulted in increased sensitivity 
to insulin and enhanced signaling through the cytokine receptor gp130, which was 
suppressed by re-expression of PTP1B. Finally, we observed a correlation between 
the expression of PTP1B and that of YB-1 in cancer cell lines and an animal model
of type II diabetes. Our data reveal an important role for YB-1 as a regulator of
PTP1B expression, and further highlight PTP1B as a critical regulator of insulin-
and cytokine-mediated signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC140751
PMID: 12554649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem J. 2003 May 1;371(Pt 3):843-55.

Identification and characterization of a prostate-specific androgen-independent
protein-binding site in the probasin promoter.

Yeung LH(1), Read JT, Sorenson P, Nelson CC, Jia W, Rennie PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, and The Prostate Centre, Vancouver General Hospital, Canada.
lyeung@vanhosp.bc.ca

In this study we investigated the combination of transcription factors and
proteins binding to the proximal part of the prostate-specific probasin (PB)
promoter. Using DNaseI in vitro footprinting, several protected regions were
identified on the proximal PB promoter (nucleotides -286 to +28 relative to the
transcription start site) when nuclear extracts from LNCaP, a human prostate
cancer cell line, were used. Four of the protected areas were observed only when 
LNCaP nuclear extracts treated with synthetic androgen (10 nM R1881) were used.
Two other regions, referred to as FPI and FPII, showed protection regardless of
the presence or absence of androgen. When DNaseI footprinting was done using
other prostate and non-prostate nuclear extracts, protection of the FPII region
was only seen in prostate cell lines. These androgen-independent regions were
further tested for tissue and binding specificity using the electrophoretic
mobility-shift assay. Eight complexes formed with the FPI probe while four
complexes were observed with the FPII probe on incubation with the tested nuclear
extracts. Methylation protection assays reveal that prostate cancer cell lines
yield slightly different protection patterns for some of the protein complexes
formed with non-prostate-derived cell lines, suggesting the presence of
prostate-enriched or -exclusive proteins. Site-directed mutagenesis of the
protected nucleotides within FPII resulted in a significant reduction in
expression from the PB promoter. Identification of proteins binding to the FPII
region revealed the participation of nuclear factor I (NF-I) or a closely related
protein, although other unknown proteins are also involved. Defining the DNA and 
protein components that dictate prostate-specific expression of the PB promoter
in an androgen-independent manner would provide a strong basis for the design and
development of a gene therapy for systemic treatment of androgen-independent
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC1223328
PMID: 12540291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Pathol. 2003 Feb;199(2):251-8.

Nuclear expression of Y-box-binding protein-1 correlates with P-glycoprotein and 
topoisomerase II alpha expression, and with poor prognosis in synovial sarcoma.

Oda Y(1), Ohishi Y, Saito T, Hinoshita E, Uchiumi T, Kinukawa N, Iwamoto Y, Kohno
K, Kuwano M, Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Nuclear expression of the Y-box-binding protein (YB-1) has been reported to
correlate with the expression of P-glycoprotein in breast cancer and
osteosarcoma. Overexpression of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily, such 
as P-glycoprotein/multi-drug resistance (MDR) 1 and MDR-associated protein (MRP) 
1, 2 and 3, has been reported in various malignant neoplasms. Fifty-four
surgically resected synovial sarcomas were examined immunohistochemically for
nuclear expression of YB-1 and intrinsic expression of P-glycoprotein, MRP1,
MRP2, and topoisomerase II alpha, and the findings were compared with
clinicopathological parameters, proliferative activities as evaluated by MIB-1
labelling index (LI), and the patients' prognoses. In addition, MDR1, MRP1, MRP2,
and MRP3 mRNA levels were assessed using a quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method in 22 concordant frozen
specimens from these cases and the findings were compared with six control
skeletal muscle tissues. Independent prognostic factors were investigated using
the Cox proportional hazards regression model. Nuclear expression of YB-1 protein
correlated with P-glycoprotein expression (p = 0.0126). Moreover, cases with
nuclear expression of YB-1 correlated with poor survival (p = 0.0495) and showed 
a high topoisomerase II alpha labelling index (topo II alpha LI) (p = 0.0056) and
a high MIB-1 LI (p = 0.01). Multivariate Cox analysis showed that only the
nuclear expression of YB-1 (p = 0.0136) and high American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) stage (ie stage III or IV) (p < 0.0001) were independent factors
for poor prognosis, while the expression of the YB-1 responsive gene products
examined was not. These results indicate that the nuclear expression of YB-1
protein is associated with P-glycoprotein expression and proliferative activity
as shown by the topo II alpha LI and the MIB-1 LI, and that expression of this
protein is an important independent prognostic factor in synovial sarcoma.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12533839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):887-98.

Nuclear factor 1 is required for both hormone-dependent chromatin remodeling and 
transcriptional activation of the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter.

Hebbar PB(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and
Developmental Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Science,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter has been used as a model to study
how the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) remodels chromatin to allow other
transcription factors to bind and activate transcription. To dissect the precise 
role of nuclear factor 1 (NF1) in chromatin remodeling and transcriptional
activation, we used linker-scanning mutants of transcription factor binding sites
on the MMTV promoter. We compared the NF1 mutant MMTV promoter in the context of 
transiently transfected templates (transient transfection) and templates
organized as chromatin (stable transfection) to understand the effect of
chromatin on factor binding and transcription. We show that on a transiently
transfected template, mutation in the NF1 binding site reduces both basal and
hormone-dependent transcription. This suggests that NF1 is required for
transcription in the absence of organized chromatin. We also found that binding
of NF1 on a transiently transfected template is independent of mutation in
hormone response elements or the octamer transcription factor (OTF) binding site.
In contrast, the binding of OTF proteins to a transiently transfected template
was found to be dependent on the binding of NF1, which may imply that NF1 has a
stabilizing effect on OTF binding. On a chromatin template, mutation in the NF1
binding site does not affect the positioning of nucleosomes on the promoter. We
also show that in the absence of NF1 binding, GR-mediated chromatin remodeling of
nucleosome B is reduced and hormone-dependent activation of transcription is
abolished. Further, we demonstrate that NF1 is required for both the association 
of BRG1 chromatin remodeling complex and the GR on the promoter in vivo. These
results suggest the novel possibility that NF1 may participate in chromatin
remodeling activities in addition to directly enhancing transcription and that in
the absence of its binding site the GR is unable to effectively bind the promoter
and recruit the remodeling complex.

PMCID: PMC140717
PMID: 12529394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neurosci. 2003 Jan 1;23(1):203-12.

Abnormal development of forebrain midline glia and commissural projections in
Nfia knock-out mice.

Shu T(1), Butz KG, Plachez C, Gronostajski RM, Richards LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, and the Program in Neuroscience, The
University of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) genes are expressed in multiple organs throughout
development (Chaudhry et al., 1997; for review, see Gronostajski, 2000). All four
NFI genes are expressed in embryonic mouse brain, with Nfia, Nfib, and Nfix being
expressed highly in developing cortex (Chaudhry et al., 1997). Disruption of the 
Nfia gene causes agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), hydrocephalus, and
reduced GFAP expression (das Neves et al., 1999). Three midline structures, the
glial wedge, glia within the indusium griseum, and the glial sling are involved
in development of the corpus callosum (Silver et al., 1982; Silver and Ogawa,
1983; Shu and Richards, 2001). Because Nfia(-)/- mice show glial abnormalities
and ACC, we asked whether defects in midline glial structures occur in Nfia(-)/- 
mice. NFI-A protein is expressed in all three midline populations. In Nfia(-)/-, 
mice sling cells are generated but migrate abnormally into the septum and do not 
form a sling. Glia within the indusium griseum and the glial wedge are greatly
reduced or absent and consequently Slit2 expression is also reduced. Although
callosal axons approach the midline, they fail to cross and extend aberrantly
into the septum. The hippocampal commissure is absent or reduced, whereas the
ipsilaterally projecting perforating axons (Hankin and Silver, 1988; Shu et al., 
2001) appear relatively normal. These results support an essential role for
midline glia in callosum development and a role for Nfia in the formation of
midline glial structures.

PMID: 12514217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Dec 13;299(4):549-54.

Autoantibody to DNA binding protein B as a novel serologic marker in systemic
sclerosis.

Jeoung DI(1), Bong Lee E, Lee S, Lim Y, Lee DY, Kim J, Kim HY, Wook Song Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Division, In2Gen Company, 6th Floor, Cancer Research Center,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, 228, Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu,
Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea.

Systemic sclerosis is a systemic disease that is characterized by tissue
fibrosis, small-vessel vasculopathy, and an autoimmune response associated with
autoantibodies. We performed serological analysis of cDNA expression library
(SEREX) to identify autoantibodies associated with systemic sclerosis. We
identified 4 clones that react with sera of patients with SSc but not with those 
of healthy donors. These clones are phosphoglycerate mutase, centromere
autoantigen C, U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein, and DNA binding protein B
(dbpB). We chose to study autoantibody to DNA binding protein B. Immunoreactivity
against recombinant dbpB was detected in 40.5% (15/37) of patients with SSc,
14.6% (6/41) of patents with systemic lupus erythematosus, 6.7% (1/15) of
patients with rheumatoid arthritis, 0% (0/12) of patients with Sjogren syndrome, 
and 5.9% (1/17) of patients with polymyositis/dermatomyositis. The frequency of
anti-dbpB was significantly higher in the SSc patients (15/37, 40.5%) compared to
the healthy controls (3/41, 7.3%, p=0.0005 by chi(2) test). Eleven patients
(11/20, 55%) with the diffuse cutaneous type of SSc had anti-dbpB and 4 patients 
(4/17, 23.5%) with the limited cutaneous type had anti-dbpB. The presence of
anti-dbpB was significantly associated with the diffuse cutaneous type (p=0.00003
by chi(2) test). This is the first report to suggest that autoantibody to dbpB
can be used as a serologic marker of systemic sclerosis.

PMID: 12459173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2002 Nov;128(11):621-6. Epub 2002 Oct 22.

Increased nuclear localization of transcription factor YB-1 in acquired
cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer.

Yahata H(1), Kobayashi H, Kamura T, Amada S, Hirakawa T, Kohno K, Kuwano M,
Nakano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

PURPOSE: Nuclear expression of Y box-binding protein (YB-1), a member of the
DNA-binding protein family, was recently reported to have a much higher
concentration in cisplatin-resistant cancer cell lines than in their
drug-sensitive parental counterparts, suggesting the ability to induce cisplatin 
resistance. Ovarian cancer has been generally treated with cisplatin-based
chemotherapy and often recurs due to acquired cisplatin resistance. The aim of
our study is to elucidate the association between nuclear YB-1 and cisplatin
resistance in human ovarian cancer using cultured cell lines and surgical
specimens.
METHODS: Intracellular YB-1 localization was examined by Western blot analysis
for both cisplatin sensitive and resistant human ovarian cancer cell lines.
Moreover, 35 pairs of surgical specimens derived from primary and matched
recurrent ovarian cancers of the same patient were evaluated for their nuclear
YB-1 expression by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: Western blot analysis for nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts indicated
that cisplatin-resistant cells showed much higher nuclear YB-1 expression than
sensitive parental cells. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that ten paired
cases turned from negative nuclear YB-1 in primary lesions to positive nuclear
YB-1 in recurrent lesions, whereas only two paired cases showed a reverse turn
from positive to negative.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of YB-1 in the nucleus seems to be associated with
acquired cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancers. Nuclear YB-1 might be a useful 
predictive marker indicating cisplatin sensitivity and/or a target molecule to
treat recurring ovarian cancers by cisplatin-based second-line chemotherapy.

PMID: 12458343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 4;278(14):11836-42. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Bel1-mediated transactivation of the spumaretroviral internal promoter is
repressed by nuclear factor I.

Kido K(1), Bannert H, Gronostajski RM, Flügel RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Retroviral Gene Expression, Research Program Applied Tumor
Virology German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69009
Heidelberg, Germany.

Gene expression of the internal and long terminal repeat promoters of the spuma
retrovirus is specifically activated by the transactivator Bel1, the key
regulator of viral gene expression. Bel1 directly binds to and activates DNA
target sites of viral promoters and those of distinct cellular genes. To
determine the contribution of cellular transcription factors to viral
transactivation, the viral internal promoter (IP) was analyzed by transient
expression, electrophoretic mobility shift assays), and supershifts. Here we
report that Bel1-mediated transactivation of the full-length and shortened
versions of the Bel1 response element (BRE) were repressed by nuclear factor I
(NFI). Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from
transfected 293T cells revealed that different DNA-protein complexes consisting
of DNA target sites of NFI and Bel1 proteins were formed. The specificity of the 
repressor and transactivator DNA binding was shown by NFI- and Bel1-specific
antibodies that led to supershifts of the different nuclear
protein-oligodeoxynucleotide complexes. The specificity of the complexes was
confirmed by using unlabeled, shortened, and mutated IP.BRE oligodeoxynucleotides
in competition experiments with the authentic IP.BRE. Cotransfection of the
infectious spumavirus DNA genome with a human NFI-X1 expression plasmid into cell
cultures greatly reduced the expression of viral structural and Bel1 proteins.
These data demonstrate the relevance of NFI-mediated repression of Bel1-driven
transactivation in vivo.

PMID: 12446690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):5156-62. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

Y-box-binding protein YB-1 mediates transcriptional repression of human alpha
2(I) collagen gene expression by interferon-gamma.

Higashi K(1), Inagaki Y, Suzuki N, Mitsui S, Mauviel A, Kaneko H, Nakatsuka I.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Science Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Company, Ltd.,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan. higashik2@sc.sumitomo-chem.co.jp

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 4;278(14):12598.

We have demonstrated previously that a proximal element within the human
alpha2(I) collagen gene (COL1A2) promoter mediates transcriptional repression by 
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and designated this region the IFN-gamma response
element (IgRE). Screening of a human fibroblast cDNA expression library with a
radiolabeled IgRE probe exclusively yielded clones with a sequence identical to
that of the transcription factor YB-1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) using various IgRE-derived oligonucleotide probes containing serial
two-base mutations showed that YB-1 protein was preferentially bound to the
pyrimidine-rich sequence within the IgRE. This region is located immediately
downstream of and partly overlaps the previously reported Sp1/Sp3 binding site.
Overexpression of YB-1 in human dermal fibroblasts decreased steady state levels 
of COL1A2 mRNA and repressed COL1A2 promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner.
This inhibitory effect of YB-1 on COL1A2 expression was abolished by mutations of
the IgRE shown to prevent YB-1 binding in EMSA. In addition, these mutations also
abolished the inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma, suggesting that YB-1 mediates the
inhibitory action of IFN-gamma on COL1A2 promoter through its binding to the
IgRE. Also, overexpression of a deletion mutant YB-1, which lacks the
carboxyl-terminal domain, abrogated the repression of COL1A2 transcription by
IFN-gamma. A functional correlation between IFN-gamma and YB-1 was further
supported by luciferase assays using four tandem repeats of the Y-box consensus
oligonucleotide linked to a minimal promoter. EMSA and Western blot analysis
using cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins implied that IFN-gamma promotes the
nuclear translocation of YB-1. Direct evidence for the nuclear translocation of
YB-1 by IFN-gamma was further provided by using a YB-1-green fluorescent protein 
expression plasmid transfected into human fibroblasts. Altogether, this study
represents the definitive identification of the transcription factor responsible 
for IFN-gamma-elicited inhibition of COL1A2 expression, namely YB-1.

PMID: 12446674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Environ Health Perspect. 2002 Oct;110 Suppl 5:827-30.

Suppression of metallothionein-I/II expression and its probable molecular
mechanisms.

Jacob ST(1), Majumder S, Ghoshal K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, 333 Hamilton Hall, 1645 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA. jacob.42@osu.edu

Metallothionein (MT) promoter was methylated in rat hepatoma and in mouse
lymphosarcoma cells by methylation of cytosine within the CpG dinucleotide
region. After demethylation of MT-I promoter in mouse lymphosarcoma cells or in
the transplanted rat hepatoma with 5-azacytidine, a potent inhibitor of DNA
methyltransferase, the promoter was activated in response to heavy metal
treatment. MT-I promoter was also suppressed in human prostate cancer lines PC3
and DU145, probably by promoter methylation, whereas cadmium induced MT-I in the 
human prostate cancer line LNCaP. In the prostate cancer lines where MT-I was
suppressed, glutathione-S-transferase-pi (GST-pi) was expressed. On the contrary,
GST-pi gene was repressed in the cell line where MT-I was induced, which suggests
an inverse relationship between MT-I induction and GST-pi expression in some
prostate cancer lines. The expressions of GST-pi and gamma-glutamyl cysteine
synthase were also significantly higher (5- to 12-fold) in the lymphosarcoma
cells and the hepatoma relative to the parental tissues. The higher expressions
of these two genes suggest a compensatory mechanism in the cells where the gene
for the antioxidant MT-I/II is not induced. MT-I/II may function as a growth
suppressor either alone or in concert with other factor(s), and consequently
their lack of expression could facilitate the tumor growth. In addition to
suppression of MT-I/II expression by promoter methylation, the lack of MT
induction could also be brought about by nuclear factor I (NFI), probably by
interaction with the metal transcription factor MTF-1. An inverse relationship
was observed between the level of NFI and MT-I expression in some cells, which
suggests a role for NFI in the relatively low constitutive levels of MT-I
expression in these cells.

PMCID: PMC1241254
PMID: 12426140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 22;41(42):12739-44.

Binding capacity of human YB-1 protein for RNA containing 8-oxoguanine.

Hayakawa H(1), Uchiumi T, Fukuda T, Ashizuka M, Kohno K, Kuwano M, Sekiguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. hiroshi@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

8-oxoguanine (8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine) is generated in the cellular nucleotide
pool as well as in nucleic acids, by the action of oxygen radicals produced in
cells. 8-oxoguanine has the potential to pair with both cytosine and adenine, and
thus, the persistence of this base in messenger RNA would cause translational
errors. To prevent such an outcome, organisms should have mechanisms for
preventing the misincorporation of 8-oxoguanine-containing nucleotide into RNA
and for removing 8-oxoguanine-containing RNA from processes of translation. We
now report that mammalian Y box-binding protein 1 (YB-1 protein) possesses the
activity to bind specifically to RNA containing 8-oxoguanine. On incubation with 
a purified preparation of YB-1 protein, 8-oxoguanine-containing RNA forms stable 
complexes with the protein while normal RNA scarcely forms such a complex. Using 
a series of deletion mutants which produce altered forms of YB-1 protein lacking 
some parts of the sequence, domains of the protein necessary for RNA binding were
identified. Escherichia coli cells expressing normal or truncated forms of YB-1
protein with the binding capacity acquire resistance against paraquat, a drug
that induces oxidative stress in cells, whereas cells with truncated proteins
lacking such an activity do not. YB-1 protein may disturb the bacterial system in
recognizing oxidatively damaged RNA, thus exerting a dominant negative effect on 
cell growth. We propose that YB-1 protein may discriminate the oxidized RNA
molecule from normal ones, thus contributing to the high fidelity of translation 
in cells.

PMID: 12379116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 1;62(17):4985-91.

Overexpression of DNA-binding protein B gene product in breast cancer as detected
by in vitro-generated combinatorial human immunoglobulin libraries.

Rubinstein DB(1), Stortchevoi A, Boosalis M, Ashfaq R, Guillaume T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Molecules differentially expressed or overexpressed by malignant cells can serve 
in detecting and tracking of tumor. Additionally, they potentially can be applied
in histologic-specific antitumor therapy. Few breast cancer-associated candidate 
molecules have been identified. Here we describe the use of combinatorial
immunoglobulin [antigen-binding fragment of immunoglobulin molecule (Fab)
fragment] phage libraries generated from patients with breast carcinoma to
identify cancer-associated gene expression. The libraries were enriched for
tumor-binding Fab by 3 logs and yielded a group of antibodies against DNA-binding
protein B (DbpB), a 35-kDa thrombin-inducible nuclear factor and member of the
Y-box family of proteins, which are known to act both negatively in selective
gene suppression and positively as promoters of gene transcription. Sequencing of
the anti-DbpB showed a degree of heterogeneity and bp substitutions suggesting
that the Fabs selected from the combinatorial library represented a varied
anti-DbpB immune response and did not simply arise from in vitro amplification by
PCR of a single or limited numbers of immunoglobulin genes. Sequencing of the
DbpB molecule expressed in malignant breast cancer showed no evidence of
tumor-specific mutations. Evaluation of levels of DbpB gene product expression
however showed the molecule to be constitutively expressed in normal nonmalignant
breast tissues but to have consistently differentially higher expression in
breast cancer. Immunohistological staining revealed DbpB to be present both
intracellularly and on the cell surface, which suggests it may be a means whereby
malignant cells repair and replicate DNA in a selectively advantageous manner as 
compared with nonmalignant cells. DbpB expression in breast cancer may advance
the basic understanding of the role of Y-box binding proteins as regulatory
agents, and in defining malignant cell phenotypes. In addition, DbpB and the
antibodies generated against it may have direct application in tumor detection
and in molecule-targeted immunotherapy.

PMID: 12208750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Sep;22(18):6375-83.

Novel translational control through an iron-responsive element by interaction of 
multifunctional protein YB-1 and IRP2.

Ashizuka M(1), Fukuda T, Nakamura T, Shirasuna K, Iwai K, Izumi H, Kohno K,
Kuwano M, Uchiumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The eukaryotic Y-box-binding protein YB-1 functions in various biological
processes, including DNA repair, cell proliferation, and transcriptional and
translational controls. To gain further insight into how human YB-1 plays its
role in pleiotropic functions, we here used two-hybrid screenings to identify
partners of this protein; the results showed that YB-1 itself, iron-regulatory
protein 2 (IRP2), and five ribosomal proteins each served as partners to YB-1. We
then examined the biological effect of the interaction of YB-1 and IRP2 on
translational regulation. Both in vitro binding and coimmunoprecipitation assays 
showed the direct interaction of YB-1 and IRP2 in the presence of a high
concentration of iron. RNA gel shift assays showed that YB-1 reduced the
formation of the IRP2-mRNA complex when the iron-responsive element of the
ferritin mRNA 5' untranslated region (UTR) was used as a probe. By using an in
vitro translation assay using luciferase mRNA ligated to the ferritin mRNA 5'UTR 
as a reporter construct, we showed that both YB-1 and IRP2 inhibited the
translation of the mRNA. However, coadministration of YB-1 and IRP2 proteins
abrogated the inhibition of protein synthesis by each protein. An In vivo
coimmunoprecipitation assay showed that IRP2 bound to YB-1 in the presence of
iron and a proteasome inhibitor. The direct interaction of YB-1 and IRP2 provides
the first evidence of the involvement of YB-1 in the translational regulation of 
an iron-related protein.

PMCID: PMC135634
PMID: 12192037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Orthop Res. 2002 Jul;20(4):723-9.

RNA splicing mediated by YB-1 is inhibited by TLS/CHOP in human myxoid
liposarcoma cells.

Rapp TB(1), Yang L, Conrad EU 3rd, Mandahl N, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, School of Medicine, University
of Washington, Seattle 98108, USA.

Human myxoid liposarcoma contains a characteristic t(12;16) chromosomal
translocation that results in fusion of the N-terminal domain of the translocated
in liposarcoma (TLS) protein to the C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP). TLS
possesses structural motifs that suggest it may participate in RNA processing. We
demonstrate that in human myxoid liposarcoma cells, wild-type TLS binds to RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) via its N-terminal domain and to the transcription and
translation factor Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) through its C-terminal domain. 
The liposarcoma fusion protein TLS/CHOP retains the ability to bind RNA Pol II
but lacks the ability to recruit YB-1 due to replacement of the C-terminal domain
of TLS by CHOP. In an in vivo splicing assay, YB-1 promotes splicing of
adenovirus EIA pre-mRNA predominantly to the 13S isoform. The oncogenic TLS/CHOP 
fusion protein inhibits this splicing function of YB-1 in a dominant negative
manner. When considered in conjunction with studies on other sarcoma fusion
proteins, these data suggest that aberrant RNA splicing may be a common feature
of human sarcomas.

PMID: 12168660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Aug 16;296(2):451-7.

Targeted disruption of one allele of the Y-box protein gene, Chk-YB-1b, in DT40
cells results in major defects in cell cycle.

Swamynathan SK(1), Varma BR, Weber KT, Guntaka RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri,
School of Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA.

Y-box or inverted CCAAT box-binding proteins are multifunctional regulators of
transcription and translation of several genes. Although YB-1 has been shown to
play a key role in cell cycle, to date, there is no direct evidence. We disrupted
one allele of Chk-YB-1b in a chicken pre-B lymphocyte cell line, DT40. Compared
to wild-type DT40 cells, these heterozygous DT40YB1b(+/-) cells with one copy of 
the wild-type Chk-YB-1b allele showed multiple abnormalities, which include
slower rate of growth, abnormal cell morphology, increased cell size, and
increased genomic DNA content. These phenotypic defects resemble those cells that
have a block in G2 and/or mitosis (G2/M). In addition, we have observed that a
fraction of these heterozygous DT40YB1b(+/-) cells undergo apoptosis. In
conclusion, we have discovered major defects in the G2/M phase of cell cycle in
YB-1 knocked-out heterozygous mutant cells, providing for the first time direct
evidence establishing a crucial role for YB-1 in cell proliferation.

PMID: 12163040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Wound Repair Regen. 2002 May-Jun;10(3):161-8.

Glucan stimulates human dermal fibroblast collagen biosynthesis through a nuclear
factor-1 dependent mechanism.

Wei D(1), Zhang L, Williams DL, Browder IW.

Author information: 
(1)James H. Quillen Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Mountain Home, and
Department of Surgery, James H. Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State
University, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA.

Glucan, an immunomodulator, has been reported to increase collagen deposition and
tensile strength in experimental models of wound repair. Previous data suggest
that glucan modulates wound healing via an indirect mechanism in which
macrophages are stimulated to release growth factors and cytokines. However,
recent data have shown the presence of glucan receptors on normal human dermal
fibroblasts, suggesting that glucans may be able to directly stimulate fibroblast
collagen biosynthesis. To test this hypothesis, we examined the effect of glucan 
on collagen biosynthesis in normal human dermal fibroblasts. We assessed nuclear 
factor-1 (NF-1) activation, procollagen mRNA expression, collagen biosynthesis,
and whether there was a causal link between glucan treatment, NF-1 activation,
and collagen expression. Glucan (1 microg/ml) increased NF-1 binding activity by 
46% (8 hours), 64% (24 hours), 215% (36 hours), and 119% (48 hours) in cultured
normal human dermal fibroblasts. Alpha 1(I) and alpha1 (III) procollagen mRNA
were increased in glucan-treated normal human dermal fibroblasts when compared
with the untreated fibroblasts. Collagen synthesis was increased at 24 hours and 
48 hours following glucan treatment of normal human dermal fibroblasts.
Down-regulation of NF-1 by pentifylline inhibited glucan-induced procollagen mRNA
expression. These data indicate that glucan can directly stimulate human
fibroblast collagen biosynthesis through an NF-1-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 12100377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31694-702. Epub 2002 Jun 21.

p73 Interacts with c-Myc to regulate Y-box-binding protein-1 expression.

Uramoto H(1), Izumi H, Ise T, Tada M, Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Yasumoto K, Funa K,
Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

YB-1 is a member of the cold shock domain family of proteins that is important
for signaling DNA damage and cell proliferation. YB-1 is induced by DNA damage
and can also recognize cisplatin-modified DNA. In this study we observed a 6-fold
increase in the steady-state level of YB-1 mRNA in response to cisplatin exposure
in cells of the human cancer cell line KB. We present evidence from
cotransfection experiments for a critical role of c-Myc and p73 in the
transactivation of the YB-1 promoter. p73 transactivated the YB-1 promoter in
experiments with Saos-2 cells, which express c-Myc, but not with HO15.19 cells,
which lack c-Myc. In turn, c-Myc transactivated an intact YB-1 promoter but not a
YB-1 promoter with a mutant E-box, indicating that the E-box is necessary for the
response of the promoter to cisplatin. We also found that p73 interacts with
c-Myc in vitro and in vivo. Using deletion mutants we showed that the DNA-binding
domain of p73 and the C-terminal region of c-Myc are required for the
interaction. Furthermore, p73 stimulated the interaction of Max with c-Myc and
promoted binding of the c-Myc-Max complex to its target DNA. Our data suggest
that p73 stimulates the transcription of the YB-1 promoter by enhancing
recruitment of the c-Myc-Max complex to the E-box.

PMID: 12080043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Jul;62(1):154-61.

The homeodomain Pbx2-Prep1 complex modulates hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mediated activation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 gene.

Gregory PA(1), Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia.

UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are expressed in a wide range of tissues in
which their levels of expression and distribution are dependent on cell-type
specific regulatory mechanisms. The presence of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1 binding site in the proximal promoters of several UGT2B genes has been shown to
contribute to their expression in liver cells and possibly other HNF1-containing 
cell types. In some of these UGT2B genes, a putative pre-B cell homeobox (Pbx)
transcription factor binding site is found directly adjacent to the functional
HNF1 site. To determine whether this putative Pbx site contributes to the
regulation of UGT2B expression, we chose the UGT2B17 gene and investigated the
capacity of its Pbx site to bind specific transcription factors and alter
promoter activity. The UGT2B17 Pbx site matches a consensus Pbx site known to
bind members of the Pbx, Hox, Meis, and Prep1 families of homeodomain-containing 
proteins and has previously been shown to bind nuclear proteins in DNaseI
footprint assays. In this study, we used gel shift and functional assays to show 
that a Pbx2-Prep1 heterodimer can bind to the UGT2B17 Pbx site and interfere with
the binding of HNF1alpha to its site adjacent to the Pbx site. This interaction
of Pbx2-Prep1 and HNF1alpha results in down-regulation of HNF1alpha-mediated
activation of the UGT2B17 promoter. Modulation of transcription by restricting
the binding of transcriptional effectors to their target site is a novel role for
Pbx2-Prep1 complexes.

PMID: 12065766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochem J. 2002 Sep 15;366(Pt 3):807-16.

Tumour metastasis suppressor, nm23-beta, inhibits gelatinase A transcription by
interference with transactivator Y-box protein-1 (YB-1).

Cheng S(1), Alfonso-Jaume MA, Mertens PR, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affair Medical Center,
University of California, San Francisco 94121, USA.

Gelatinase A transcriptional regulation is the consequence of combinatorial
interactions with key promoter and enhancer elements identified within this gene.
A potent 40 bp enhancer response element, RE-1, located in the near 5' flanking
regions of the rat and human gelatinase A genes drives high-level expression in
glomerular mesangial cells (MCs). Southwestern-blot analysis of MC nuclear
extracts revealed specific interactions of RE-1 with at least four proteins, of
which three have been identified as p53, activator protein 2 and the
single-stranded DNA-binding factor Y-box protein-1 (YB-1). In the present study, 
we report the identification of a fourth 17 kDa RE-1-binding protein as the rat
homologue (nm23-beta) of the human nm23-H1 metastasis suppressor gene.
Recombinant nm23-beta protein bound only the single-stranded forms of the RE-1
sequence. Mutagenesis revealed direct interaction of nm23-beta with a repeat
sequence, 5'-GGGTTT-3', shown previously to specifically interact with YB-1
[Mertens, Harendza, Pollock and Lovett (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 22905-22912],
and recombinant nm23-beta protein competed for single-stranded YB-1 binding.
Transient transfection of MC with an nm23-beta expression plasmid within the
context of a RE-1/simian virus 40 promoter/luciferase reporter yielded a
concentration-dependent repression (80-90%) of luciferase activity in MC and Rat1
fibroblasts. A similar pattern of nm23-beta repression was demonstrated within
the context of the RE-1/homologous gelatinase A promoter. Co-transfection of
nm23-beta blocked YB-1-mediated activation of transcription and expression of
gelatinase A. Nm23-beta may be an important physiological regulator of gelatinase
A transcription that acts by competitive interference with the single-stranded
transactivator YB-1. Gelatinase A is a key mediator of tumour metastasis,
suggesting that competitive suppression of transcription by nm23-beta (or the
human nm23-H1) may be a component of the reduced metastatic capabilities of cells
expressing high levels of this protein.

PMCID: PMC1222814
PMID: 12010125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Apr 12;1574(3):231-44.

Identification of a novel nuclear factor-binding site in the Pisum sativum sad
gene promoters.

Gittins JR(1), Schuler MA, Strid A.

Author information: 
(1)Biokemi och Biofysik, Institutionen för Kemi, Göteborgs Universitet, P.O. Box 
462, S-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.

DNA fragments containing the 5' promoter regions of the Pisum sativum sadA and
sadC genes were amplified from genomic DNA, cloned and sequenced. These sequences
contain a number of conserved cis-acting elements, which are potentially involved
in stress-induced transcription of the sad genes. To determine whether any of the
identified elements are active in binding nuclear factors in vitro, 11 60-bp
overlapping (by 30 bp) DNA probe fragments covering the proximal sadC promoter
sequence (360 bp) were used in electrophoretic mobility shift assays with
competition. Binding activities were compared in nuclear extracts from control,
UV-B-stressed and wounded pea leaves. The pattern of DNA binding was almost
identical with all three extracts, with one 30-bp region being the predominant
site for factor binding. Using overlapping sub-fragments of this region, the
majority of the specific binding could be attributed to the novel 11-bp GC-rich
sequence GTGGCGCCCAC. An almost identical sequence is conserved in the sadA
promoter. This motif has features in common with a number of recognised
cis-elements, which suggests a possible binding site for factors which play a
role in regulating sad gene transcription.

PMID: 11997088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25893-903. Epub 2002 May 3.

Transcription factor NFIC undergoes N-glycosylation during early mammary gland
involution.

Kane R(1), Murtagh J, Finlay D, Marti A, Jaggi R, Blatchford D, Wilde C, Martin
F.

Author information: 
(1)Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research and Department of
Pharmacology, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Expression of a 74-kDa nuclear factor I (NFI) protein is triggered in early
involution in the mouse mammary gland, and its expression correlates with
enhanced occupation of a twin (NFI) binding element in the clusterin promoter, a 
gene whose transcription is induced at this time (Furlong, E. E., Keon, N. K.,
Thornton, F. D., Rein, T., and Martin, F. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271,
29688-29697). We now identify this 74-kDa NFI as an NFIC isoform based on its
interaction in Western analysis with two NFIC-specific antibodies. A transition
from the expression of a 49-kDa NFIC in lactation to the expression of the 74-kDa
NFIC in early involution is demonstrated. We show that the 74-kDa NFIC binds
specifically to concanavalin A (ConA) and that this binding can be reversed by
the specific ConA ligands, methyl alpha-D-mannopyranoside and methyl
alpha-D-glucopyranoside. In addition, its apparent molecular size was reduced to 
approximately 63 kDa by treatment with the peptide N-glycosidase. The 49-kDa
lactation-associated NFIC did not bind ConA nor was it affected by peptide
N-glycosidase. Tunicamycin, a specific inhibitor of N-glycosylation, blocked
formation of the 74-kDa NFI in involuting mouse mammary gland in vivo when
delivered from implanted Elvax depot pellets. Finally, the production of the ConA
binding activity could be reiterated in "mammospheres" formed from primary mouse 
mammary epithelial cells associated with a laminin-rich extracellular matrix.
Synthesis of the 74-kDa NFIC was also inhibited in this setting by tunicamycin.
Thus, involution triggers the production of an NFIC isoform that is
post-translationally modified by N-glycosylation. We further show, by using
quantitative competitive reverse transcriptase-PCR, that there is increased
expression of the major mouse mammary NFIC mRNA transcript, mNFIC2, in early
involution, suggesting that the involution-associated change in NFIC expression
also has a transcriptional contribution.

PMID: 11991954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):24875-82. Epub 2002 Apr 24.

Combinatorial interactions of p53, activating protein-2, and YB-1 with a single
enhancer element regulate gelatinase A expression in neoplastic cells.

Mertens PR(1), Steinmann K, Alfonso-Jaume MA, En-Nia A, Sun Y, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Medical Clinic II, RWTH Aachen,
Pauwelsstrasse 30, Germany. Pmertens@ukaachen.de

Gelatinase A, also denoted matrix metalloproteinase 2, plays multiple critical
roles in the neoplastic process, including facilitation of neoangiogenesis and
formation of distal metastases. The transcriptional regulation of the gelatinase 
A gene is under the control of strong, evolutionarily conserved cis-acting
enhancer elements, designated the r2 (human) or RE-1 (rat), that harbor
contiguous binding motifs for the transcription factors activating protein-2
(AP2), p53, and YB-1. Using recombinant transcription factors, complex patterns
of RE-1 binding were observed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Increased 
complex formation was detected with the AP2/YB-1 and AP2/p53 combinations, while 
YB-1 competed with p53 for binding. The combination of AP2, p53, and YB-1 yielded
novel ternary complexes, particularly when binding to single-stranded RE-1
probes. Transient transfection of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines with a
series of gelatinase A luciferase reporter constructs were in accordance with the
binding patterns determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Combined AP2
and p53 increased gelatinase A luciferase reporter activity significantly, and
the inclusion of YB-1 yielded further increase in both reporter activity and
secreted levels of gelatinase A protein. YB-1 and p53 expression are increased
following multiple genotoxic stresses, including irradiation, and the synergistic
interactions of these induced transcription factors with the widely expressed AP2
protein provide a probable pathophysiologic mechanism for the enhanced tumor cell
synthesis of gelatinase A induced by radiation.

PMID: 11973333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(8):3828-38.

Functional interaction between JC virus late regulatory agnoprotein and cellular 
Y-box binding transcription factor, YB-1.

Safak M(1), Sadowska B, Barrucco R, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurovirology, Center for Neurovirology and Cancer
Biology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Human polyomavirus JC virus (JCV) is a causative agent of progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy which results from lytic infection of glial cells. Although
significant progress has been made in understanding the regulation of JCV gene
transcription, the mechanism(s) underlying the viral lytic cycle remains largely 
unknown. We recently reported that the JCV late auxiliary Agnoprotein may have a 
regulatory role in JCV gene transcription and replication. Here, we investigated 
its regulatory function in viral gene transcription through its physical and
functional interaction with YB-1, a cellular transcription factor which
contributes to JCV gene expression in glial cells. Time course studies revealed
that Agnoprotein is first detected at day 3 postinfection and that its level
increased during the late stage of the infection cycle. Agnoprotein is mainly
localized to the cytoplasmic compartment of the infected cell, with high
concentrations found in the perinuclear region. While the position of Agnoprotein
throughout the infection cycle remained relatively unaltered, the subcellular
distribution of YB-1 between the cytoplasm and nucleus changed. Results from
coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments
revealed that Agnoprotein physically interacts with YB-1 and that the
amino-terminal region of Agnoprotein, between residues 1 and 36, is critical for 
this association. Further investigation of this interaction by functional assays 
demonstrated that Agnoprotein negatively regulates YB-1-mediated gene
transcription and that the region corresponding to residues 1 to 36 of
Agnoprotein is important for the observed regulatory event. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that the interaction of the viral late regulatory Agnoprotein
and cellular Y-box binding factor YB-1 modulates transcriptional activity of JCV 
promoters.

PMCID: PMC136065
PMID: 11907223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17589-96. Epub 2002 Mar 4.

Nuclear factor 1-C2 contributes to the tissue-specific activation of a milk
protein gene in the differentiating mammary gland.

Kannius-Janson M(1), Johansson EM, Bjursell G, Nilsson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of CMB/Molecular Biology, Box 462, S-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.
Marie.Kannius@molbio.gu.se

Members of the nuclear factor 1 (NF1) transcription factor family have been
postulated to be involved in the regulation of milk genes. In this work we have
been able to identify the splice variant NF1-C2 as an important member of a
tissue-specific activating complex that regulates the milk gene encoding carboxyl
ester lipase (CEL). Mutation of the NF1-binding site in the CEL gene promoter
results in a drastic reduction of the gene expression to about 15% in mammary
epithelial cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the NF1-C2 protein interacts
with a higher affinity to the NF1-binding site in the CEL gene promoter than
other NF1 family members do and that NF1-C2 in the mouse mammary gland is a
phosphorylated protein. During development of the mouse mammary gland, binding of
NF1-C2 to the CEL gene promoter is induced at midpregnancy, in correlation with
the induction of CEL gene expression. The fact that the NF1-C2 involving complex 
remains throughout the lactation period and decreases during the weaning period, 
when the CEL gene is down-regulated, supports its importance in the regulation of
CEL gene expression. To our knowledge, this is the first report identifying a
specific, endogenously expressed NF1 isoform to be involved in the
tissue-specific activation of a gene.

PMID: 11877413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Mol Biol. 2002 Feb 15;316(2):317-26.

The solution structure and DNA-binding properties of the cold-shock domain of the
human Y-box protein YB-1.

Kloks CP(1), Spronk CA, Lasonder E, Hoffmann A, Vuister GW, Grzesiek S, Hilbers
CW.

Author information: 
(1)NSR Center for Molecular Structure, Design and Synthesis, Laboratory of
Biophysical Chemistry, University of Nijmegen, Toernooiveld 1, 6525 ED Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

The human Y-box protein 1 (YB-1) is a member of the Y-box protein family, a class
of proteins involved in transcriptional and translational regulation of a wide
range of genes. Here, we report the solution structure of the cold-shock domain
(CSD) of YB-1, which is thought to be responsible for nucleic acid binding. It is
the first structure solved of a eukaryotic member of the cold-shock protein
family and consists of a closed five-stranded anti-parallel beta-barrel capped by
a long flexible loop. The structure of CSD is similar to the OB-fold and a
comparison with bacterial cold-shock proteins shows that its structural
properties are conserved from bacteria to man. Our data suggest the presence of a
DNA-binding site consisting of a patch of positively charged and aromatic
residues on the surface of the beta-barrel. Further, it is shown that CSD, which 
has a preference for binding single-stranded pyrimidine-rich sequences, binds
weakly and hardly specifically to DNA. Binding affinities reported for intact
YB-1 indicate that domains other than the CSD play a role in DNA binding of YB-1.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11851341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(1):7-13.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of a factor that binds to the proximal 
promoter of human angiotensinogen.

Nakajima T(1), Inoue I, Cheng T, Lalouel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112-5331,
USA.

A significant association has been reported between a common variant in the
angiotensinogen gene (AGT), allele T235, and essential hypertension. In
subsequent work, it was found that another variant, the presence of an adenine
instead of a guanine 6bp upstream from the initiation site of transcription, was 
in absolute linkage disequilibrium with T235. The nucleotide substitution at the 
-6 position affected the formation of DNA-protein complexes in gel mobility shift
assays and the basal transcription of AGT in transactivation experiments. We have
further examined the potential impact of this polymorphism on AGT promoter
function. In ultraviolet cross-linking analysis. 150- and 75-kDa proteins bound
to the AGT proximal promoter. The possible involvement of factors that bind to
GC-rich domains, including Sp1, Sp3, and AP2, was not supported by gel mobility
shift assays. Screening an expression library with a double-stranded DNA segment 
centered on -6 led to the isolation of cDNA clones encoding the YB1 protein. The 
specificity of the interaction of YB1 with the proximal promoter of AGT was
verified by Southwestern blotting and gel mobility shift assays. In
cotransfection experiments, YB1 reduced basal AGT promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. Although these observations suggest a possible role for
YB1 in modulating AGT expression, this function is likely to occur in the context
of complex interactions involving other nuclear factors. The work illustrates the
challenge of developing a molecular understanding of the relationship between
common genetic variants and conditions that are only partly caused by them.

PMID: 11829142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 1;290(4):1255-9.

Mechanism of oxidative stress-induced GADD153 gene expression in vascular smooth 
muscle cells.

Tang JR(1), Nakamura M, Okura T, Takata Y, Watanabe S, Yang ZH, Liu J, Kitami Y, 
Hiwada K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Onsen-gun, Ehime, 791-0295, Japan.

Oxidative stress plays a critical role in normal functioning of cardiac and
vascular cells as well as in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Growth
arrest and DNA damage-inducible gene 153 (GADD153), which is upregulated by
oxidative stress, regulates the cell cycle and apoptosis. Previously an AP-1 was 
reported to contribute significantly to GADD153 gene transcriptional activation
by oxidative stress. Recently, we have reported that GADD153 gene promoter
activity is negatively regulated by nuclear factor 1 (NF1), in vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs). The aim of this study was to elucidate the roles of AP-1
and NF1 in GADD153 gene induction by oxidative stress in VSMCs. H(2)O(2) induced 
GADD153 mRNA and reduced NF1 mRNA expression. In the electromobility shift assay,
H(2)O(2) induced AP-1-binding activity and reduced NF1-binding activity.
Overexpression of NF1 significantly suppressed the induction of the GADD153 gene 
after treatment with H(2)O(2). These results revealed that induction of the
GADD153 gene by oxidative stress is regulated mainly by two nuclear factors, NF1 
and AP-1.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11811998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Infect Immun. 2002 Feb;70(2):988-92.

Gene expression profiling in AGS cells stimulated with Helicobacter pylori
isogenic strains (cagA positive or cagA negative).

Bach S(1), Makristathis A, Rotter M, Hirschl AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hygiene Institute, University of Vienna, 
A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

To study host response to CagA, human gastric cancer cell line AGS was infected
with a Helicobacter pylori type I wild-type or isogenic cagA-negative mutant.
Differentially expressed genes were identified using cDNA array technology. By
Northern blotting, downregulation of focal adhesion kinase and upregulation of
LIM kinase mRNA in the presence of CagA were clearly verified. Furthermore,
upregulation of LIM kinase, macrophage inflammatory protein-2, c-myc, and bone
morphogenetic protein-1 and downregulation of transcription factor Y-box binding 
protein-1 and focal adhesion kinase mRNA in response to H. pylori type I
infection compared to the uninfected control could be shown by Northern blotting.
Hence, these findings identified new targets for further functional studies on H.
pylori-associated pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC127671
PMID: 11796637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10427-34. Epub 2002 Jan 11.

YB-1 relocates to the nucleus in adenovirus-infected cells and facilitates viral 
replication by inducing E2 gene expression through the E2 late promoter.

Holm PS(1), Bergmann S, Jurchott K, Lage H, Brand K, Ladhoff A, Mantwill K,
Curiel DT, Dobbelstein M, Dietel M, Gansbacher B, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Experimentelle Onkologie und Therapieforschung, Technische
Universität München, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, München 81675, Germany.
per.s.holm@lrz.tum.de

The adenovirus early proteins E1A and E1B-55kDa are key regulators of viral DNA
replication, and it was thought that targeting of p53 by E1B-55kDa is essential
for this process. Here we have identified a previously unrecognized function of
E1B for adenovirus replication. We found that E1B-55kDa is involved in targeting 
the transcription factor YB-1 to the nuclei of adenovirus type 5-infected cells
where it is associated with viral inclusion bodies believed to be sites of viral 
transcription and replication. We show that YB-1 facilitates E2 gene expression
through the E2 late promoter thus controlling E2 gene activity at later stages of
infection. The role of YB-1 for adenovirus replication was demonstrated with an
E1-minus adenovirus vector containing a YB-1 transgene. In infected cells, AdYB-1
efficiently replicated and produced infectious progeny particles. Thus,
adenovirus E1B-55kDa protein and the host cell factor YB-1 act jointly to
facilitate adenovirus replication in the late phase of infection.

PMID: 11788582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Int J Cancer. 2002 Jan 20;97(3):278-82.

Y-box factor YB-1 predicts drug resistance and patient outcome in breast cancer
independent of clinically relevant tumor biologic factors HER2, uPA and PAI-1.

Janz M(1), Harbeck N, Dettmar P, Berger U, Schmidt A, Jürchott K, Schmitt M,
Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Growth and Differentiation, Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Intrinsic or acquired resistance to chemotherapy is responsible for failure of
current treatment regimens in breast cancer patients. The Y-box protein YB-1
regulates expression of the P-glycoprotein gene mdr1, which plays a major role in
the development of a multidrug-resistant tumor phenotype. In human breast cancer,
overexpression and nuclear localization of YB-1 is associated with upregulation
of P-glycoprotein. In our pilot study, we analyzed the clinical relevance of YB-1
expression in breast cancer (n = 83) after a median follow-up of 61 months and
compared it with tumor-biologic factors already used for clinical risk-group
discrimination, i.e., HER2, urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1). High YB-1 expression in tumor
tissue and surrounding benign breast epithelial cells was significantly
associated with poor patient outcome. In patients who received postoperative
chemotherapy, the 5-year relapse rate was 66% in patients with high YB-1
expression. In contrast, in patients with low YB-1 expressions, no relapse has
been observed so far. YB-1 expression thus indicates clinical drug resistance in 
breast cancer. Moreover, YB-1 correlates with breast cancer aggressiveness: in
patients not treated with postoperative chemotherapy, those with low YB-1
expression are still free of disease, whereas the 5-year relapse rate in those
with high YB-1 was 30%. There was no significant correlation between YB-1
expression and either HER2 expression or uPA and PAI-1 levels. Risk-group
assessment achieved by YB-1 differed significantly from that by HER2 or
uPA/PAI-1. In conclusion, YB-1 demonstrated prognostic and predictive
significance in breast cancer by identifying high-risk patients in both the
presence and absence of postoperative chemotherapy, independent of tumor-biologic
factors currently available for clinical decision making.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11774277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Dec 21;289(5):1262-7.

Members of the nuclear factor 1 family reduce the transcriptional potential of
the nuclear receptor LXRalpha promoter.

Steffensen KR(1), Holter E, Tobin KA, Leclerc S, Gustafsson JA, Guérin SL, Eskild
W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Novum Research Park, Karolinska Institute,
Huddinge, Sweden. knut.steffensen@biosci.ki.se

Expression of the LXRalpha nuclear receptor in liver is predicted to affect
cholesterol and lipid metabolism. Here we show that a short fragment from the
LXRalpha gene promoter spanning the region from -144 to +43 relative to the mRNA 
initiation site can drive transcription of a reporter gene. Under basal
conditions, in vitro DNase I footprinting demonstrated interaction between
nuclear proteins and an NF1 recognition site in close vicinity to the
transcriptional initiation. Both supershift, mutational analyses in EMSA and
transfections provided evidence that the NF1 (nuclear factor I) transcription
factor interacts with the LXRalpha promoter. All four members of the NF1 family
were found to suppress the transcriptional activity indicating a general
inhibitory effect on LXRalpha expression. A similar regulation by NF1 was also
observed when using a fragment from the LXRalpha promoter extending up to
position -3033 therefore giving the inhibitory effect of NF1 a significant impact
on LXRalpha gene expression.

PMID: 11741331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Dec 21;289(5):1225-8.

Activation of the NPTA element of the CYP2A3 gene by NFI-A2, a nasal
mucosa-selective nuclear factor 1 isoform.

Xie Y(1), Madelian V, Zhang J, Ling G, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, State University of New York, Albany, New York 12201, USA.

The aim of this study was to determine whether the NPTA element of the olfactory 
mucosa-predominant CYP2A3 gene can be activated by NFI-A2, a recently identified 
member of the nuclear factor 1 family of transcription factors. Isoform-specific 
RNA-PCR confirmed that NFI-A2 is mainly expressed in rat olfactory mucosa. A
full-length NFI-A2 cDNA was isolated from a cDNA library of rat olfactory mucosa 
and was used for preparation of a construct encoding a fusion protein of NFI-A2
with the yeast GAL4 activation domain. Expression of the fusion protein in yeast 
was detected with an antibody to NFI-A. The fusion protein activated the
expression of a LacZ reporter gene in yeast one-hybrid assays with a reporter
construct containing the NPTA element, but not with other constructs lacking the 
NPTA element. These findings suggest that NFI-A2 may be involved in the
tissue-selective transcriptional activation of the CYP2A3 gene in the olfactory
mucosa.

PMID: 11741324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Matrix Biol. 2001 Dec;20(8):527-41.

A member of the Y-box protein family interacts with an upstream element in the
alpha1(I) collagen gene.

Sun W(1), Hou F, Panchenko MP, Smith BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
St., Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) stimulates protein complex formation
on a TGF-beta response element (TAE) found in the distal portion (-1624) of the
collagen alpha 1(I) promoter. To identify the fibroblast proteins in this
complex, an expression library constructed from human embryonic lung fibroblasts 
mRNA was screened using a tetramer of TAE. Y-box binding protein (YB-1), was
identified as a protein in the TAE-protein complex. The protein expressed by
phage clones formed a specific complex with labeled TAE but not mutated TAE
(mTAE) similar to the complex formed with nuclear protein. Nuclear protein-TAE
complexes isolated from native gels contained YB-1 by Western analysis. TGF-beta 
treatment increased the amount of YB-1 protein in nuclear extracts, decreased its
amount in cytoplasm, but did not alter the steady state levels of YB-1 mRNA. A
full-length YB-1 protein expressed in human lung fibroblasts was primarily
located in the nucleus with punctate staining in cytoplasmic regions. The
expression of YB-1 decreased in the cytoplasm after 2 h of TGF-beta treatment.
Therefore, the increased binding activity seen in TGF-beta-stimulated nuclear
extracts was due primarily to relocalization of YB-1 from the cytoplasm to the
nuclear compartment. Co-transfection of YB-1 cDNA with a collagen
promoter-reporter construct caused a dose-dependent activation of collagen
promoter activity in rat fibroblasts whereas the promoter with a mutation in the 
TAE element was not sensitive to YB-1 co-expression. In conclusion, we have
identified YB-1 as a protein that interacts with a TGF-beta response element in
the distal region of the collagen alpha 1(I) gene. YB-1 protein activates the
collagen promoter and translocates into the nucleus during TGF-beta addition to
fibroblasts, suggesting a role for this protein in TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 11731270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Anticancer Res. 2001 Jul-Aug;21(4A):2357-62.

Expression of Y box-binding protein-1 correlates with DNA topoisomerase IIalpha
and proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression in lung cancer.

Gu C(1), Oyama T, Osaki T, Kohno K, Yasumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, University of Occupational and Environmental Health,
School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Y box-binding protein-1 (YB-1), a member of the DNA binding protein family,
interacts with inverted CCAAT boxes (Y-boxes). Y-boxes are located on the
promoter of numerous genes, such as DNA topoisomerase IIalpha (Topo IIalpha),
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1). In
this study, we used immunohistochemical (IHC) staining to detect YB-1 expression 
in 59 lung cancer tissues and to evaluate whether YB-1 expression was associated 
with the expression of YB-1 target genes such as Topo IIalpha, PCNA and MDR1 in
human lung carcinoma. Twenty-eight out of 59 cases (47.5%) were stained positive 
for YB-1 in the cytoplasm, while 30 out of 59 cases (50.8%) were positive for
PCNA in the nuclei. Topo IIalpha-positive cells were detected in 16 out of 59
cases (27.1%). Eight out of 59 cases (13.6%) had greater than 5% P-gp positive
cells expression. There was a significant correlation between the YB-1 and Topo
IIalpha expression in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) (p=0.0242). YB-1 expression
also correlated with PCNA expression in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
(p=0.0001). Higher levels of YB-1 expression were associated with T3-4 and Stage 
III-IV tumors in adenocarcinomas (p=0.0072; p=0.0168). In contrast, no
relationship was found between YB-1 expression and P-gp expression. Our study
suggests that YB-1 expression correlates with Topo IIalpha and PCNA expression in
lung cancer.

PMID: 11724293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5970-6.

Y box-binding factor promotes eosinophil survival by stabilizing
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor mRNA.

Capowski EE(1), Esnault S, Bhattacharya S, Malter JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin
Medical School, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Short-lived peripheral blood eosinophils are recruited to the lungs of asthmatics
after allergen challenge, where they become long-lived effector cells central to 
disease pathophysiology. GM-CSF is an important cytokine which promotes
eosinophil differentiation, function, and survival after transit into the lung.
In human eosinophils, GM-CSF production is controlled by regulated mRNA stability
mediated by the 3' untranslated region, AU-rich elements (ARE). We identified
human Y box-binding factor 1 (YB-1) as a GM-CSF mRNA ARE-specific binding protein
that is capable of enhancing GM-CSF-dependent survival of eosinophils. Using a
transfection system that mimics GM-CSF metabolism in eosinophils, we have shown
that transduced YB-1 stabilized GM-CSF mRNA in an ARE-dependent mechanism,
causing increased GM-CSF production and enhanced in vitro survival. RNA EMSAs
indicate that YB-1 interacts with the GM-CSF mRNA through its 3' untranslated
region ARE. In addition, endogenous GM-CSF mRNA coimmunoprecipitates with
endogenous YB-1 protein in activated eosinophils but not resting cells. Thus, we 
propose a model whereby activation of eosinophils leads to YB-1 binding to and
stabilization of GM-CSF mRNA, ultimately resulting in GM-CSF release and
prolonged eosinophil survival.

PMID: 11698476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Intervirology. 2001;44(5):311-6.

Recombination hot spot of hepatitis B virus genome binds to members of the HMG
domain protein family and the Y box binding protein family; implication of these 
proteins in genomic instability.

Kajino K(1), Yamamoto T, Hayashi J, Umeda T, Takahara T, Hino O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Cancer Institute, Kami-Ikebukuro,
Toshima-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Previously we hypothesized that the occurrence of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is enhanced by genomic instability induced by the integrated
hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA. Using an in vitro recombination assay, we showed
that a subgenomic fragment of HBV DNA designated 15AB (nt1855-1914) is
indispensable for in vitro recombination, and also showed the existence of 15AB
binding protein. On the assumption that the 15AB binding protein may be a
candidate cellular recombinogenic protein which accelerates genomic instability
and hepatocarcinogenesis, we tried to isolate it by southwestern screening.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We obtained several positive clones including mouse
upstream binding factor (UBF) and DNA binding protein A (dbpA). UBF belongs to an
HMG domain protein family and dbpA belongs to a Y box binding protein family.
15AB binding seemed to be mediated by the conserved DNA binding domains in these 
families, because other members in the families such as HMG1 and YB-1 also bound 
to 15AB. We report them here because several documents have already suggested the
possible association of these families and DNA recombination.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11684893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Virus Res. 2001 Dec 4;81(1-2):1-16.

Cellular and early viral factors in the interaction of adenovirus type 12 with
hamster cells: the abortive response.

Hösel M(1), Schröer J, Webb D, Jaroshevskaja E, Doerfler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Weyertal 121, D-50931, Koeln,
Germany.

The interaction of human adenovirus type 12 (Ad12) with Syrian hamster cells is
remarkable in that there is a block of viral DNA replication and late gene
transcription. We have screened several cellular factors known to play a role in 
adenovirus replication for their possible contributions to the interactions of
Ad12 in the abortive BHK21 hamster cell system. (1) Western blot analyses of
total protein extracts from Ad12- or Ad2-infected BHK21 cells do not reveal a
significant difference in the accumulation of NFIII protein at different times
after infection. Transcriptional levels of the NFIII gene in BHK21 cells are not 
altered upon the abortive infection with Ad12 or the productive infection with
Ad2. The amount of NFIII protein is markedly reduced in nuclear extracts from
BHK21 cells as compared with extracts from C131 hamster cells or human HeLa
cells. A presumptive defect in NFIII transport to the nuclei rather than overall 
reduced NFIII gene transcription might explain the low abundance of NFIII in the 
nuclei of uninfected or Ad12-infected BHK21 cells. The productive infection of
BHK21 or C131 cells with Ad2 leads to an increase in the NFIII concentration in
the nuclei of infected cells, late after infection to a decrease; (2) NFI levels 
in the nuclei of mock-infected or Ad2- or Ad12-infected BHK21 cells are
comparable with those in HeLa or in C131 cells. Thus, deficiencies in NFI may not
play a role in the abortive system; (3) The absence of morphological alterations 
in PML protein domains from globular to track-like structures in the nuclei of
Ad12-infected hamster cells correlates with the inability of Ad12 DNA to
replicate in BHK21 cells. In BHK21 cells, the E4-ORF3 of Ad12 DNA is only weakly 
transcribed and only small amounts of the gene product are synthesized. In
Ad12-infected C131 cells, which allow the replication of Ad12 DNA, the E4-ORF3 of
Ad12 DNA is expressed, and track-like PML protein structures are observed.
Transfection of the 12-E4-ORF3-EGFP construct leads to the expression of both the
green fluorescent protein (GFP) and of the 12-E4-ORF3 gene product in 20-30% of
the transfected BHK21 cells and elicits the morphological reorganization of the
PML protein structures in the successfully transfected BHK21 cells. Similar
results are obtained upon transfection of the 2-E4-ORF3 construct. Untransfected 
cells or cells transfected with the empty pIRES2-pEGFP vector carry the globular 
PML protein phenotype; (4) The expression of the 12-E4-ORF3-EGFP and/or of the
NFIII-EGFP constructs upon transfection following Ad12-infection of BHK21 cells
fails to promote Ad12 DNA replication. Hence, the formation of track-like PML
protein structures in BHK21 cells by itself is not a sufficient precondition for 
Ad12 DNA replication in this abortive system. The data demonstrate that the
expression of NFI, NFIII, and/or the conversion of the PML domains do not suffice
to elicit Ad12 DNA replication in the abortive hamster cell system.

PMID: 11682120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Oct;7(10):3151-5.

Nuclear expression of the Y-box binding protein, YB-1, as a novel marker of
disease progression in non-small cell lung cancer.

Shibahara K(1), Sugio K, Osaki T, Uchiumi T, Maehara Y, Kohno K, Yasumoto K,
Sugimachi K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Transcription factor Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1) that binds to the inverted
CCAAT box is involved not only in transcription of various genes but also in cell
proliferation and DNA repair. We determined whether localization of YB-1 in
either the nucleus or cytoplasm could serve as a prognostic marker for patients
with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In 196 NSCLC patients, expression of
YB-1 protein in the nucleus or cytoplasm was immunohistochemically evaluated. Of 
the 196 tumors examined, 88 (44.9%) were positive for YB-1 expression in the
nucleus. Nuclear YB-1 expression significantly correlated with T factor, lymph
node metastasis, and stage of the disease. Patients with a nuclear YB-1 tumor had
a poorer prognosis than did those with a cytoplasmic YB-1 tumor in all of the
NSCLC patients (P = 0.0494) and in patients with squamous cell carcinoma (P =
0.0313) but not in patients with adenocarcinomas. Nuclear localization of the
YB-1 protein may prove to be an important factor of disease progression for
patients with NSCLC, in particular, in cases of squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 11595709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Oct;21(20):6859-69.

Differential interactions of specific nuclear factor I isoforms with the
glucocorticoid receptor and STAT5 in the cooperative regulation of WAP gene
transcription.

Mukhopadhyay SS(1), Wyszomierski SL, Gronostajski RM, Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The distal region (-830 to -720 bp) of the rat whey acidic protein (WAP) gene
contains a composite response element (CoRE), which has been demonstrated
previously to confer mammary gland-specific and hormonally regulated WAP gene
expression. Point mutations in the binding sites for specific transcription
factors present within this CoRE have demonstrated the importance of both nuclear
factor I (NFI) and STAT5 as well as cooperative interactions with the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in the regulation of WAP gene expression in the
mammary gland of transgenic mice. This study reports the characterization of NFI 
gene expression during mammary gland development and the identification and
cloning of specific NFI isoforms (NFI-A4, NFI-B2, and NFI-X1) from the mouse
mammary gland during lactation. Some but not all of these NFI isoforms
synergistically activate WAP gene transcription in cooperation with GR and STAT5,
as determined using transient cotransfection assays in JEG-3 cells. On both the
WAP CoRE and the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat promoter, the
NFI-B isoform preferentially activated gene transcription in cooperation with
STAT5A and GR. In contrast, the NFI-A isoform suppressed GR and STAT
cooperativity at the WAP CoRE. Finally, unlike their interaction with the NFI
consensus binding site in the adenovirus promoter, the DNA-binding specificities 
of the three NFI isoforms to the palindromic NFI site in the WAP CoRE were not
identical, which may partially explain the failure of the NFI-A isoform to
cooperate with GR and STAT5A.

PMCID: PMC99863
PMID: 11564870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Virol. 2001 Oct;75(20):9687-95.

JC virus multiplication in human hematopoietic progenitor cells requires the NF-1
class D transcription factor.

Monaco MC(1), Sabath BF, Durham LC, Major EO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

JCV, a small DNA virus of the polyomavirus family, has been shown to infect glial
cells of the central nervous system, hematopoietic progenitor cells, and immune
system lymphocytes. A family of DNA binding proteins called nuclear factor-1
(NF-1) has been linked with site-coding specific transcription of cellular and
viral genes and replication of some viruses, including JC virus (JCV). It is
unclear which NF-1 gene product must be expressed by cells to promote JCV
multiplication. Previously, it was shown that elevated levels of NF-1 class D
mRNA were expressed by human brain cells that are highly susceptible to JCV
infection but not by JCV nonpermissive HeLa cells. Recently, we reported that
CD34(+) precursor cells of the KG-1 line, when treated with the phorbol ester
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), differentiated to cells with
macrophage-like characteristics and lost susceptibility to JCV infection. These
studies have now been extended by asking whether loss of JCV susceptibility by
PMA-treated KG-1 cells is linked with alterations in levels of NF-1 class D
expression. Using reverse transcription-PCR, we have found that PMA-treated KG-1 
cells express mRNA that codes for all four classes of NF-1 proteins, although
different levels of RNA expression were observed in the hematopoietic cells
differentiated into macrophages. Northern hybridization confirms that the
expression of NF-1 class D gene is lower in JCV nonpermissive PMA-treated KG-1
cells compared with non-PMA-treated cells. Further, using gel mobility shift
assays, we were able to show the induction of specific NF-1-DNA complexes in KG-1
cells undergoing PMA treatment. The binding increases in direct relation to the
duration of PMA treatment. These results suggest that the binding pattern of NF-1
class members may change in hematopoietic precursor cells, such as KG-1, as they 
undergo differentiation to macrophage-like cells. Transfection of PMA-treated
KG-1 cells with an NF-1 class D expression vector restored the susceptibility of 
these cells to JCV infection, while the transfection of PMA-treated KG-1 cells
with NF-1 class A, B, and C vectors was not able to restore JCV susceptibility.
These data collectively suggest that selective expression of NF-1 class D has a
regulatory role in JCV multiplication.

PMCID: PMC114540
PMID: 11559801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Neurovirol. 2001 Aug;7(4):288-92.

Physical and functional interaction between viral and cellular proteins modulate 
JCV gene transcription.

Safak M(1), Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurovirology and Cancer Biology, College of Science and
Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

The lytic phase of JC virus (JCV) appears to be highly complex and remains
elusive. A growing body of experimental evidence suggests that the regulation of 
JCV gene expression and replication requires, in addition to the presence of
specific transcription factors, cooperativity between viral and cellular
regulatory proteins. This cooperativity may be accomplished by physical
interaction of the participant proteins on and/or off the viral DNA sequence.
Here, we present evidence of specific physical and functional interaction between
a cellular factor, YB-1, and the JCV early protein, T-antigen, and showed that
both proteins play important roles in JCV gene transcription. Additionally, our
data indicate that YB-1 also functionally interact with another viral protein,
designated agnoprotein, which is expressed late during the course of infection,
adding further complexity to the currently known picture on JCV gene regulation.

PMID: 11517404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Virology. 2001 Aug 15;287(1):89-104.

Nuclear factor 1 family members mediate repression of the BK virus late promoter.

Kraus RJ(1), Shadley L, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1599, USA.

BK virus (BKV) is a member of the polyoma virus family that is ubiquitous in
humans. Its 5-kb DNA genome consists of a bidirectional promoter region situated 
between two temporally regulated coding regions. We mapped the transcription
initiation site of the major late promoter (MLP) of the archetype strain BKV(WW) 
to nt 185. We found that it lies within the sequence TGGN6GCCA, a binding site
for members of the nuclear factor 1 (NF1) family of transcription factors.
Competition electrophoretic mobility shift and immunoshift assays confirmed that 
NF1 factors present in nuclear extracts of HeLa and CV-1 cells bind to the
BKV-MLP. Because BKV(WW) grew poorly in tissue culture and failed to express
detectable levels of RNA in vitro, SV40-BKV chimeric viruses were constructed to 
investigate the transcriptional function of this NF-1 binding site. These
sequence-specific factors repressed transcription in a cell-free system when
template copy number was low. This repression could be relieved by the addition
in trans of oligonucleotides containing wild-type, but not mutated, NF1-binding
site sequences. SV40-BKV chimeric viruses defective in this NF1-binding site
overproduced late RNA at early, but not late, times after transfection of CV-1
cells. Finally, transient expression in 293 cells of cDNAs encoding the family
members NF1-A4, NF1-C2, and NF1-X2 specifically repressed transcription from the 
BKV late promoter approximately 3-, 10-, and 10-fold, respectively, in a DNA
binding-dependent manner. We conclude that some members of the NF1 family of
transcription factors can act as sequence-specific cellular repressors of the
BKV-MLP. We propose that titration of these and other cellular repressors by
viral genome amplification may be responsible in part for the
replication-dependent component of the early-to-late switch in BKV gene
expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11504545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 15;167(4):2331-42.

Regulation of class II expression in monocytic cells after HIV-1 infection.

Rakoff-Nahoum S(1), Chen H, Kraus T, George I, Oei E, Tyorkin M, Salik E, Beuria 
P, Sperber K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10029, USA.

Retraction in
    Rakoff-Nahoum S, Chen H, Kraus T, George I, Oei E, Tyorkin M, Salik E, Beuria P, 
Sperber K. J Immunol. 2006 Nov 1;177(9):6561.

Human macrophage hybridoma cells were used to study HLA-DR expression after HIV-1
infection. HLA-DR surface expression was lost 2 wk after infection that was
associated with decreased mRNA transcription. Transfecting HLA-DR-alpha and
HLA-DR-beta cDNA driven by a nonphysiological CMV promoter restored expression,
suggesting that regulatory DNA-binding proteins may be affected by HIV-1
infection. There was no protein binding to conserved class II DNA elements (W/Z/S
box, X-1 and X-2 boxes, and Y box) in a HIV-1-infected human macrophage hybridoma
cell line, 43(HIV), and in primary monocytes that lost HLA-DR expression after
HIV-1(BaL) infection. PCR analysis of the HIV-1-infected cells that lost HLA-DR
expression revealed mRNA for W/Z/S (RFX-5), X-1 (RFX-5), X-2 (hX-2BP), and one Y 
box DNA-binding protein (NF-YB), and CIITA, a non-DNA-binding protein necessary
for class II transcription. There was no mRNA for the Y box-binding protein,
NF-YA. However, HLA-DR expression could be restored by transfection with NF-YA
driven by a CMV promoter, although HLA-DR failed to localize in either the late
endosomes, lysosomes, or acidic compartments. This was associated with a loss of 
class II-associated invariant chain peptide and leupeptin-induced protein in the 
43(HIV) cells. To address this further, non-HIV-1-infected 43 cells were infected
with vaccinia virus containing HIV-1 gag, nef, pol, and env proteins. HLA-DR
failed to localize in neither the late endosomes, lysosomes, or acidic
compartments in the vaccinia-infected cells containing HIV-1 env protein. HIV-1
appears to have multiple effects on class II expression in monocytic cells that
may contribute to the immune defects seen in HIV-1-infected patients.

PMID: 11490022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Gene Expr. 2001;9(4-5):203-15.

Downregulation of constitutive and heavy metal-induced metallothionein-I
expression by nuclear factor I.

Majumder S(1), Ghoshal K, Gronostajski RM, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, USA.

Although the existence of repressor protein(s) involved in the regulation of
highly inducible metallothionein-I (MT-I) gene expression has been postulated,
none has been identified to date. We considered nuclear factor I (NFL) protein as
a potential repressor, as three half-sites for NFI binding are present on MT-I
promoter and NFI is known to downregulate several cellular gene promoters.
Overexpression of all four isoforms of mouse NFI protein (NFI-A, -B, -C, and -X) 
suppressed both constitutive and heavy metal-induced activation of the MT-I
promoter in HepG2 cells. However, unlike other target genes of NFI, direct
interaction of NFI with MT-I promoter is not necessary to mediate its repression.
Point mutation of the NFI binding sites within the MT-I promoter that abrogates
NFI binding in vitro could not alleviate the repression. Similarly, NFI proteins 
also repress activity of minimal MT-I promoter deficient in the NFI binding
sites. Further, an NFI-C deletion mutant lacking the DNA binding domain continued
to repress MT-I promoter. Overexpression of MTF-1, the key trails-acting factor
involved in MT-I gene transcription, surmounted NFI-mediated repression of the
basal and zinc-induced MT-I promoter activity. These data demonstrate that NFI is
a repressor of MT-I expression, where its DNA binding activity is not essential
to downregulate the MT-I promoter. Interaction of NFI with another protein(s),
probably MTF-I, may be involved in this repression.

PMID: 11444530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2001 Jun;9(2):143-9.

Expression of survivin, YB-1, and KI-67 in sporadic adenomas and
dysplasia-associated lesions or masses in ulcerative colitis.

Fogt F(1), Poremba C, Shibao K, Itoh H, Kohno K, Zimmerman RL, Görtz HG,
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Urbanski SJ, Alsaigh N, Heinz D, Noffsinger AE, Shroyer
KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Sporadic adenomas are said to exhibit an orderly growth pattern with a reversal
of proliferative and apoptotic cell distribution as compared with normal colonic 
crypts. Dysplastic polyps of patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) may represent 
dysplasia-associated lesions or masses (DALM) with a high associated cancer risk,
or, alternatively, may represent sporadic adenomas. Histologic criteria to
differentiate between sporadic adenomas and DALM have not focused on the balance 
between cell renewal and cell loss. The expression of the novel anti-apoptosis
gene product, survivin, and the proliferation markers, Ki-67 and Y-box binding
protein (YB-1), were investigated by immunohistochemical localization in sporadic
adenomas and DALM lesions of patients with UC. In adenomas, KI-67 was expressed
preponderantly at the luminal aspect of the polyp, whereas its expression was
diffuse in DALM. Survivin was detected diffusely in both adenomas and DALM. YB-1 
showed positive staining in the deep aspect of adenomatous glands but only to a
minor degree at the surface, whereas both deep and diffuse expression patterns of
YB-1 were seen in DALM. The authors conclude that DALM and sporadic adenomas
exhibit different patterns of cellular proliferation and that molecular markers
of cell proliferation, Ki-67 and YB-1, may be useful to distinguish sporadic
adenomas from DALM. However, the similar expression of survivin suggests that the
underlying mechanisms that regulate apoptotic cell death are uniform in these
lesions.

PMID: 11396632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jun 19;98(13):7277-82. Epub 2001 Jun 5.

Thrombin induces the release of the Y-box protein dbpB from mRNA: a mechanism of 
transcriptional activation.

Stenina OI(1), Shaneyfelt KM, DiCorleto PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute of The Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

We have recently demonstrated that thrombin induces expression of the
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain gene in endothelial cells (EC) through
activation of the Y-box binding protein DNA-binding protein B (dbpB). We now
present evidence that dbpB is activated by a novel mechanism: proteolytic
cleavage leading to release from mRNA, nuclear translocation, and induction of
thrombin-responsive genes. Cytosolic, full-length dbpB (50 kDa) was rapidly
cleaved to a 30-kDa species upon thrombin stimulation of EC. This truncated,
"active" dbpB exhibited nuclear localization and binding affinity for the
thrombin response element sequence, which is distinct from the Y-box sequence.
Oligo(dT) affinity chromatography revealed that cytosolic dbpB from control EC,
but not active dbpB from thrombin-treated EC, was bound to mRNA. Latent dbpB
immunoprecipitated from cytosolic extracts of control EC was activated by
ribonuclease treatment. Furthermore, when EC cytosolic extracts were subjected to
Nycodenz gradient centrifugation, latent dbpB fractionated with mRNA, whereas
active dbpB fractionated with free proteins. The cytosolic retention domain of
dbpB, which we localized to the region 247-267, was proteolytically cleaved
during its activation. In contrast to full-length dbpB, truncated dbpB stimulated
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain and tissue factor promoter activity by
over 5-fold when transiently cotransfected with reporter constructs. These
results suggest a novel mode of transcription factor activation in which an
agonist causes release from mRNA of a latent transcription factor leading to its 
transport to the nucleus and its regulation of target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC34659
PMID: 11390977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):28562-9. Epub 2001 May 21.

Hyperthermia-induced nuclear translocation of transcription factor YB-1 leads to 
enhanced expression of multidrug resistance-related ABC transporters.

Stein U(1), Jürchott K, Walther W, Bergmann S, Schlag PM, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle Strasse 10, 13092
Berlin, Germany. ustein@mdc-berlin.de

Genotoxic stress leads to nuclear translocation of the Y-box transcription factor
YB-1 and enhanced expression of the multidrug resistance gene MDR1. Because
hyperthermia is used for the treatment of colon cancer in combination with
chemoradiotherapy, we investigated the influence of hyperthermia on YB-1 activity
and the expression of multidrug resistance-related genes. Here we report that
hyperthermia causes YB-1 translocation from the cytoplasm into the nucleus of
human colon carcinoma cells HCT15 and HCT116. Nuclear translocation of YB-1 was
associated with increased MDR1 and MRP1 gene activity, which is reflected in
strong efflux pump activity. However, a combination of hyperthermia and drug
treatment effectively reduced cell survival of the HCT15 and HCT116 cells. These 
results demonstrate that activation of MDR1 and MRP1 gene expression and
increased efflux pump activity after hyperthermia were insufficient to cause an
increase in drug resistance in colon cancer cell lines. The ability of
hyperthermia to abrogate drug resistance in the presence of an increase in
functional MDR proteins may provide an explanation for the efficacious results
seen in the clinic in colon cancer patients treated with a combination of
hyperthermia and chemotherapy.

PMID: 11369762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Lipid Res. 2001 May;42(5):783-91.

Interleukin 4 induces transcription of the 15-lipoxygenase I gene in human
endothelial cells.

Lee YW(1), Kühn H, Kaiser S, Hennig B, Daugherty A, Toborek M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, KY
40536, USA.

The reticulocyte-type 15-lipoxygenase (15-LO-I) has been implicated in
atherogenesis because of its capability of oxidizing low density lipoprotein.
Therefore, we investigated the expression of the 15-LO-I gene in human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Nonactivated HUVEC did not exhibit detectable
15-LO-I mRNA. However, exposure of the cells to interleukin 4 (IL-4) induced the 
transcription of the 15-LO-I gene in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. 
Interestingly, this induction was not paralleled by a concomitant production of
the functional 15-LO-I enzyme, as indicated by activity assays and
immunoblotting. To gain more information about the mechanism of the induction
process, we investigated IL-4-dependent activation of nuclear transcription
factors for which binding sites were previously identified in the 5'-flanking
region of the human 15-LO-I gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed 
that IL-4 can activate signal transducer and activator of transcription 6,
activator protein 2, GATA motif-binding transcription factor 1, nuclear factor 1,
and SP-1 in HUVEC in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Activation of
these transcription factors was observed as early as 30 min after cytokine
exposure. These data indicate that IL-4 upregulates the transcription of the
15-LO-I gene in human vascular endothelial cells, and this process may involve
the activation of several nuclear transcription factors. The lack of active
15-LO-I protein in the presence of functional 15-LO-I mRNA suggests additional
regulatory elements of 15-LO expression at posttranscriptional levels.

PMID: 11352986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Res. 2001 May 1;61(9):3586-90.

Oncogenic TLS/ERG and EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins inhibit RNA splicing mediated by 
YB-1 protein.

Chansky HA(1), Hu M, Hickstein DD, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The translocation liposarcoma protein TLS has recently been shown to function as 
an adapter molecule coupling gene transcription to RNA splicing. Here we
demonstrate that YB-1, a protein known to play important roles in transcription
and translation, interacts with the COOH-terminal domains of TLS and the
structurally related Ewing's sarcoma protein EWS. Through this interaction, YB-1 
is recruited to RNA polymerase II and promotes splicing of E1A pre-mRNA to the
13S isoform. This splicing function of YB-1 is inhibited by exogenous TLS/ERG or 
EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins, which bind to RNA polymerase II but fail to recruit
the YB-1 protein. In Ewing's sarcoma cells that express endogenous EWS/Fli-1,
this linkage between YB-1 and RNA Pol II via EWS (or TLS) was found to be
defective. Together, these results suggest that TLS and EWS fusion proteins may
contribute to malignant transformation through disruption of RNA splicing
mediated by TLS- and EWS-binding proteins such as YB-1.

PMID: 11325824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Exp Cell Res. 2001 May 1;265(2):319-28.

Glucocorticoid hormone-induced receptor localization to the chromatin fibers
formed on injected DNA in Xenopus oocytes.

Gelius B(1), Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Oocytes from Xenopus laevis have provided a model system for studying the dynamic
changes that occur in chromatin during gene activation. We have reconstituted
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) induced transcription from the mouse mammary tumor
virus (MMTV) promoter by intranuclear injection of an MMTV-driven reporter and
cytoplasmic injection of synthetic mRNA(GR) into Xenopus oocytes. Here we
investigate the intranuclear distribution of injected DNA, which is assembled
into chromatin. We show that this chromatin is organized as an intranuclear
fibrous network. Unliganded GR is located in the cytosol and hormone triggers its
nuclear translocation and association with the chromatin fibers. Furthermore, we 
analyze the intranuclear distribution of other factors involved in transcription 
from the MMTV promoter. Indirect immunofluorescence microscopy on
cryostat-sectioned oocytes revealed that BRG1, which is a subunit of the SWI/SNF 
chromatin remodeling complex, as well as RNA polymerase II and recombinantly
expressed Xenopus nuclear factor 1-B, are all associated with the endogenous
chromosomes and the chromatin fibers formed on injected DNA. This association
does not depend on specific DNA binding sites and appears to be nonspecific.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11302698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):21242-9. Epub 2001 Apr 3.

Stimulation of human endonuclease III by Y box-binding protein 1 (DNA-binding
protein B). Interaction between a base excision repair enzyme and a transcription
factor.

Marenstein DR(1), Ocampo MT, Chan MK, Altamirano A, Basu AK, Boorstein RJ,
Cunningham RP, Teebor GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Human endonuclease III (hNth1) is a DNA glycosylase/apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP)
lyase that initiates base excision repair of pyrimidines modified by reactive
oxygen species, ionizing, and ultraviolet radiation. Using duplex 2'-deoxyribose 
oligonucleotides containing an abasic (AP) site, a thymine glycol, or a
5-hydroxyuracil residue as substrates, we found the AP lyase activity of hNth1
was 7 times slower than its DNA glycosylase activity, similar to results reported
for murine and human 8-oxoguanine-DNA glycosylase, which are also members of the 
endonuclease III family. This difference in rates contrasts with the equality of 
rates found in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae endonuclease III
homologs. A yeast two-hybrid screen for potential modulators of hNth1 activity
revealed interaction with the damage-inducible transcription factor Y box-binding
protein 1 (YB-1), also identified as DNA-binding protein B (DbpB). The in vitro
addition of His(6)YB-1 to hNth1 increased the rate of DNA glycosylase and AP
lyase activity. Analysis revealed that YB-1 affects the steady state equilibrium 
between the covalent hNth1-AP site Schiff base ES intermediate and the
noncovalent ES intermediate containing the AP aldehydic sugar and the
epsilon-amino group of the hNth1 active site lysine. This equilibrium may be a
checkpoint in modulating hNth1 activity.

PMID: 11287425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20766-73. Epub 2001 Mar 7.

Nuclear factor 1 interferes with Sp1 binding through a composite element on the
rat poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase promoter to modulate its activity in vitro.

Laniel MA(1), Poirier GG, Guerin SL.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center and the Unit of Health
and Environment, CHUL Research Center, Ste-Foy, Quebec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) catalyzes the rapid and extensive
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of nuclear proteins in response to DNA strand breaks, and 
its expression, although ubiquitous, is modulated from tissue to tissue and
during cellular differentiation. PARP-1 gene promoters from human, rat, and mouse
have been cloned, and they share a structure common to housekeeping genes, as
they lack a functional TATA box and contain multiple GC boxes, which bind the
transcriptional activator Sp1. We have previously shown that, although Sp1 is
important for rat PARP1 (rPARP) promoter activity, its finely tuned modulation is
likely dependent on other transcription factors that bind the rPARP proximal
promoter in vitro. In this study, we identified one such factor as NF1-L, a rat
liver isoform of the nuclear factor 1 family of transcription factors. The NF1-L 
site on the rPARP promoter overlaps one of the Sp1 binding sites previously
identified, and we demonstrated that binding of both factors to this composite
element is mutually exclusive. Furthermore, we provide evidence that NF1-L has no
effect by itself on rPARP promoter activity, but rather down-regulates the Sp1
activity by interfering with its ability to bind the rPARP promoter in order to
modulate transcription of the rPARP gene.

PMID: 11278663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Biol Rep. 2000 Sep;27(3):167-73.

Characterization of 5'-flanking region of human aggrecanase-1 (ADAMTS4) gene.

Mizui Y(1), Yamazaki K, Kuboi Y, Sagane K, Tanaka I.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Research Laboratories, Eisai Co., Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan.
y-mizui@hhc.eisai.co.jp

Aggrecanase-1, also known as ADAMTS4 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with
thrombospondin motifs 4), cleaves at the Glu373-Ala374 site of aggrecan, thereby 
indicating aggrecan degradation. It is thought that ADAMTS4 plays a pivotal role 
in inflammatory joint diseases and cartilage degradation. To elucidate the
mechanisms of regulation of ADAMTS4 gene expression, we cloned the 5'-flanking
region of the human ADAMTS4 gene and characterized its promoter activity by means
of reporter assay using porcine chondrocytes and NIH3T3 cells. Reporter gene
analysis using deletion variants suggested that the region between -383 and +10
relative to the tentative transcription start site is necessary for full promoter
activity; this region contains one Sp1 and three AP2 sites. In addition, the
segment between -726 and -384 appears to contain silencer element(s). A complete 
deletion mutant of the nuclear factor I (NFI) binding site at -441 to -429
resulted in recovery of the promoter activity in chondrocytes, but not in NIH3T3 
cells. Thus, the NFI site is involved in negative regulation of the human ADAMTS4
promoter activity in chondrocytes.

PMID: 11254106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem Pharmacol. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):511-6.

Repression of cytochrome P450 1A1 gene expression by oxidative stress: mechanisms
and biological implications.

Barouki R(1), Morel Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 490, Université René Descartes, 45 rue des Saints Pères, 75 270
cedex 06, Paris, France. robert.barouki@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) is a member of a multigenic family of
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes. Beyond its usual role in the detoxification of
polycyclic aromatic compounds, the activity of this enzyme can be deleterious
since it can generate mutagenic metabolites and oxidative stress. The CYP1A1 gene
is highly inducible by the environmental contaminants dioxin and benzo[a]pyrene. 
We discuss here the regulatory mechanisms that limit this induction. Several
feedback loops control the activation of this gene and the subsequent potential
toxicity. The oxidative repression of the CYP1A1 gene seems to play a central
role in these regulations. The transcription factor Nuclear Factor I/CCAAT
Transcription Factor (NFI/CTF), which is important for the transactivation of the
CYP1A1 gene promoter, is particularly sensitive to oxidative stress. A critical
cysteine within the transactivating domain of NFI/CTF appears to be the target of
H(2)O(2). The DNA-binding domains of several transcription factors have been
described as targets of oxidative stress. However, recent studies described here 
suggest that more attention should be given to transactivating domains that may
represent biologically relevant redox targets of cellular signaling.

PMID: 11239493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hypertension. 2001 Feb;37(2 Pt 2):419-24.

Nuclear factor 1 is a negative regulator of gadd153 gene expression in vascular
smooth muscle cells.

Nakamura M(1), Okura T, Kitami Y, Hiwada K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Ehime, Japan.

Growth arrest and DNA damage inducible gene 153 (gadd153) is expressed at very
low levels in growing cells but is markedly induced in response to cellular
stresses, including glucose deprivation, exposure to genotoxic agents, and other 
growth-arresting situations. Forced expression of GADD153 can induce cell cycle
arrest and/or apoptosis in many types of cells. Recently, we reported that
GADD153 was induced in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) in neointimal lesions
of balloon-injured carotid arteries. To investigate the underlying molecular
mechanisms of gadd153 gene expression in VSMCs, we isolated and characterized a
promoter region of the rat gadd153 gene. Sequence alignments of this region
revealed 1 TATA-like sequence and several well-known cis elements. The
5'-deletion analysis for this region showed that a domain spanning -447 through
-368 drastically reduced the promoter activity to almost equal levels of
promoterless control. Because this domain contained a consensus sequence for the 
nuclear factor 1 family of proteins (NF1), DNA-binding studies were performed by 
use of 2 types of NF1 consensus probes. Both probes were specifically shifted by 
nuclear extracts from proliferating VSMCs and were supershifted by antiserum
against CCAAT transcription factor/NF1. In addition, promoter activity of a
mutant luciferase vector, which was generated by a point mutation at the NF1
binding motif of the gadd153 gene, was 14-fold higher than that of a wild-type
one. These results suggest that gadd153 gene expression in VSMCs is negatively
regulated by an NF1-binding motif, and NF1 may act as an antiapoptotic factor by 
continuously suppressing gadd153 gene expression in growing VSMCs.

PMID: 11230311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Mar 1;29(5):1200-7.

Y box-binding protein-1 binds preferentially to single-stranded nucleic acids and
exhibits 3'-->5' exonuclease activity.

Izumi H(1), Imamura T, Nagatani G, Ise T, Murakami T, Uramoto H, Torigoe T,
Ishiguchi H, Yoshida Y, Nomoto M, Okamoto T, Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Funa K, Kohno
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka Yahatanisi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

We have previously shown that Y box-binding protein-1 (YB-1) binds preferentially
to cisplatin-modified Y box sequences. Based on structural and biochemical data, 
we predicted that this protein binds single-stranded nucleic acids. In the
present study we confirmed the prediction and also discovered some unexpected
functional features of YB-1. We found that the cold shock domain of the protein
is necessary but not sufficient for double-stranded DNA binding while the C-tail 
domain interacts with both single-stranded DNA and RNA independently of the cold 
shock domain. In an in vitro translation system the C-tail domain of the protein 
inhibited translation but the cold shock domain did not. Both in vitro pull-down 
and in vivo co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that YB-1 can form a
homodimer. Deletion analysis mapped the C-tail domain of the protein as the
region of homodimerization. We also characterized an intrinsic 3'-->5' DNA
exonuclease activity of the protein. The region between residues 51 and 205 of
its 324-amino acid extent is required for full exonuclease activity. Our findings
suggest that YB-1 functions in regulating DNA/RNA transactions and that these
actions involve different domains.

PMCID: PMC29712
PMID: 11222770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Gastroenterology. 2001 Jan;120(1):200-9.

Transcription of SST2 somatostatin receptor gene in human pancreatic cancer cells
is altered by single nucleotide promoter polymorphism.

Torrisani J(1), Bouisson M, Puente E, Capellà G, Laurent-Puig P, Berger A, Vaysse
N, Susini C, Buscail L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 531, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Rangueil, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The somatostatin receptor SST2 mediates the antiproliferative 
effect of stable somatostatin analogues. SST2 gene expression is lost in most
human pancreatic carcinomas. We investigated the mechanisms that could be
involved in this defect.
METHODS: SST2 gene structure was investigated by sequencing and restriction
fragment length polymorphism. Characterization of the polymorphism was performed 
by electrophoretic mobility shift, cross-linking, and transcription assays.
RESULTS: No major deletion of the SST2 coding sequence was found in pancreatic
carcinoma specimens, but 2 point mutations were frequently detected in the
promoter sequence at positions -83 (A-->G) and -57 (C-->G) from the major
transcription initiation site. These mutations were present in pancreatic cancer 
but also in normal pancreatic tissues or leukocytes and thus correspond to a
genetic polymorphism. In the 2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines MiaPaCa-2 and
AsPC-1, the naturally occurring mutation -57G had no effect on transcription of
SST2 gene, whereas -83G mutation reduced it by 60%-70%. We showed that the -83G
mutation creates a specific binding site for the nuclear factor I. Cotransfection
experiments showed that the nuclear factor I-A1.1 isoform was responsible for
SST2 promoter repression.
CONCLUSIONS: The -83G polymorphism identified on human SST2 gene promoter is
responsible for the specific fixation of nuclear factor I and repression of SST2 
transcription in human pancreatic cancer cells. However, its contribution to
pancreatic tumorigenesis remains unknown.

PMID: 11208729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 14;19(54):6194-202.

Direct interaction of p53 with the Y-box binding protein, YB-1: a mechanism for
regulation of human gene expression.

Okamoto T(1), Izumi H, Imamura T, Takano H, Ise T, Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

The Y-box binding protein, YB-1, belongs to a family of multifunctional proteins 
which regulate gene expression on both transcriptional and translational levels. 
The tumor suppressor gene p53 displays growth suppressive properties by
regulating gene expression through transcriptional regulation. We now demonstrate
that YB-1 directly interacts with p53 using an in vitro pull-down assay. Using
immunochemical co-precipitation methods, we also found that the two proteins are 
bound in vivo. Deletion analysis showed that three independent domains of YB-1,
one at the N-terminal and two at the C-terminal, interact with p53. Conversely, a
14 amino acid sequence at the C-terminal of p53 was required for its interaction 
with YB-1. Gel mobility shift assays showed that the interaction of YB-1 with p53
stimulated the sequence-specific DNA binding of p53 to its consensus sequence. By
contrast, this interaction inhibited the binding of YB-1. Using a p53-responsive 
p21 promoter linked to a reporter gene, it can be shown that antisense expression
of YB-1 inhibits the induction of this promoter by p53 in transient transfection 
assays. These findings delineate a straightforward mechanism for gene expression 
through p53-YB-1 interaction.

PMID: 11175333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 1;354(Pt 2):387-95.

A member of the nuclear factor-1 family is involved in the pituitary repression
of the human placental growth hormone genes.

Norquay LD(1), Jin Y, Surabhi RM, Gietz RD, Tanese N, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Technology Group and Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba,
730 William Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3J7.

The human growth hormone (GH) gene family consists of five tandemly arranged and 
highly related genes, including the chorionic somatomammotropins (CSs), at a
single locus on chromosome 17. Despite striking homologies in promoter and
flanking DNA sequences, the genes within this locus have different
tissue-specific patterns of expression: GH-N is expressed almost exclusively in
the somatotrophs of the anterior pituitary; the remaining genes, including CS-A, 
are expressed in placental syncytiotrophoblast. Previously we proposed that
active repression of the placental gene promoters in pituitary GC cells is
mediated by upstream 'P' sequences and, specifically, a 263 bp region containing 
two 'P' sequence elements (PSE-A and PSE-B) and corresponding factors (PSF-A and 
PSF-B). We have now examined the possibility that PSF-A and PSF-B are members of 
the nuclear factor (NF)-1 family. Transcripts of NF-1A, NF-1C and NF-1X, but not 
of NF-1B, were readily detected in GC cells. High-affinity binding of NF-1 to
PSE-B, but not to PSE-A, was confirmed by competition of DNA-protein interactions
by using NF-1 DNA elements and antibodies. Functionally, a NF-1 element was able 
to substitute for PSE-B as a promoter-specific repressor in GC cells after gene
transfer. However, there was a difference in the magnitude of repression exerted 
by the NF-1 and PSF-B elements on the CS-A promoter and, with the use of
mutations, this difference was shown to be consistent with variations in
NF-1-binding sequences. These results indicate that PSF-B, but not PSF-A, is a
member of the NF-1 family, which participates in the PSF complex and in the
repression of the CS-A promoter in pituitary GC cells.

PMCID: PMC1221667
PMID: 11171118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 29;279(3):904-8.

Identification of mouse YB1/p50 as a component of the FMRP-associated mRNP
particle.

Ceman S(1), Nelson R, Warren ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Atlanta, Georgia 
30322, USA.

Fragile X mental retardation is caused by the absence of FMRP, an RNA-binding
protein found in a large mRNP complex. Although there is evidence that FMRP
exists as a homo-multimer, additional proteins have been identified that
associate with FMRP in the mRNP. The autosomal paralogs of FMRP, FXR1P, and
FXR2P, associate with FMRP, as do nucleolin and NUFIP1, all RNA binding proteins.
Using cell lines that were stably transfected with Flag-Fmr1, we identified an
additional protein that coimmunoprecipitates with FMRP. The approximately 50 kDa 
protein was identified by mass spectrometry as mouse Y box-binding protein 1
(YB1), which is 97% identical to the core mRNP protein p50, an RNA-binding
protein. An anti-p50 antiserum recognized the 50 kDa protein, confirming the
identification. The association of the FMRP-mRNP with a Y box protein, the latter
commonly found in mRNPs, further suggests the involvement of FMRP in translation 
modulation.

PMID: 11162447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Feb;59(2):203-11.

Role of an inverted CCAAT element in human topoisomerase IIalpha gene expression 
in ICRF-187-sensitive and -resistant CEM leukemic cells.

Morgan SE(1), Beck WT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pharmacology, Departments of Molecular Genetics,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

DNA topoisomerase (topo) IIalpha gene expression or activity is altered in tumor 
cells selected for resistance to inhibitors of topoII. To better understand the
mechanisms by which topoIIalpha expression levels are modulated, we examined
topoIIalpha transcriptional regulation in ICRF-187-sensitive and
ICRF-187-resistant human leukemic cell lines that express an increased amount of 
topoIIalpha protein and mRNA. Transient transfections of luciferase reporter
plasmids containing either the full-length human topoIIalpha promoter or
fragments of it revealed that topoIIalpha transcriptional activity was
significantly increased in the drug-resistant CEM/ICRF-8 cells, compared with CEM
cells. Specifically, the transcriptional activity of the full-length topoIIalpha 
promoter (nucleotides -557 to +90) was doubled in CEM/ICRF-8 compared with CEM
cells. Serial deletion of the topoIIalpha promoter permitted localization of the 
region responsible for its up-regulation in the drug-resistant cells between
nucleotides -557 and -162, which includes the last three inverted CCAAT elements 
(ICE) 3 to 5. Note that construction of a point mutation in ICE3 resulted in a
significant increase in transcriptional activity of the topoIIalpha promoter in
the drug-sensitive CEM cells. In addition, by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, ICE3 was recognized by a protein complex containing NF-YB that was present
at reduced levels in the topoIIalpha-overexpressing CEM/ICRF-8 extracts,
suggesting that ICE3 plays a negative regulatory role in human topoIIalpha gene
expression. This is the first study to show that topoIIalpha transcriptional
up-regulation in ICRF-187-resistant cells is mediated in part by altered
regulation of the third inverted CCAAT box in the topoIIalpha promoter.

PMID: 11160854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7943-51. Epub 2000 Dec 14.

Cold shock domain factors activate the granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor promoter in stimulated Jurkat T cells.

Diamond P(1), Shannon MF, Vadas MA, Coles LS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Immunology, Hanson Centre for Cancer Research, Institute of 
Medical and Veterinary Science, Frome Road, Adelaide, South Australia, 5000,
Australia. peter.diamond@imvs.sa.gov.au

Cold shock domain (CSD) family members have been shown to play roles in either
transcriptional activation or repression of many genes in various cell types. We 
have previously shown that CSD proteins dbpAv and dbpB (also known as YB-1) act
to repress granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor transcription in
human embryonic lung (HEL) fibroblasts via binding to single-stranded DNA regions
across the promoter. Here we show that the same CSD factors are involved in
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor transcriptional activation in
Jurkat T cells. Unlike the mechanisms of CSD repression in HEL fibroblasts,
CSD-mediated activation in Jurkat T cells is not mediated through DNA binding but
presumably through protein-protein interactions via the C terminus of the CSD
protein with transcription factors such as RelA/NF-kappaB p65. We demonstrate
that Jurkat T cells lack truncated CSD factor subtypes present in HEL
fibroblasts, which raises the possibility that the cellular content of CSD
proteins may determine their final role as activators or repressors of
transcription.

PMID: 11116154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7559-67. Epub 2000 Dec 11.

Chromatin assembly enhances binding to the CYP2B1 phenobarbital-responsive unit
(PBRU) of nuclear factor-1, which binds simultaneously with constitutive
androstane receptor (CAR)/retinoid X receptor (RXR) and enhances CAR/RXR-mediated
activation of the PBRU.

Kim J(1), Min G, Kemper B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular & Integrative Physiology and Cell & Structural
Biology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 61801, 
USA.

Phenobarbital induction of CYP2B genes is mediated by a complex
phenobarbital-responsive enhancer (PBRU), which contains a binding site for
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) flanked by two DR-4 nuclear receptor (NR) binding sites
for a heterodimer of constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and retinoid X
receptor (RXR). To examine potential interactions between NF-1 and CAR/RXR,
binding of purified recombinant proteins to DNA, or to chromatin assembled using 
Drosophila embryo extract, was examined. NF-1 and CAR/RXR bound simultaneously
and independently to the overlapping NF-1 and NR-1 sites; binding of CAR/RXR to
the NR-2 site was modestly increased by NF-1 binding; and CAR/RXR bound to a new 
site in the PBRU region, designated NR-3. Assembly of plasmid DNA into chromatin 
using Drosophila extract resulted in linearly phased nucleosomes in the PBRU
region. The apparent binding affinity of NF-1 was increased by about 10-fold in
assembled chromatin compared with DNA, whereas CAR/RXR binding was decreased. As 
observed for DNA, however, simultaneous, largely independent, binding to the NF-1
and NR sites was observed. CAR-mediated transactivation of the PBRU in cultured
cells of hepatic origin was inhibited by mutations in the NF-1 site, and
overexpression of NF-1 increased CAR transactivation in HepG2 cells. These
studies demonstrate that NF-1 and CAR/RXR can both bind to the PBRU at the same
time and that chromatin assembly increases NF-1 binding, which is consistent with
previous in vivo footprinting studies in which the NF-1 site was occupied in
untreated animals and the NF-1 and flanking NR sites were occupied after
phenobarbital treatment. CAR-mediated trans-activation of the PBRU was increased 
by NF-1, analogous to NF-1 effects on phenobarbital induction in previous
transient transfection studies and consistent with mediation of phenobarbital
induction by CAR.

PMID: 11113125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 20;1498(2-3):162-8.

The DREAM-DRE interaction: key nucleotides and dominant negative mutants.

Ledo F(1), Link WA, Carrión AM, Echeverria V, Mellström B, Naranjo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Biología Molecular y Celular, L115, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, C.S.I.C., Campus Cantoblanco, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

Transcriptional repressor DREAM, an EF-hand containing calcium-binding protein,
blocks basal expression of target genes through specific interaction with DRE
sites in the DNA. The sequence GTCA forms the central core of the DRE site,
whereas flanking nucleotides contribute notably to the affinity for DREAM.
Release of binding of DREAM from the DRE results in derepression, a process that 
is regulated by Ca(2+). Change of two amino acids within an EF-hand in DREAM
blocks Ca(2+)-induced derepression and results in potent dominant negative
mutants of endogenous DREAM.

PMID: 11108959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Dec;58(6):1239-46.

Nuclear factor I/CCAAT box transcription factor trans-activating domain is a
negative sensor of cellular stress.

Morel Y(1), Coumoul X, Nalpas A, Barouki R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U490, Université
Paris V-René Descartes, Centre Universitaire des Saints-Pères, Paris, France.

The adaptive response to cellular stress requires the reprogramming of gene
expression. So far, research has focused on induction mechanisms; several
transcription factors activated by cellular stress have been shown to trigger the
induction of repair and detoxification enzymes. Using the hepatoma cell line
HepG2, we report that the trans-activating function of the nuclear factor I/CCAAT
box transcription factor (NFI/CTF-1) is, on the contrary, repressed by various
stress conditions, including inflammatory cytokine treatment, glutathione
depletion, heat and osmotic shocks, and chemical stress. Under the same
conditions, other transcription factors were not affected. We show that when
Cys-427 within the trans-activating domain of NFI/CTF-1 is mutated into a serine,
the repressive effect triggered by cellular stresses is no longer observed. In
addition, this effect is abolished in cells transfected with a thioredoxin
expression vector. Using the dichlorofluorescein fluorescent probe, we provide
direct evidence that the stress conditions elicit an intracellular reactive
oxygen species generation, which can, in turn, negatively regulate NFI/CTF-1. In 
agreement with these observations, we show that the CYP1A1 mRNA and the CYP1A1
gene promoter, which is a target of NFI/CTF-1, are repressed by stress
conditions. Thus, through the redox regulation of its trans-activating function, 
NFI/CTF-1 constitutes a novel biologically relevant negative sensor of several
stress stimuli.

PMID: 11093759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Nov;38(3):526-34.

Acquisition of double-stranded DNA-binding ability in a hybrid protein between
Escherichia coli CspA and the cold shock domain of human YB-1.

Wang N(1), Yamanaka K, Inouye M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Escherichia coli CspA, a major cold shock protein, is dramatically induced upon
temperature downshift. As it binds co-operatively to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) 
and RNA without apparent sequence specificity, it has been proposed that CspA
acts as an RNA chaperone to facilitate transcription and translation at low
temperature. CspA consists of a five-stranded beta-barrel structure containing
two RNA-binding motifs, RNP1 and RNP2. Eukaryotic Y-box proteins, such as human
YB-1, are a family of nucleic acid-binding proteins that share a region of high
homology with CspA (43% identity), termed the cold shock domain (CSD). Their
cellular functions are very diverse and are associated with growth-related
processes. Here, we replaced the six-residue loop region of CspA between the
beta3 and beta4 strands with the corresponding region of the CSD of human YB-1
protein. The resulting hybrid protein became capable of binding to
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) in addition to ssDNA and RNA. The dsDNA-binding
ability of an RNP1 point mutant (F20L) of the hybrid was almost unchanged. On the
other hand, the dsDNA-binding ability of the hybrid protein was abolished in high
salt concentrations in contrast to its ssDNA-binding ability. These results
indicate that the loop region between the beta3 and beta4 strands of Y-box
proteins, which is a little longer and more basic than that of CspA, plays an
important role in their binding to dsDNA.

PMID: 11069676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. FEBS Lett. 2000 Nov 3;484(2):118-24.

Two nuclear localization signals are required for nuclear translocation of
nuclear factor 1-A.

Imagawa M(1), Sakaue R, Tanabe A, Osada S, Nishihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. imagawa@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Nuclear factor 1 (NF1) proteins are encoded by at least four genes (NF1-A, B, C, 
X). Although DNA-binding and the transcription regulation domains of these
proteins are well characterized, the nuclear localization signals (NLSs) are
still unknown in all NF1s. We have identified two NLSs in NF1-A, and both are
required for full translocation to the nucleus, although one of them itself has a
partial translocation ability. These two NLSs are conserved in all four NF1s.
Interestingly, three isoforms of NF1-A (NF1-A1, A2, A4) have two NLSs and
translocate completely to the nucleus. In contrast, NF1-A3 lacks the second NLS
and partially stays in the cytoplasm. Since NF1s construct homodimer and
heterodimer, these findings indicate the differential regulations of the NF1
translocation.

PMID: 11068044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8499-512.

Thyroglobulin repression of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) gene
expression is mediated by decreased DNA binding of nuclear factor I proteins
which control constitutive TTF-1 expression.

Nakazato M(1), Chung HK, Ulianich L, Grassadonia A, Suzuki K, Kohn LD.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Regulation Section, Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Follicular thyroglobulin (TG) selectively suppresses the expression of
thyroid-restricted transcription factors, thereby altering the expression of
thyroid-specific proteins. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism
by which TG suppresses the prototypic thyroid-restricted transcription factor,
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), in rat FRTL-5 thyrocytes. We show that
the region between bp -264 and -153 on the TTF-1 promoter contains two nuclear
factor I (NFI) elements whose function is involved in TG-mediated suppression.
Thus, NFI binding to these elements is critical for constitutive expression of
TTF-1; TG decreases NFI binding to the NFI elements in association with TG
repression. NFI is a family of transcription factors that is ubiquitously
expressed and contributes to constitutive and cell-specific gene expression. In
contrast to the contribution of NFI proteins to constitutive gene expression in
other systems, we demonstrate that follicular TG transcriptionally represses all 
NFI RNAs (NFI-A, -B, -C, and -X) in association with decreased NFI binding and
that the RNA levels decrease as early as 4 h after TG treatment. Although TG
treatment for 48 h results in a decrease in NFI protein-DNA complexes measured in
DNA mobility shift assays, NFI proteins are still detectable by Western analysis.
We show, however, that the binding of all NFI proteins is redox regulated. Thus, 
diamide treatment of nuclear extracts strongly reduces the binding of NFI
proteins, and the addition of higher concentrations of dithiothreitol to nuclear 
extracts from TG-treated cells restores NFI-DNA binding to levels in extracts
from untreated cells. We conclude that NFI binding to two NFI elements, at bp
-264 to -153, positively regulates TTF-1 expression and controls constitutive
TTF-1 levels. TG mediates the repression of TTF-1 gene expression by decreasing
NFI RNA and protein levels, as well as by altering the binding activity of NFI,
which is redox controlled.

PMCID: PMC102156
PMID: 11046146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Clin Invest. 2000 Aug;106(4):579-87.

Thrombin activates a Y box-binding protein (DNA-binding protein B) in endothelial
cells.

Stenina OI(1), Poptic EJ, DiCorleto PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Thrombin stimulates the expression of multiple genes in endothelial cells (ECs), 
but the trans-acting factors responsible for this induction remain undefined. We 
have previously described a thrombin-inducible nuclear factor (TINF), which binds
to an element in the PDGF B promoter and is responsible for the thrombin
inducibility of this gene. Inactive cytoplasmic TINF is rapidly activated and
translocated to nuclei of ECs upon stimulation with thrombin. We have now
purified TINF from thrombin-treated ECs. Amino acid sequencing revealed it to be 
a member of the Y-box protein family, and the sole Y-box protein-encoding cDNA we
detected in human or bovine ECs corresponded to DNA-binding protein B (dbpB).
DbpB translocated to the nucleus after thrombin stimulation of ECs as shown by
FACS analysis of nuclei from ECs expressing GFP-dbpB fusion proteins. During
thrombin activation, dbpB was found to be cleaved, yielding a 30-kDa
NH(2)-terminal fragment that recognized the thrombin-response element sequence,
but not the Y-box consensus sequence. Preincubation of ECs with protein tyrosine 
phosphatase inhibitors completely blocked dbpB activation by thrombin and blocked
induction of endogenous PDGF B-chain mRNA and promoter activation by thrombin.
Y-box proteins are known to act constitutively to regulate the expression of
several genes. Activation of this class of transcription factors in response to
thrombin or any other agonist represents a novel signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC380248
PMID: 10953033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29915-21.

Physical and functional interaction between two pluripotent proteins, the Y-box
DNA/RNA-binding factor, YB-1, and the multivalent zinc finger factor, CTCF.

Chernukhin IV(1), Shamsuddin S, Robinson AF, Carne AF, Paul A, El-Kady AI,
Lobanenkov VV, Klenova EM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, United Kingdom.

CTCF is a unique, highly conserved, and ubiquitously expressed 11 zinc finger
(ZF) transcriptional factor with multiple DNA site specificities. It is able to
bind to varying target sequences to perform different regulatory roles, including
promoter activation or repression, creating hormone-responsive gene silencing
elements, and functional block of enhancer-promoter interactions. Because
different sets of ZFs are utilized to recognize different CTCF target DNA sites, 
each of the diverse DNA.CTCF complexes might engage different essential protein
partners to define distinct functional readouts. To identify such proteins, we
developed an affinity chromatography method based on matrix-immobilized purified 
recombinant CTCF. This approach resulted in isolation of several CTCF protein
partners. One of these was identified as the multifunctional Y-box
DNA/RNA-binding factor, YB-1, known to be involved in transcription, replication,
and RNA processing. We examined CTCF/YB-1 interaction by reciprocal
immunoprecipitation experiments with anti-CTCF and anti-YB-1 antibodies, and
found that CTCF and YB-1 form complexes in vivo. We show that the bacterially
expressed ZF domain of CTCF is fully sufficient to retain YB-1 in vitro. To
assess possible functional significance of CTCF/YB-1 binding, we employed the
very first identified by us, negatively regulated, target for CTCF (c-myc
oncogene promoter) as a model in co-transfection assays with both CTCF and YB-1
expression vectors. Although expression of YB-1 alone had no effect,
co-expression with CTCF resulted in a marked enhancement of CTCF-driven c-myc
transcriptional repression. Thus our findings demonstrate, for the first time,
the biological relevance of the CTCF/YB-1 interaction.

PMID: 10906122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jul 15;28(14):2726-35.

Discrete promoter elements affect specific properties of RNA polymerase II
transcription complexes.

Steinke JW(1), Kopytek SJ, Peterson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, 2128 TAMU,
College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA.

The frequency of transcription initiation at specific RNA polymerase II promoters
is, in many cases, related to the ability of the promoter to recruit the
transcription machinery to a specific site. However, there may also be functional
differences in the properties of assembled transcription complexes that are
promoter-specific or regulator-dependent and affect their activity. Transcription
complexes formed on variants of the adenovirus major late (AdML) promoter were
found to differ in several ways. Mutations in the initiator element increased the
sarkosyl sensitivity of the rate of elongation and decreased the rate of early
steps in initiation as revealed by a sarkosyl challenge assay that exploited the 
resistance of RNA synthesis to high concentrations of sarkosyl after formation of
one or two phospho-diester bonds. Similar, but clearly distinct, effects were
also observed after deletion of the binding site for upstream stimulatory factor 
from the AdML promoter. In contrast, deletion of binding sites for nuclear factor
1 and Oct-1, as well as mutations in the recognition sequence for initiation site
binding protein, were without apparent effect on transcription complexes on
templates containing the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter.

PMCID: PMC102648
PMID: 10908329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Gene. 2000 Jul 11;252(1-2):1-13.

Regulation of the human fas promoter by YB-1, Puralpha and AP-1 transcription
factors.

Lasham A(1), Lindridge E, Rudert F, Onrust R, Watson J.

Author information: 
(1)Genesis Research and Development Corporation Limited, Auckland, New Zealand.
a.lasham@genesis.co.nz

Fas (CD95/Apo-1) gene expression is dysregulated in a number of diseased states. 
Towards understanding the regulation of fas gene expression, we previously
identified activator and repressor elements within the human fas promoter. Using 
a combination of expression screening and reporter gene assays, we have
identified transcription factors which bind to these elements and thereby
regulate transcription of the fas promoter. These are three single-stranded DNA
binding proteins, YB-1, Puralpha and Purbeta and two components of the AP-1
complex, c-Fos and c-Jun. c-Jun is a potent transcriptional activator of fas and 
stimulated expression levels up to 184-fold in reporter gene assays.
Co-expression with c-Fos abrogated c-Jun-mediated activation. YB-1 and Puralpha
are transcriptional repressors of fas and decreased basal transcription by
60-fold in reporter gene assays. Purbeta was predominantly an antagonist of
YB-1/Puralpha-mediated repression. Overexpression of YB-1 and Puralpha in Jurkat 
cells was shown to reduce the level of cell surface Fas staining, providing
further evidence that these proteins regulate the fas promoter. It has been
suggested that YB-1 plays a role in cell proliferation as an activator of
growth-associated gene expression. We have shown that YB-1 is a repressor of a
cell death-associated gene fas. These results suggest that YB-1 may play an
important role in controlling cell survival by co-ordinately regulating the
expression of cell growth-associated and death-associated genes.

PMID: 10903433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):31274-82.

The upstream region of the Rpe65 gene confers retinal pigment epithelium-specific
expression in vivo and in vitro and contains critical octamer and E-box binding
sites.

Boulanger A(1), Liu S, Henningsgaard AA, Yu S, Redmond TM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retinal Cell and Molecular Biology, NEI, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

RPE65 is essential for all-trans- to 11-cis-retinoid isomerization, the hallmark 
reaction of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Here, we identify regulatory
elements in the Rpe65 gene and demonstrate their functional relevance to Rpe65
gene expression. We show that the 5' flanking region of the mouse Rpe65 gene,
like the human gene, lacks a canonical TATA box and consensus GC and CAAT boxes. 
The mouse and human genes do share several cis-acting elements, including an
octamer, a nuclear factor one (NFI) site, and two E-box sites, suggesting a
conserved mode of regulation. A mouse Rpe65 promoter/beta-galactosidase transgene
containing bases -655 to +52 (TR4) of the mouse 5' flanking region was sufficient
to direct high RPE-specific expression in transgenic mice, whereas shorter
fragments (-297 to +52 or -188 to +52) generated only background activity.
Furthermore, transient transfection of analogous TR4/luciferase constructs also
directed high reporter activity in the human RPE cell line D407 but weak activity
in the non-RPE cell lines HeLa, HepG2, and HS27. Functional binding of potential 
transcription factors to the octamer sequence, AP-4, and NFI sites was
demonstrated by directed mutagenesis, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and
cross-linking. Mutations of these sites abolished binding and corresponding
transcriptional activity and indicated that octamer and E-box transcription
factors synergistically regulate the RPE65 promoter function. Thus, we have
identified the regulatory region in the Rpe65 gene that accounts for
tissue-specific expression in the RPE and found that octamer and E-box
transcription factors play a critical role in the transcriptional regulation of
the Rpe65 gene.

PMID: 10896939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30668-76.

Regulation of brain fatty acid-binding protein expression by differential
phosphorylation of nuclear factor I in malignant glioma cell lines.

Bisgrove DA(1), Monckton EA, Packer M, Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute and University of Alberta,
11560 University Avenue, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1Z2, Canada.

Brain fatty acid-binding protein (B-FABP) is expressed in the radial glial cells 
of the developing central nervous system as well as in a subset of human
malignant glioma cell lines. Most of the malignant glioma lines that express
B-FABP also express GFAP, an intermediate filament protein found in mature
astrocytes. We are studying the regulation of the B-FABP gene to determine the
basis for its differential expression in malignant glioma lines. By DNase I
footprinting, we have identified five DNA-binding sites located within 400 base
pairs (bp) of the B-FABP transcription start site, including two nuclear factor I
(NFI)-binding sites at -35 to -58 bp (footprint 1, fp1) and -237 to -260 bp
(fp3), respectively. Competition experiments, supershift experiments with
anti-NFI antibody, and methylation interference experiments all indicate that the
factor binding to fp1 and fp3 is NFI. By site-directed mutagenesis of both
NFI-binding sites, we show that the most proximal NFI site is essential for
B-FABP promoter activity in transiently transfected malignant glioma cells.
Different band shift patterns are observed with nuclear extracts from B-FABP(+)
and B-FABP(-) malignant glioma lines, with the latter generating complexes that
migrate more slowly than those obtained with B-FABP(+) extracts. All bands are
converted to a faster migrating form with potato acid phosphatase treatment,
indicating that NFI is differentially phosphorylated in B-FABP(+) and B-FABP(-)
lines. Our results suggest that B-FABP expression in malignant glioma lines is
determined by the extent of NFI phosphorylation which, in turn, is controlled by 
a phosphatase activity specific to B-FABP(+) lines.

PMID: 10896661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Neurovirol. 2000 May;6 Suppl 2:S101-8.

Influence of JC virus coding region genotype on risk of multiple sclerosis and
progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.

Agostini HT(1), Ryschkewitsch CF, Baumhefner RW, Tourtellotte WW, Singer EJ,
Komoly S, Stoner GL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurotoxicology Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, MD 20892, USA.

Two features of the biology of JC virus make it a particularly suitable candidate
for an agent in MS-like disease: its neurotropic capability targeting glial cells
as evidenced in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy lesions, and its
capacity for latency and persistence as illustrated by its behaviour in the
kidney. JC virus is chronically or intermittently excreted in the urine by some
40% of the population. The existence of JC virus in multiple coding-region
genotypes provides a unique approach to the study of JC virus-induced
neurological disease. We have previously shown that a genotype originating in
Asia but also present in Europe and the US, called Type 2B, is more frequently
found in PML brain than expected based on its prevalence in urine samples from a 
control population. In contrast, we find that the excretion of JCV in MS patients
is similar in both genotype and frequency to that of control individuals, and
appears to be regulated by factors unrelated to those that control CNS disease
activity.

PMID: 10871796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Oncogene. 2000 May 25;19(23):2786-90.

The concerted regulatory functions of the transcription factors nuclear factor-1 
and upstream stimulatory factor on a composite element in the promoter of the
hepatocyte growth factor gene.

Jiang JG(1), Gao B, Zarnegar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburth, Pennsylvania, PA 15261, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is an important multifunctional cytokine whose
gene expression is regulated mainly at the transcriptional level. Previous
studies using transgenic mice as well as in vitro analyses showed that a
potential regulatory element(s) exists between -260 to -230 bp in the upstream
region of the HGF gene promoter. In the present study, we have discovered that
this region is a composite site through which members of the nuclear factor 1
(NF1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF) families bind to and regulate HGF
gene transcription. Gel mobility shift and supershift assays revealed that USF
and NF1 have high binding affinity for this region and that the binding sites of 
the two different transcription factor families overlap. Functional studies
showed that NF1 suppresses HGF gene promoter activity and that USF has an
activating function. We found that the NF1/X and NF1/Red1 isoforms strongly
suppressed HGF promoter activity while the NF1/L variant had no obvious effects. 
USF1, but not USF2, of the USF family stimulated HGF gene promoter activity. More
interestingly, during liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, a process
which activates the HGF gene, we noted that the binding activity of USF to the
HGF promoter element increased while that of NF1 decreased. These data provide
insight into the molecular mechanisms that govern HGF gene transcription.
Oncogene (2000).

PMID: 10851080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Gene. 2000 May 16;249(1-2):31-45.

Roles of the NFI/CTF gene family in transcription and development.

Gronostajski RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Case Western Reserve University, OH 44195, USA. gronosr@ccf.org

The Nuclear Factor I (NFI) family of site-specific DNA-binding proteins (also
known as CTF or CAAT box transcription factor) functions both in viral DNA
replication and in the regulation of gene expression. The classes of genes whose 
expression is modulated by NFI include those that are ubiquitously expressed, as 
well as those that are hormonally, nutritionally, and developmentally regulated. 
The NFI family is composed of four members in vertebrates (NFI-A, NFI-B, NFI-C
and NFI-X), and the four NFI genes are expressed in unique, but overlapping,
patterns during mouse embryogenesis and in the adult. Transcripts of each NFI
gene are differentially spliced, yielding as many as nine distinct proteins from 
a single gene. Products of the four NFI genes differ in their abilities to either
activate or repress transcription, likely through fundamentally different
mechanisms. Here, we will review the properties of the NFI genes and proteins and
their known functions in gene expression and development.

PMID: 10831836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Genes Dev. 2000 May 15;14(10):1236-48.

Nucleolin and YB-1 are required for JNK-mediated interleukin-2 mRNA stabilization
during T-cell activation.

Chen CY(1), Gherzi R, Andersen JS, Gaietta G, Jürchott K, Royer HD, Mann M, Karin
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

Regulated mRNA turnover is a highly important process, but its mechanism is
poorly understood. Using interleukin-2 (IL-2) mRNA as a model, we described a
role for the JNK-signaling pathway in stabilization of IL-2 mRNA during T-cell
activation, acting via a JNK response element (JRE) in the 5' untranslated region
(UTR). We have now identified two major RNA-binding proteins, nucleolin and YB-1,
that specifically bind to the JRE. Binding of both proteins is required for IL-2 
mRNA stabilization induced by T-cell activation signals and for JNK-induced
stabilization in a cell-free system that duplicates essential features of
regulated mRNA decay. Nucleolin and YB-1 are required for formation of an IL-2
mRNP complex that responds to specific mRNA stabilizing signals.

PMCID: PMC316620
PMID: 10817758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biochem J. 2000 Jun 1;348 Pt 2:297-305.

Chicken Y-box proteins chk-YB-1b and chk-YB-2 repress translation by
sequence-specific interaction with single-stranded RNA.

Swamynathan SK(1), Nambiar A, Guntaka RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

Y-Box proteins comprise a large family of multifunctional proteins with a wide
spectrum of activities in both transcription and translational regulation of gene
expression. Earlier, we have reported on the involvement of chk-YB-2 in
transcriptional regulation of Rous sarcoma virus long terminal repeats and the
involvement of chk-YB-1b in transcriptional regulation of alpha1(I) collagen
genes. Here, we have investigated the potential role of chk-YB-2 and chk-YB-1b in
RNA metabolism. We report that chk-YB-2 and chk-YB-1b are localized predominantly
in the cytoplasm and that they both can bind single-stranded RNA in a
sequence-specific and reversible manner. Well-conserved cold-shock domain,
N-terminal proline-rich domain and the alternating clusters of acidic and basic
amino acids located in the C-terminal ends of these two proteins were all found
to be necessary for their RNA-binding ability. Further, we demonstrate that these
two proteins inhibit translation in vitro and that binding to RNA is required for
this inhibition. The significance of these results is discussed.

PMCID: PMC1221066
PMID: 10816422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15498-503.

Interaction of two multifunctional proteins. Heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein K and Y-box-binding protein.

Shnyreva M(1), Schullery DS, Suzuki H, Higaki Y, Bomsztyk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

The heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) K, a component of the hnRNP
particles, appears to be involved in several steps of regulation of gene
expression. To gain insight into mechanisms of K protein action, we performed
two-hybrid screens using full-length hnRNP K as a bait. Several novel protein
partners were identified, including Y-box-binding protein (YB-1), splicing
factors 9G8 and SRp20, DNA-methyltransferase, hnRNP L, and hnRNP U. In vitro
binding studies and co-immunoprecipitation from cellular extracts provided
evidence for direct interaction between hnRNP K and YB-1. Two distinct domains in
YB-1 were responsible for binding to K protein. Each protein was able to
transactivate transcription from a polypyrimidine-rich promoter; however, this
effect was reduced when K and YB-1 proteins were coexpressed suggesting a
functional interaction between these two proteins.

PMID: 10809782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochem Pharmacol. 1999 May 1;57(9):1073-6.

Positive regulation of the rat CYP2B2 phenobarbital response unit by the nuclear 
receptor hexamer half-site.nuclear factor 1 complex.

Stoltz C(1), Anderson A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Pavillon
L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Canada.

A distal 163-bp fragment mediates phenobarbital responsiveness of the rat CYP2B2 
gene. Multiple cis-acting elements in this fragment cooperate to form a
phenobarbital response unit (PBRU). A nuclear factor 1 binding site and an
associated nuclear receptor hexamer half-site are present in both the rat CYP2B2 
PBRU and the homologous mouse Cyp2b10 sequence. Based on mutational analyses, the
hexamer half-site has been reported to act positively in CYP2B2 and negatively in
Cyp2b10. However, the specific mutations introduced into the rat and mouse
hexamer half-sites were different, raising the possibility that the different
roles attributed to the element may be a consequence of the different mutations
used. We introduced into the rat CYP2B2 hexamer half-site the specific mutational
change previously introduced into the Cyp2b10 sequence, where its effect was to
increase the basal level of expression and to abolish phenobarbital
responsiveness. In the rat context, this mutation reduced but did not abolish
phenobarbital responsiveness and decreased, rather than increased, the basal
level of expression. The residual phenobarbital responsiveness of the hexamer
half-site mutant, as well as that of nuclear factor 1 mutants, indicates that
these elements behave as positive accessory sites, suggesting that factors
binding to them function as activators of phenobarbital-dependent transcription.

PMID: 10796078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biochem J. 2000 May 15;348 Pt 1:235-40.

The repression of nuclear factor I/CCAAT transcription factor (NFI/CTF)
transactivating domain by oxidative stress is mediated by a critical cysteine
(Cys-427).

Morel Y(1), Barouki R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U490, Université Paris V-René Descartes, Centre Universitaire des
Saints-Pères, 45, rue des Saints-Pères, 75006 Paris, France.

The activity of the nuclear factor I/CCAAT transcription factor (NFI/CTF) is
negatively regulated by oxidative stress. The addition of relatively high
(millimolar) H(2)O(2) concentrations inactivates cellular NFI DNA-binding
activity whereas lower concentrations can repress NFI/CTF transactivating
function. We have investigated the mechanism of this regulation using Gal4 fusion
proteins and transfection assays. We show that micromolar H(2)O(2) concentrations
repress the transactivating domain of NFI/CTF in a dose-dependent manner and are 
less or not active on other transcription factors' transactivating domains.
Studies using deletions and point mutations pointed to the critical role of
Cys-427. Indeed, when this cysteine is mutated into a serine, the repression by
H(2)O(2) is totally blunted. Mutation of other cysteine, serine and tyrosine
residues within the transactivating domain had no clear effect on the repression 
by H(2)O(2). Finally, treatment of cells with the thiol-alkylating reagent
N-ethylmaleimide leads to a decrease in the transactivating function, which is
dependent on Cys-427. This study shows that transactivating domains of
transcription factors can constitute very sensitive targets of oxidative stress
and highlights the critical role of these domains.

PMCID: PMC1221059
PMID: 10794737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Apr;14(4):486-505.

Transforming growth factor-beta1 down-regulation of major histocompatibility
complex class I in thyrocytes: coordinate regulation of two separate elements by 
thyroid-specific as well as ubiquitous transcription factors.

Napolitano G(1), Montani V, Giuliani C, Di Vincenzo S, Bucci I, Todisco V, Laglia
G, Coppa A, Singer DS, Nakazato M, Kohn LD, Colletta G, Monaco F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University G. D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1-decreased major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I gene expression in thyrocytes is transcriptional; it involves trans
factors and cis elements important for hormone- as well as iodide-regulated
thyroid growth and function. Thus, in rat FRTL-5 thyrocytes, TGF-beta1 regulates 
two elements within -203 bp of the transcription start site of the MHC class I
5'-flanking region: Enhancer A, -180 to -170 bp, and a downstream regulatory
element (DRE), -127 to -90 bp, that contains a cAMP response element (CRE)-like
sequence. TGF-beta1 reduces the interaction of a NF-kappaB p50/fra-2 heterodimer 
(MOD-1) with Enhancer A while increasing its interaction with a NF-kappaB p50/p65
heterodimer. Both reduced MOD-1 and increased p50/p65 suppresses class I
expression. Decreased MOD-1 and increased p50/p65 have been separately associated
with the ability of autoregulatory (high) concentrations of iodide to suppress
thyrocyte growth and function, as well as MHC class I expression. TGF-beta1 has
two effects on the downstream regulatory element (DRE). It increases DRE binding 
of a ubiquitously expressed Y-box protein, termed TSEP-1 (TSHR suppressor element
binding protein-1) in rat thyroid cells; TSEP-1 has been shown separately to be
an important suppressor of the TSH receptor (TSHR) in addition to MHC class I and
class II expression. It also decreases the binding of a thyroid-specific trans
factor, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), to the DRE, reflecting the
ability of TGF-beta1 to decrease TTF-1 RNA levels. TGF-beta1-decreased TTF-1
expression accounts in part for TGF-beta1-decreased thyroid growth and function, 
since decreased TTF-1 has been shown to decrease thyroglobulin, thyroperoxidase, 
sodium iodide symporter, and TSHR gene expression, coincident with decreased MHC 
class I. Finally, we show that TGF-beta1 increases c-jun RNA levels and induces
the formation of new complexes involving c-jun, fra-2, ATF-1, and c-fos, which
react with Enhancer A and the DRE. TGF-beta1 effects on c-jun may be a pivotal
fulcrum in the hitherto unrecognized coordinate regulation of Enhancer A and the 
DRE.

PMID: 10770487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Apr;12(4):1372-84.

NFI in the development of the olfactory neuroepithelium and the regulation of
olfactory marker protein gene expression.

Behrens M(1), Venkatraman G, Gronostajski RM, Reed RR, Margolis FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Maryland at Baltimore,
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) proteins are DNA-binding transcription factors that
participate in the tissue specific expression of various genes. They are encoded 
by four different genes (NFI-A, B, C, and X) each of which generates multiple
isoforms by alternative RNA splicing. NFI-like binding sites have been identified
in several genes preferentially expressed in olfactory receptor neurons. Our
prior demonstration that NFI binds to these elements led to the hypothesis that
NFI is involved in the regulation of these genes. To analyse the role of NFI in
the regulation of olfactory neuron gene expression we have performed transient
transfection experiments in HEK 293 cells using constructs that place luciferase 
expression under the control of an olfactory marker protein (OMP)-promoter
fragment containing the NFI binding site. In vitro mutagenesis of this site
revealed a negative modulation of luciferase expression by endogenous NFI
proteins in HEK 293 cells. In addition, we have used in situ hybridization to
analyse the tissue and cellular distribution of the four NFI gene transcripts
during pre- and postnatal mouse development. We have simultaneously characterized
the expression of Pax-6, and O/E-1, transcription factors known to regulate the
phenotype of olfactory receptor neurons. We demonstrate that all of these
transcription factors vary in specific spatio-temporal patterns during the
development of the olfactory system. These data on NFI activity, and on
transcription factor expression, provide a basis to understand the role of NFI in
regulating gene expression in olfactory receptor neurons.

PMID: 10762365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Cell Biochem. 2000 Apr;77(3):507-16.

Recognition and binding of the human selenocysteine insertion sequence by
nucleolin.

Wu R(1), Shen Q, Newburger PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical School, and the 
University of Massachusetts Cancer Center, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells cotranslationally incorporate the unusual amino 
acid selenocysteine at a UGA codon, which conventionally serves as a termination 
signal. Translation of selenoprotein gene transcripts in eukaryotes depends upon 
a "selenocysteine insertion sequence" in the 3'-untranslated region. We have
previously shown that DNA-binding protein B specifically binds this sequence
element. We now report the identification of nucleolin as a partner in the
selenoprotein translation complex. In RNA electromobility shift assays, nucleolin
binds the selenocysteine insertion sequence from the human cellular glutathione
peroxidase gene, competes with binding activity from COS cells, and shows
diminished affinity for probes with mutations in functionally important,
conserved sequence elements. Antibody to nucleolin interferes with the gel shift 
activity of COS cell extract. Antibody to DNA-binding protein B co-extracts
nucleolin from HeLa cell cytosol, and the two proteins co-sediment in glycerol
gradient fractions of ribosomal high salt extracts. Thus, nucleolin appears to
join DNA-binding protein B and possibly other partners to form a large complex
that links the selenocysteine insertion sequence in the 3'-untranslated region to
other elements in the coding region and ribosome to translate the UGA "stop"
codon as selenocysteine.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10760958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):20061-8.

The mouse mammary tumor virus promoter adopts distinct chromatin structures in
human breast cancer cells with and without glucocorticoid receptor.

Kinyamu HK(1), Fryer CJ, Horwitz KB, Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and
Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Steroid receptors represent a class of transcription regulators that act in part 
by overcoming the often repressive nature of chromatin to modulate gene activity.
The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter is a useful model for studying
transcriptional regulation by steroid hormone receptors in the context of
chromatin. The chromatin architecture of the promoter prevents the assembly of
basal transcription machinery and binding of ubiquitous transcription factors.
However, in human breast carcinoma T47D cells lacking the glucocorticoid receptor
(GR), but expressing the progesterone receptor (PR), nucleosome B (nuc B) assumes
a constitutively hypersensitive chromatin structure. This correlation led us to
test the hypothesis that the chromatin structure of nuc B was dependent on GR
expression in T47D cells. To examine this possibility, we stably co-transfected
the MMTV promoter and the GR into T47D cells that lacked both the GR and the PR. 
We found that in T47D cells that lack both the GR and the PR or express only the 
GR, nuc B assumes a constitutively "open" chromatin structure, which allows
hormone independent access by restriction endonucleases and transcription
factors. These results suggest that in GR(+)/pr(-) T47D cells, the MMTV chromatin
structure permits GR transcriptional activation, independent of chromatin
remodeling.

PMID: 10751396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochimie. 2000 Feb;82(2):117-22.

The selenocysteine insertion sequence binding protein SBP is different from the
Y-box protein dbpB.

Fagegaltier D(1), Hubert N, Carbon P, Krol A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9002 du CNRS, Structure des Macromolécules Biologiques et Mécanismes de
Reconnaissance, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 15, rue
René-Descartes, 67084, Strasbourg, France.

In eukaryotes, translation of internal UGA selenocysteine codons requires the
SECIS stem-loop structure in the 3'UTR of selenoprotein mRNAs. In an earlier
work, we identified SBP as a selenocysteine insertion sequence (SECIS)-binding
protein. Here, the yeast three-hybrid screen was employed to capture the cDNA of 
SBP. One candidate, satisfying the genetic screens, was identified as the already
known dbpB protein. Although it was also found by another group, but with a
different strategy, to carry SECIS-binding activity, further experiments enabled 
us to show that dbpB was unable to bind the SECIS element in vitro. Altogether,
our findings led us to conclude that, under our conditions, dbpB and SBP are two 
distinct proteins.

PMID: 10727766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8895-902.

Identification and functional characterization of a conserved, nuclear factor
1-like element in the proximal promoter region of CYP1A2 gene specifically
expressed in the liver and olfactory mucosa.

Zhang J(1), Zhang QY, Guo J, Zhou Y, Ding X.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health and the Department of
Environmental Health and Toxicology, School of Public Health, State University of
New York at Albany, Empire State Plaza, Albany, New York 12201-0509, USA.

CYP1A2 is a major cytochrome P-450 isoform in the liver and the olfactory mucosa 
but is essentially not expressed in other tissues. A nuclear factor 1 (NF-1)
-like element was identified in the proximal promoter region of rat, mouse,
rabbit, and human CYP1A2 genes through data base analysis. In vitro DNase I
footprinting with a -211 to +81 probe from the rat CYP1A2 gene and nuclear
extracts from rat liver and olfactory mucosa revealed a single protected region
corresponding to the NF-1-like element at -129 to -111. Protein binding to this
NF-1-like element was tissue-selective and was confirmed by in vivo footprinting 
in native chromatin from rat liver. Multiple DNA-binding complexes were detected 
in gel-shift assays using the CYP1A2 NF-1-like element and nuclear extracts from 
liver and olfactory mucosa, all of which were supershifted in the presence of an 
anti-NF1 antibody. The NF-1-like element was essential for transcriptional
activity of the CYP1A2 gene in an in vitro transcription assay using nuclear
extracts from the two tissues. Thus, members of the NF-1 family of transcription 
factors may play an important role in the tissue-selective expression of the
CYP1A2 gene in the liver and olfactory mucosa.

PMID: 10722736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):4435-44.

Stable expression of a dominant negative mutant of CCAAT binding factor/NF-Y in
mouse fibroblast cells resulting in retardation of cell growth and inhibition of 
transcription of various cellular genes.

Hu Q(1), Maity SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The heterotrimeric CCAAT-binding factor CBF specifically interacts with the CCAAT
motif present in the proximal promoters of numerous mammalian genes. To
understand the in vivo function of CBF, a dominant negative mutant of CBF-B
subunit that inhibits DNA binding of wild type CBF was stably expressed in mouse 
fibroblast cells under control of tetracycline-responsive promoter. Expression of
the mutant CBF-B but not the wild-type CBF-B resulted in retardation of
fibroblast cell growth. The analysis of cell growth using bromodeoxyuridine
labeling showed that expression of the mutant CBF-B decreased the number of cells
entering into S phase, and also delayed induction of S phase in the quiescent
cells after serum stimulation, thus indicating that the inhibition of CBF binding
prolonged the progression of S phase in fibroblasts. These results provide direct
evidence for the first time that CBF is an important regulator of fibroblast
growth. The inhibition of CBF binding reduced expression of various cellular
genes including the alpha2(1) collagen, E2F1, and topoisomerase IIalpha genes
which promoters contain the CBF-binding site. This result implied that expression
of many other genes which promoters contain CBF-binding site was also decreased
by the inhibition of CBF binding, and that the decreased expression of multiple
cellular genes possibly caused the retardation of fibroblast cell growth.

PMID: 10660616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 28;275(4):2979-85.

Transcriptional activation of the MDR1 gene by UV irradiation. Role of NF-Y and
Sp1.

Hu Z(1), Jin S, Scotto KW.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Pharmacology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

The MDR1 promoter is subject to control by various internal and external stimuli.
We have previously shown that the CCAAT box-binding protein, NF-Y, mediates MDR1 
activation by the histone deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A and sodium
butyrate, through the recruitment of the co-activator, P/CAF. We have now
extended our investigation to the activation of MDR1 by genotoxic stress. We show
that activation of the MDR1 promoter by UV irradiation is also dependent on the
CCAAT box (-82 to -73) as well as on a proximal GC element (-56 to -42). Gel
shift and supershift analyses with nuclear extracts prepared from human KB-3-1
cells identified NF-Y as the transcription factor interacting with the CCAAT box,
while Sp1 was the predominant factor binding to the GC element. Mutations that
abrogated binding of either of these factors reduced or abolished activation by
ultraviolet irradiation; moreover, co-expression of a dominant-negative NF-Y
protein (NF-YA29) reduced UV-activated transcription. Interestingly, YB-1, a
transcription factor that also recognizes the CCAAT motif and had been reported
to mediate induction of the MDR1 promoter by ultraviolet light, was incapable of 
interacting with the double-stranded MDR1 CCAAT box oligonucleotide in nuclear
extracts, although it did interact with a single-stranded oligonucleotide.
Furthermore, a mutation that abolished activation of MDR1 by UV-irradiation had
no effect on YB-1 binding and co-transfection of a YB-1 expression plasmid had a 
repressive effect on UV-inducible transcription. Taken together, these results
indicate a role for both NF-Y and Sp1 in the transcriptional activation of the
MDR1 gene by genotoxic stress, and indicate that YB-1, if involved, is not
sufficient to mediate this activation.

PMID: 10644769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Virol. 2000 Jan;74(2):755-63.

Glial cell-specific regulation of the JC virus early promoter by large T antigen.

Kim HS(1), Goncalves NM, Henson JW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a fatal demyelinating disease
that results from an oligodendrocyte infection caused by JC virus. The JC virus
early promoter directs cell-specific expression of the viral replication factor
large T antigen, and thus transcriptional regulation constitutes a major
mechanism of glial tropism in PML. We have previously demonstrated that T antigen
controls the JC virus basal promoter in a glial cell-specific manner, since T
antigen repressed the JC virus and simian virus 40 (SV40) early promoters in
glioma cells but induced strong activation of the JC virus early promoter in
nonglial cells. To further analyze these findings, T antigen and nuclear extracts
from glial and nonglial cells were used to examine DNase I footprints on the
proximal promoter. T-antigen binding to site II was more extensive than expected 
based on sequence homology with SV40, and nuclear proteins protected several
regions of the proximal promoter in a cell-specific manner. Multiple Sp1 binding 
domains were identified. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that
T-antigen-mediated activation required a TATA box sequence, a pentanucleotide
repeat immediately upstream of the TATA box, and an Sp1 binding site downstream
of the TATA box. When footprints were obtained with mutant promoters which
blocked T-antigen-induced transactivation, no change in T-antigen binding was
observed. These results suggest that T antigen activates the JC virus basal
promoter in nonglial cells by interaction with the transcription initiation
complex.

PMCID: PMC111595
PMID: 10623737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Int J Cancer. 1999 Dec 10;83(6):732-7.

Enhanced coexpression of YB-1 and DNA topoisomerase II alpha genes in human
colorectal carcinomas.

Shibao K(1), Takano H, Nakayama Y, Okazaki K, Nagata N, Izumi H, Uchiumi T,
Kuwano M, Kohno K, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery I, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, 
School of Medicine, Kitakyushu, Japan.

The transcription factor YB-1 is expressed in a wide range of cell types and has 
been implicated in the regulation of various genes involved in cell
proliferation. Nuclear expression of YB-1 is correlated with MDR-1 gene
expression in breast cancer and osteosarcoma. In this study, we asked whether
YB-1 expression is enhanced in human colorectral carcinoma and if it is
associated with the expression of target genes such as MDR-1, DNA topoisomerase
II alpha and PCNA. YB-1, DNA topoisomerase II alpha, PCNA and MDR-1 expression
were assessed by Western blotting, Northern blotting and immunohistochemistry in 
26 human colorectal carcinomas. The involvement of YB-1 in DNA topoisomerase II
alpha gene expression was examined by transient DNA transfection assays. YB-1 was
overexpressed in almost all cancerous lesions in comparison with normal mucosa in
surgically resected colorectal carcinomas of 26 patients. YB-1 expression
correlated well with both DNA topoisomerase II alpha and PCNA expression. In
contrast, no correlation was observed between YB-1 and MDR-1 expression. We also 
found that a transient co-transfection with a DNA topoisomerase II alpha
promoter-luciferase plasmid and an antisense YB-1 expression construct resulted
in a significant reduction of the promoter activity in KM12C human colon cancer
cells. YB-1 may be an excellent proliferation-associated marker and may be a
transcription factor regulating DNA topoisomerase II alpha gene expression in
human colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 10597187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Lipid Res. 1999 Nov;40(11):2091-8.

Regulation of the rat neutral cytosolic cholesteryl ester hydrolase promoter by
hormones and sterols: a role for nuclear factor-Y in the sterol-mediated
response.

Natarajan R(1), Ghosh S, Grogan WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics, Medical Campus, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298-0614, USA.

Expression of the rat liver neutral cytosolic cholesteryl ester hydrolase (CEH)
gene is regulated by glucocorticoids, thyroxine, and agents that perturb
cholesterol metabolism. The present studies identify the putative hormone
response elements in the CEH promoter. They also define the roles of two
previously identified sterol regulatory elements (SRE-92 and SRE-160) and a
putative nuclear factor-Y (NF-Y) binding site with a consensus ATTGG (inverted
CCAAT) motif (Natarajan, R., S. Ghosh, and W. M. Grogan. 1998. Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 243: 349;-355). CEH promoter-reporter gene constructs were
transiently transfected into HepG2 cells to evaluate promoter activity. Results
indicated that the CEH gene has two complex glucocorticoid response units in
distal portions of the promoter corresponding to consensus glucocorticoid
regulatory sequences as well as putative thyroid hormone response elements. CEH
promoter-reporter constructs with the proximal 189 bp of the wild-type or mutated
sequences were also transfected into HepG2 cells. Activity of the wild-type
construct increased when incubated in sterol depleted media or when co-expressed 
with a mature sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP-2). These
responses were suppressed by mutations in SRE-92, SRE-160, or NF-Y, indicating
that these cis elements are sufficient for sterol-mediated regulation of the CEH 
promoter. Gel mobility shift assays further demonstrated that NF-Y binds to the
inverted CCAAT box motif and is required for the sterol-mediated regulation.
These results indicate that multiple cis-elements regulate transcription of the
cholesteryl ester hydrolase (CEH) gene, consistent with the reported regulation
of CEH expression.-Natarajan, R., S. Ghosh, and W. M. Grogan. Regulation of the
rat neutral cytosolic cholesteryl ester hydrolase promoter by hormones and
sterols: a role for nuclear factor-Y in the sterol-mediated response.

PMID: 10553012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1999 Dec;10(12):2480-7.

YB-1 regulation of the human and rat gelatinase A genes via similar enhancer
elements.

Mertens PR(1), Alfonso-Jaume MA, Steinmann K, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic II, RWTH Aachen, Germany. pmertens@post.klinikum.rwth-aachen.de

Experimental and clinical studies strongly suggest that gelatinase A plays a
central role in the evolution of glomerular injury and sclerosis. The sequences
of the 5' flanking regions of the human and rat gelatinase A genes do not share
similarities with other members of the matrix metalloproteinase gene family and
are regulated in a distinctive manner. The human and rat gelatinase A genes
include regions of significant homology (r2 human; RE-1 rat), which have been
shown to act as potent cis-activators of transcription. The rat RE-1 sequence
interacts specifically with the developmentally regulated transcription factors
AP2 and YB-1, resulting in a synergistic activation of gelatinase A
transcription. Although the human r2 sequence specifically interacts with AP2
(Mol Cell Biol 10: 6524-6532, 1990), there is no clear evidence for the presence 
of a canonical YB-1 binding site (Y-box) within this sequence. This study
demonstrates, despite the absence of a canonical Y-box sequence in the r2
element, that YB-1 and AP2 specifically interact with r2, yielding synergistic
transactivation of the human gelatinase A gene. It is concluded that the r2
element is the conserved functional analog of the RE-1 element, and that
interactions of AP2 and YB-1 govern human gelatinase A gene expression.

PMID: 10589685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Gen Virol. 1999 Oct;80 ( Pt 10):2629-38.

Interaction of YB-1 with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat and TAR RNA
modulates viral promoter activity.

Ansari SA(1), Safak M, Gallia GL, Sawaya BE, Amini S, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for NeuroVirology and NeuroOncology, MCP Hahnemann University,
Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA.

Transcriptional regulation of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
genome is mediated by viral and cellular factors. TAR, an unusual RNA regulatory 
element with a stem-bulge-loop structure at the 5' ends of all nascent viral
transcripts is critical for HIV-1 transcription. TAR is the target for Tat, a
viral transcription factor encoded early in the HIV-1 life-cycle and essential
for gene expression. Evidence demonstrating the interaction of a cellular
ssDNA/RNA binding protein, YB-1, with TAR through a region which is important for
Tat interaction is presented. Interestingly, results from protein-protein
interaction studies revealed that YB-1 can also form a complex with Tat. Results 
from mapping experiments suggest that while the region spanning aa 125-203 within
YB-1 is essential for its association with TAR, a truncated YB-1 spanning aa
1-125 can weakly bind to Tat. Functionally, overexpression of full-length YB-1
enhanced Tat-induced activation of the HIV-1 minimal promoter containing TAR
sequences, whereas mutant YB- 1 with no ability to bind to Tat and TAR failed to 
affect Tat-mediated activation. Expression of mutant YB-1(1-125), which binds to 
Tat but not RNA, decreased Tat-mediated enhancement of virus transcription. These
observations suggest that while full-length YB-1 may function as a facilitator
and, by interaction with both Tat and TAR, increase the level of Tat:TAR
association, mutant YB-1 with no TAR binding activity, by complexing with Tat,
may prevent Tat interaction with TAR. The importance of these findings in light
of the proposed mechanism of Tat function is discussed.

PMID: 10573156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Virol. 1999 Dec;73(12):10146-57.

Physical and functional interaction between the Y-box binding protein YB-1 and
human polyomavirus JC virus large T antigen.

Safak M(1), Gallia GL, Ansari SA, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for NeuroVirology, MCP Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19102, USA.

Y-box binding protein YB-1 is a member of a family of DNA and RNA binding
proteins which have been shown to affect gene expression at both the
transcriptional and translational levels. We have previously shown that YB-1
modulates transcription from the promoters of the ubiquitous human polyomavirus
JC virus (JCV). Here we investigate the physical and functional interplay between
YB-1 and the viral regulatory protein large T antigen (T-antigen), using JCV as a
model system. Results of mobility band shift assays demonstrated that the
efficiency of binding of YB-1 to a 23-bp single-stranded viral target sequence
was significantly increased when T-antigen was included in the binding reaction
mixture. Affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
that YB-1 and T-antigen physically interact with each other. Additionally,
results of transcription studies demonstrated that these two proteins interact
functionally on the JCV early and late gene promoters. Whereas ectopic expression
of YB-1 and T-antigen results in synergistic transactivation of the viral late
promoter, YB-1 alleviates T-antigen-mediated transcriptional suppression of the
viral early promoter activity. Furthermore, we have localized, through the use of
a series of deletion mutants, the sequences of these proteins which are important
for their interaction. The T-antigen-interacting region of YB-1 is located in the
cold shock domain of YB-1 and its immediate flanking sequences, and the
YB-1-interacting domain of T-antigen maps to the carboxy-terminal half of
T-antigen. Results of transient transfection assays with various YB-1 mutants and
T-antigen expression constructs confirm the specificity of the functional
interaction between YB-1 and T-antigen. Taken together, these data demonstrate
that the cellular factor YB-1 and the viral regulatory protein T-antigen interact
both physically and functionally and that this interaction modulates
transcription from the JCV promoters.

PMCID: PMC113067
PMID: 10559330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 1;343 Pt 3:687-95.

Delineation of the insulin-responsive sequence in the rat cytosolic aspartate
aminotransferase gene: binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 and nuclear 
factor I.

Beurton F(1), Bandyopadhyay U, Dieumegard B, Barouki R, Aggerbeck M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 490, Université René Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints Pères, 75270
Paris cedex 06, France.

Expression of the rat cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase gene is stimulated by 
glucocorticoids and repressed by insulin in the liver. The regulation by insulin 
and part of the glucocorticoid effect are mediated by a distal region in the
promoter. A 142 bp fragment (-1844 to -1702) confers hormonal sensitivity to the 
heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in transient-transfection assays in
H4IIEC3 hepatoma cells. Footprinting and gel-shift assays showed that several
nuclear proteins bind to this region at conserved CCAAT-enhancer binding protein 
(C/EBP), activator protein (AP-1) and E-box sequences. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3alpha (HNF-3)alpha and beta bind to sequences upstream of a
glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE) half-site as demonstrated by supershift
experiments. Nuclear factor I (NFI)-like proteins bind downstream of the GRE
half-site. These sites around the GRE motif overlap with five insulin responsive 
element (IRE) -like sequences (TG/ATTT). The effect of insulin was not prevented 
by any single mutation in the IRE-like sites. However, mutation of two IRE sites 
(namely IREc and d) prevented the insulin effect although only marginally
affecting the glucocorticoid effect. The results suggest that the effect of
insulin is due to a complex interplay of factors requiring the synergistic
contribution of at least two sites and underline the contribution of HNF-3 and
NFI-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC1220603
PMID: 10527950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Oct 12;96(21):11946-51.

Disruption of the murine nuclear factor I-A gene (Nfia) results in perinatal
lethality, hydrocephalus, and agenesis of the corpus callosum.

das Neves L(1), Duchala CS, Tolentino-Silva F, Haxhiu MA, Colmenares C, Macklin
WB, Campbell CE, Butz KG, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland OH 44195, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4276. Godinho F [corrected to
Tolentino-Silva F].

The phylogenetically conserved nuclear factor I (NFI) family of
transcription/replication proteins is essential both for adenoviral DNA
replication and for the transcription of many cellular genes. We showed
previously that the four murine NFI genes (Nfia, Nfib, Nfic, and Nfix) are
expressed in unique but overlapping patterns during mouse development and in
adult tissues. Here we show that disruption of the Nfia gene causes perinatal
lethality, with >95% of homozygous Nfia(-/-) animals dying within 2 weeks after
birth. Newborn Nfia(-/-) animals lack a corpus callosum and show ventricular
dilation indicating early hydrocephalus. Rare surviving homozygous Nfia(-/-) mice
lack a corpus callosum, show severe communicating hydrocephalus, a full-axial
tremor indicative of neurological defects, male-sterility, low female fertility, 
but near normal life spans. These findings indicate that while the Nfia gene
appears nonessential for cell viability and DNA replication in embryonic stem
cells and fibroblasts, loss of Nfia function causes severe developmental defects.
This finding of an NFI gene required for a developmental process suggests that
the four NFI genes may have distinct roles in vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC18392
PMID: 10518556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Oct;13(10):1704-17.

Members of the nuclear factor 1 transcription factor family regulate rat
3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (3alpha-HSD/DD AKR1C9) gene
expression: a member of the aldo-keto reductase superfamily.

Hung CF(1), Penning TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6084, USA.

Rat 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (3alpha-HSD/DD; AKR1C9), a
member of the aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily, inactivates nearly all
steroid hormones by converting 5alpha- and 5beta-dihydrosteroids to their
respective 3alpha,5alpha- and 3alpha,5beta-tetrahydrosteroids and protects
against circulating steroid hormone excess. It is highly expressed in rat liver
comprising 0.5-1.0% of the soluble protein. Previously, we identified a powerful 
distal enhancer resident at about -4.0 kb to -2.0 kb in the 5'-flanking region of
the 3alpha-HSD/DD gene. We now report the functional dissection of this enhancer.
Transfection of nested deletions of the 5'-end of the gene promoter linked to
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) into HepG2 cells located the enhancer
activity between (-4673 to -4179 bp). Further internal and 5'-end deletion
mutants revealed that a 73-bp fragment (from -4351 to -4279 bp) contained a major
enhancer element. This fragment spanned two imperfect direct repeats
GTGGAAAAACCCAGGAA and GTGGAAAAAACCCAGGAA and contained three direct repeats of
GGAAAAA. This fragment also contained three potential half-nuclear factor 1 (NF1)
sites (TGGA-NNNNNGCCA) and a putative CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
binding site. The 73-bp fragment enhanced CAT activity from the basal
3alpha-HSD/DD gene promoter. Recombinant C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta did not bind to
this fragment. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that HepG2 and rat
liver nuclear extracts bound to this 73-bp fragment. The 73-bp protein complex
was competed out by a NF1 oligonucleotide and was supershifted by an NF1
antibody. When the 73-bp fragment was fused to an alpha1-globin promoter-CAT
construct and cotransfected with CCAAT transcription factor 1 (CTF1)/NF1 into
Drosophila Schneider SL2 insect cells (which lack NF1-like proteins)
trans-activation of CAT activity was observed. These results indicate that
members of the NF1 transcription factor family regulate high constitutive
expression of the rat 3alpha-HSD/DD gene that is responsible for steroid hormone 
inactivation. The potential role of NF1 in regulating other AKR genes that have
protective roles is discussed.

PMID: 10517672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Endocrinology. 1999 Oct;140(10):4564-72.

Activation of the insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-5 promoter in
osteoblasts by cooperative E box, CCAAT enhancer-binding protein, and nuclear
factor-1 deoxyribonucleic acid-binding sequences.

Ji C(1), Chen Y, Centrella M, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Plastic Surgery, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8041, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5) has IGF-dependent
and -independent actions. PGE2 rapidly increases IGFBP-5 expression by
osteoblasts through cAMP-dependent processes. A minimal DNA sequence required for
basal and PGE2-stimulated IGFBP-5 promoter activity spans -69 to -35 bp. This
region adjoins a functional TATA box and contains E box, CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP), nuclear factor-1 (NF-1), and activator protein-2 (AP-2)
transcription factor related binding motifs. In this study we compared minimal
promoter sequences of -74 to +120 bp, without or with mutations in each potential
regulatory element, by reporter gene expression and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. Mutation of the E box-related element reduced basal promoter
activity by 50% and eliminated the 2-fold stimulatory effect of PGE2. In
contrast, mutations in the C/EBP- or NF-1-related elements also reduced basal
promoter activity without fully eliminating the PGE2 effect. Overexpression of
C/EBPdelta stimulated basal IGFBP-5 promoter activity, and this effect was
eliminated by mutating the C/EBP-binding site. However, mutation of the
AP-2-binding site or overexpression of AP-2 did not correlate with basal or
PGE2-induced promoter activation. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
prominent gel shift complexes occurred with osteoblast nuclear extracts and
32P-labeled probes spanning the E box-, C/EBP-, and NF-1-related motifs. These
gel shift complexes were depleted by specific binding site mutations and were
enhanced by PGE2. Increased binding by extracts from PGE2-treated cultures was
blocked by cycloheximide treatment. These results identify several elements as
integral binding sequences for both basal and PGE2-stimulated IGFBP-5 promoter
activity. They further reveal that multiple sequences within this cluster form a 
basic transcription unit where nuclear factors can accumulate in a protein
synthesis-dependent way and enhance IGFBP-5 expression by osteoblasts in response
to PGE2.

PMID: 10499512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Sep;13(9):1558-70.

Androgen specificity of a response unit upstream of the human secretory component
gene is mediated by differential receptor binding to an essential androgen
response element.

Verrijdt G(1), Schoenmakers E, Alen P, Haelens A, Peeters B, Rombauts W,
Claessens F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leuven, Belgium.

The expression of secretory component (SC), the epithelial receptor for
poly-immunoglobulins, is regulated in a highly tissue-specific manner. In several
tissues, e.g. lacrimal gland and prostate, SC synthesis is enhanced by androgens 
at the transcriptional level. In this study, we describe the presence of an
androgen response unit, located 3.3 kb upstream of the sc transcription
initiation site and containing several 5'-TGTTCT-3'-like motifs. Although each of
these elements is implicated in the enhancer function, one element, the ARE1.2
motif, is found to be the main interaction site for the androgen receptor as
demonstrated in in vitro binding assays as well as in transient transfection
assays. A high-affinity binding site for nuclear factor I, adjacent to this ARE, 
is also involved in the correct functioning of the sc upstream enhancer. The
ARE1.2 motif consists of an imperfect direct repeat of two core binding elements 
with a three-nucleotide spacer and therefore constitutes a nonconventional ARE.
We demonstrate that this element displays selectivity for the androgen receptor
as opposed to glucocorticoid receptor both in in vitro binding assays and in
transfection experiments. Mutational analysis suggests that the direct nature of 
the half-site repeat is responsible for this selectivity. We have thus determined
a complex and androgen-specific response unit in the far upstream region of the
human SC gene, which we believe to be involved in its androgen responsiveness in 
epithelial cells of different organs such as prostate and lacrimal gland. We were
also able to demonstrate that the primary sequence of a single nonconventional
ARE motif within the enhancer is responsible for its androgen specificity.

PMID: 10478846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Aug 15;27(16):e11.

Rapid purification of intact minichromosomes over a glycerol cushion.

Di Croce L(1), Koop R, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)IMT, Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35033 Marburg, Germany.

Negatively supercoiled plasmids can be assembled into dynamic minichromosomes
using Drosophila embryo extract as a source of histones and chromatin assembly
factors. However, analysis of such mini-chromosomes is often difficult due to the
presence in the crude extract of a large excess of macromolecules and low
molecular weight molecules including ATP. Several techniques have been used to
partially purify the minichromosomes based on either sizing columns or
centrifugation on sucrose gradients. We have developed a single-step method
employing a 30 min ultracentrifugation through a glycerol cushion. In contrast to
chromatin purified in sucrose-containing buffers, the minichromosomes obtained
with this method are suitable for transcriptional analysis. This method is fast, 
quantitative, flexible, can deal with several samples simultaneously and leads to
concentration of the chromatin. As centrifugation through glycerol yields
chromatin free of ATP and several characterized chromatin remodeling complexes,
this method should be useful for structural and functional studies in vitro.

PMCID: PMC148554
PMID: 10454648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Cell. 1999 Jul;4(1):45-54.

Two-step synergism between the progesterone receptor and the DNA-binding domain
of nuclear factor 1 on MMTV minichromosomes.

Di Croce L(1), Koop R, Venditti P, Westphal HM, Nightingale KP, Corona DF, Becker
PB, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)IMT, Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

In contrast to its behavior as naked DNA, the MMTV promoter assembled in
minichromosomes can be activated synergistically by the progesterone receptor and
NF1 in a process involving ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling. The DNA-binding
domain of NF1 is required and sufficient for stable occupancy of all
receptor-binding sites and for functional synergism. Activation of purified
minichromosomes is observed in the absence of SWI/SNF and can be enhanced by
recombinant ISWI. Receptor binding to minichromosomes recruits ISWI and NURF38,
but not brahma. We propose a two-step synergism in which the receptor triggers a 
chromatin remodeling event that facilitates access of NF1, which in turn
stabilizes an open nucleosomal conformation required for efficient binding of
further receptor molecules and full transactivation.

PMID: 10445026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochem J. 1999 Aug 15;342 ( Pt 1):189-98.

Expression, DNA-binding specificity and transcriptional regulation of nuclear
factor 1 family proteins from rat.

Osada S(1), Matsubara T, Daimon S, Terazu Y, Xu M, Nishihara T, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, 1-6 Yamada-Oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Nuclear factor 1 (NF1) family proteins, which are encoded by four different genes
(NF1-A, NF1-B, NF1-C and NF1-X), bind to the palindromic sequence and regulate
the expression of many viral and cellular genes. We have previously purified
NF1-A and NF1-B from rat liver as factors that bind to the silencer in the
glutathione transferase P gene, and have also reported the repression domain of
NF1-A. In the present study we cloned five cDNA species (NF1-B1, NF1-B2, NF1-B3, 
NF1-C2 and NF1-X1) and compared their expression profiles and the affinity and
specificity of the DNA binding of these NF1 family members. By Northern blot
analysis, we found that the expression profiles of the NF1s are indistinguishable
in the various tissues of the rat. The DNA-binding affinities of NF1-A and NF1-X 
are higher than those of NF1-B and NF1-C, whereas all four NF1 proteins showed
the same DNA-binding specificity. Transfection analyses revealed that the
function of NF1-B on the transcriptional regulation differed between NF1-B
isoforms and was affected by the factor(s) that bind to the promoter regions. In 
addition, we identified the transcriptional regulatory domain of NF1-B, which is 
enriched with proline and serine residues.

PMCID: PMC1220452
PMID: 10432316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Matrix Biol. 1999 Jun;18(3):295-307.

The role of NF-1 factors in regulation of elastin gene transcription.

Degterev A(1), Foster JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118,
USA.

The -195- to -500-bp region of the human elastin promoter has been shown to
convey high activity in neonatal rat aortic smooth muscle cell and pulmonary
fibroblast cell cultures. In addition, this region has been implicated in
controlling the differential basal level of elastin transcription in these two
cell types. The overall goal of this study was to define the positive element(s) 
within the -195- to - 500-bp region and to identify the trans-acting factors
binding to this sequence. A combination of deletion and linker scan mutational
analyses localizes the positive element between -401 and -415 bp. Gel shift
analyses demonstrate that the positive element binds NF-1 family members.
Co-transfection of a CTF1 expression vector in Drosophila Schneider cells shows
the ability of an NF-1 family member to activate elastin promoter activity
through this site. Comparative Western and Southwestern blot analyses of nuclear 
extracts isolated from SMC and lung fibroblasts lay the foundation for possible
differential regulation of elastin transcriptional levels via cell specific
expression of different NF-1 family members.

PMID: 10429948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1999 Mar 25;149(1-2):141-51.

Nicotinamide potentiates TSHR and MHC class II promoter activity in FRTL-5 cells.

Ohe K(1), Ikuyama S, Takayanagi R, Kohn LD, Nawata H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kyushu University Faculty of Medicine, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

Here we show that nicotinamide modulates the promoter activity of rat thyrotropin
(TSHR) and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II genes in rat FRTL-5
thyroid cells, and have identified a novel mechanism for its action. TSHR and MHC
class II, are potentiated through reduced expression of a common repressor of
these two genes, TSEP-1 (TSHR suppressor element binding protein-1)/YB-1. Thus we
show that TSHR mRNA is increased and TSHR promoter activity was
concentration-dependently activated from 0 to 40 mM nicotinamide. The promoter
lengths of TSHR and MHC class II containing TSEP/YB-1 binding sites were enhanced
by 40 mM nicotinamide, but not the ones deleted of these binding sites.
TSEP-1/YB-1 binding to the recognition sites in both TSHR and MHC class II
promoters was reduced in nicotinamide-treated FRTL-5 nuclear extracts.
Nicotinamide reduced the expression of TSEP-1/YB-1 mRNA and TSEP-1/YB-1 protein
in the nucleus.

PMID: 10375026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cancer. 1999 Jun 1;85(11):2450-4.

Is nuclear expression of Y box-binding protein-1 a new prognostic factor in
ovarian serous adenocarcinoma?

Kamura T(1), Yahata H, Amada S, Ogawa S, Sonoda T, Kobayashi H, Mitsumoto M,
Kohno K, Kuwano M, Nakano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear expression of Y box-binding protein (YB-1), a member of the
DNA binding protein family, has been reported to be much more highly concentrated
in cisplatin-resistant cell lines than in their parental counterparts, suggesting
an ability to limit cisplatin sensitivity. Moreover, YB-1 plays a key role in
P-glycoprotein expression. Because ovarian carcinoma traditionally has been
treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy, the sensitivity of the tumors to
chemotherapy could reflect a particular prognosis in patients with ovarian
carcinoma. The aim of the current study was to determine whether YB-1 expression 
correlated with prognosis in ovarian serous adenocarcinoma patients.
METHODS: The expression of YB-1 in the nucleus was examined immunohistochemically
in 42 paraffin embedded primary Stage III (International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics) serous ovarian carcinoma tumors extirpated by primary surgery at 
Kyushu University Hospital between 1985-1995.
RESULTS: Of the 40 primary ovarian tumors examined, 12 (30%) were positive for
YB-1 expression in the nucleus. There was no significant difference in
intraperitoneal stage, histologic grade, or residual tumor size after primary
surgery between patients with tumors with positive and those with negative
nuclear expression of YB-1 protein. The disease free survival curve for patients 
whose tumors were positive for nuclear expression of YB-1 protein was
significantly worse than that for patients whose tumors were negative (P =
0.0025). P-glycoprotein was overexpressed in 4 of 12 tumors with nuclear YB-1
expression (33%) but there was no statistical significance between the expression
of nuclear YB-1 and P-glycoprotein.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of YB- 1 protein in the nucleus may be considered a
useful prognostic marker and also may reflect the sensitivity of ovarian serous
adenocarcinoma to chemotherapy.

PMID: 10357417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 30;274(18):12917-24.

The transcription factor nuclear factor I mediates repression of the GLUT4
promoter by insulin.

Cooke DW(1), Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287-2520, USA. dcooke@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu

Insulin represses GLUT4 expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes through an insulin
response element located at bases -706 to -676 in the 5'-flanking sequence.
Nuclear proteins related to the nuclear factor I (NF1) family of transcription
factors bind to this insulin response element. Mutations that disrupt binding of 
NF1 proteins to the insulin response element impair the insulin response in
reporter gene assays. Insulin treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes induces a rapid
change in the level of phosphorylation of NF1 proteins, providing a potential
mechanism for insulin's ability to regulate gene expression through NF1. Another 
as yet unidentified protein, not related to NF1, also binds to the GLUT4 insulin 
response element and is able to mediate partial repression of the GLUT4 promoter 
in reporter gene assays.

PMID: 10212282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Neurochem. 1999 Apr;72(4):1353-61.

Glial fibrillary acidic protein transcription responses to transforming growth
factor-beta1 and interleukin-1beta are mediated by a nuclear factor-1-like site
in the near-upstream promoter.

Krohn K(1), Rozovsky I, Wals P, Teter B, Anderson CP, Finch CE.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department III, University of Leipzig, Germany.

Elevated expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is associated with 
astrocyte activation during responses to injury in the CNS. Because transforming 
growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) are released
during neural responses to injury and because these cytokines also modulate GFAP 
mRNA levels, it is of interest to define their role in GFAP transcription. The
increases of GFAP mRNA in response to TGF-beta1 and decreases in response to
IL-1beta were shown to be transcriptionally mediated in rat astrocytes
transfected with a luciferase-reporter construct containing 1.9 kb of 5'-upstream
rat genomic DNA. Constructs containing sequential deletions of the rat GFAP
5'-upstream promoter identified a short region proximal to the transcription
start (-106 to -53 bp) that provides full responses to TGF-beta1 and IL-1beta.
This region contains an unusual sequence motif with overlapping nuclear factor-1 
(NF-1)- and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-like binding sites and homology to 
known TGF-beta response elements. Mutagenesis (3-bp exchanges) in -70 to -68 bp
blocked the induction of GFAP by TGF-beta1 and the repression by IL-1beta. Gel
shift experiments showed that the DNA segment -85 to -63 bp was bound by a
factor(s) in nuclear extracts from astrocytes. The concentrations of these DNA
binding factors were increased by treatment of astrocytes with TGF-beta1 and
decreased by IL-1beta. Binding of these nuclear factors was blocked by mutation
of -70 to -68 bp. Despite homology to NF-1 or NF-kappaB binding sites in the GFAP
promoter at segment -79 to -67 bp, anti-NF-kappaB or anti-NF-1 antibodies did not
further retard the gel shift of the nuclear factors/DNA complex. Moreover,
astrocytic nuclear proteins do not compete for the specific binding to NF-1
consensus sequence. Thus, nuclear factors from astrocytes that bind to the -85-
to -63-bp promoter segment might be only distantly related to NF-1 or NF-kappaB. 
These findings are pertinent to the use of GFAP promoter constructs in transgenic
animals, because cisacting elements in the GFAP promoter are sensitive to
cytokines that may be elaborated in response to expression of transgene products.

PMID: 10098836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mamm Genome. 1999 Apr;10(4):390-6.

Exon structure of the nuclear factor I DNA-binding domain from C. elegans to
mammals.

Fletcher CF(1), Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Chaudhry AZ, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

The Nuclear Factor I (NFI) family of DNA-binding proteins is essential for
adenovirus DNA replication and the transcription of many cellular genes. Mammals 
have four genes encoding NFI proteins, C. elegans has only a single NFI gene, and
prokaryotes have none. To assess the relationship between members of this
unusually small family of transcription/replication factors, we mapped the
chromosomal locations of the four murine NFI genes and analyzed the exons
encoding the DNA-binding domains of the mouse, Amphioxus, and C. elegans NFI
genes. The four murine NFI genes are on Chrs 4 (Nfia and Nfib), 8 (Nfix), and 10 
(Nfic), suggesting early duplication of the genes and dispersal throughout the
genome. The DNA-binding domains of all four NFI genes are encoded by large (532
bp) exons with identical splice acceptor and donor sites in each. In contrast,
the C. elegans nfi-1 gene has four phased introns interrupting this DNA-binding, 
domain-encoding exon, and the last exon extends 213 bp past the splice site used 
in all four murine genes. In addition, the introns present in C. elegans nfi-1
are missing from the NFI genes of Amphioxus and all mammalian genomes examined.
This analysis of the exon structure of the C. elegans and murine NFI genes
indicates that the murine genes were probably generated by duplication of a C.
elegans-like ancestral gene, but that significant changes have occurred in the
genomic organization of either the C. elegans or murine NFI genes during
evolution.

PMID: 10087299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 26;274(13):8813-22.

CREB binding protein coordinates the function of multiple transcription factors
including nuclear factor I to regulate phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP)
gene transcription.

Leahy P(1), Crawford DR, Grossman G, Gronostajski RM, Hanson RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) binds to a region of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(GTP) (PEPCK) gene promoter adjacent to the cAMP regulatory element (CRE) and
inhibits the induction of transcription from the gene promoter caused by the
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A. In vivo footprinting studies demonstrated 
that both the CRE and the NFI-binding site are occupied by transcription factors,
regardless of the presence of factors that stimulate (dibutyryl cAMP or
dexamethasone) or inhibit (insulin) transcription from the PEPCK gene promoter.
The NFI effects on transcription from the PEPCK gene promoter were observed even 
in the absence of the NFI binding site, suggesting the possibility of other
weaker binding sites on the promoter or an interaction of NFI with a
transcriptional co-activator. A mammalian two-hybrid system was used to
demonstrate direct interaction between the transactivation domain of NFI-C and
the CREB binding domain of the CREB-binding protein (CBP). Overexpression of a
gene fragment encoding the CREB binding domain of CBP stimulates transcription
from the PEPCK gene promoter. The inhibitory effect of NFI on transcription of
the PEPCK gene induced by the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A appears to be
the result of an interaction between NFI and the CREB-binding protein in which
NFI competes with CREB for binding to the CREB-binding site on CBP. In contrast, 
glucocorticoids and thyroid hormone use the steroid hormone receptor binding
domain of CBP to stimulate transcription from the PEPCK gene promoter. NFI-A
combines with dexamethasone or thyroid hormone in an additive manner to stimulate
PEPCK gene transcription. We conclude that CBP coordinates the action of the
multiple factors known to control transcription of the PEPCK gene.

PMID: 10085123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2712-23.

Reciprocal interaction between two cellular proteins, Puralpha and YB-1,
modulates transcriptional activity of JCVCY in glial cells.

Safak M(1), Gallia GL, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for NeuroVirology and NeuroOncology, MCP Hahnemann University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Cross communication between regulatory proteins is an important event in the
control of eukaryotic gene transcription. Here we have examined the structural
and functional interaction between two cellular regulatory proteins, YB-1 and
Puralpha, on the 23-bp sequence element derived from the enhancer-promoter of the
human polyomavirus JCV. YB-1 and Puralpha are single-stranded DNA binding
proteins which recognize C/T- and GC/GA-rich sequences, respectively. Results
from band shift studies demonstrated that while both proteins interact directly
with their DNA target sequences within the 23-bp motif, each protein can regulate
the association of the other one with the DNA. Affinity chromatography and
coimmunoprecipitation provide evidence for a direct interaction between Puralpha 
and YB-1 in the absence of the DNA sequence. Ectopic expression of YB-1 and
Puralpha in glial cells synergistically stimulated viral promoter activity via
the 23-bp sequence element. Results from mutational studies revealed that
residues between amino acids 75 and 203 of YB-1 and between amino acids 85 and
215 of Puralpha are important for the interaction between these two proteins.
Functional studies with glial cells indicated that the region within Puralpha
which mediates its association with YB-1 and binding to the 23-bp sequence is
important for the observed activation of the JCV promoter by the Puralpha and
YB-1 proteins. The results of this study suggest that the cooperative interaction
between YB-1 and Puralpha mediates the synergistic activation of the human
polyomavirus JCV genome by these cellular proteins. The importance of these
findings for cellular and viral genes which are regulated by Puralpha and YB-1 is
discussed.

PMCID: PMC84064
PMID: 10082537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Gene. 1999 Mar 4;228(1-2):169-79.

Phenobarbital responsiveness conferred by the 5'-flanking region of the rat
CYP2B2 gene in transgenic mice.

Ramsden R(1), Beck NB, Sommer KM, Omiecinski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, 4225 Roosevelt Way NE, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Phenobarbital (PB) is a prototype for a class of agents that produce marked
transcriptional activation of a number of genes, including certain cytochrome
P-450s. We used transgenic mouse approaches and multiple gene reporters to assess
the functional consequences of specific deletions and site-specific mutations
within the 2.5kb 5'-flanking region of the rat CYP2B2 gene. Protein-DNA
interactions at the PBRU domain also were characterized. Using the transgenic
models, we demonstrate that sequences between -2500 and -1700bp of the CYP2B2
gene are critical for PB induction; mice with 1700 or 800bp of 5'-flanking CYP2B2
sequence are not PB responsive. DNA affinity enrichment techniques and
immunoblotting and electromobility shift assays were used to determine that
nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) interacts strongly with a site centered at -2200bp in the
PB responsive unit (PBRU) of CYP2B2. To test the functional contribution of NF-1 
in PB activation, we introduced specific mutations within the PBRU NF-1 element
and demonstrated that these mutations completely ablate the binding interaction. 
However, transgenic mice incorporating the mutant NF-1 sequence within an
otherwise wild-type -2500/CYP2B2 transgene maintained full PB responsiveness.
These results indicate that, despite the avidity of the respective DNA-protein
interaction within the PBRU in vitro, NF-1 interaction is not an essential factor
directing PB transcriptional activation in vivo.

PMID: 10072770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 1999 Apr;1(1):44-7.

Upregulation of mineralocorticoid- and glucocorticoid-receptor gene expression by
Sp-I.

Kolla V(1), Litwack G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Jefferson Medical
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) belong to
the steroid/thyroid hormone superfamily of ligand-induced transcription factors. 
Both activate the human Na/K ATPase alpha1 and beta1 genes transcriptionally. To 
assess the role of the transcription factor Sp1 and the nuclear factor I (NF-I), 
in MR- and GR-mediated gene expression using the human Na/K ATPase beta1
full-length promoter, we have examined the functions of Sp-I and NF-I functions
in two different cell lines, COS-1 and T-84. By transient transfections we have
shown that Sp-I significantly enhances MR and GR expression, whereas NF-I had
negligible effect. We propose that the transcriptional enhancement could be
through a direct interaction physically between MR or GR with Sp1 that allows
other factors to bind the responsive element resulting in synergistic
upregulation of transcription.

PMID: 10329476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7072-81.

Nuclear factor I-mediated repression of the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter is
abrogated by the coactivators p300/CBP and SRC-1.

Chaudhry AZ(1), Vitullo AD, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

To better understand the function of nuclear factor I (NFI) proteins in
transcription, we have used transient transfection assays to assess
transcriptional modulation by NFI proteins on the NFI-dependent mouse mammary
tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. Expression of NFI-C or NFI-X, but not NFI-A or NFI-B
proteins, represses glucocorticoid induction of the MMTV promoter in HeLa cells. 
Repression is DNA binding-independent as a deletion construct expressing the
NH2-terminal 160 residues of NFI-C represses but does not bind DNA. Repression by
NFI-C is cell type-dependent and occurs in HeLa and COS-1 cells but not 293 or
JEG-3 cells. NFI-C does not repress progesterone induction of the MMTV promoter
in HeLa cells, suggesting that progesterone induction of the promoter differs
mechanistically from glucocorticoid induction. NFI-C-mediated repression is
alleviated by overexpression of glucocorticoid receptor (GR), suggesting that
NFI-C represses the MMTV promoter by preventing GR function. However, repression 
by NFI-C occurs with only a subset of glucocorticoid-responsive promoters, as the
chimeric NFIGREbeta-gal promoter that is activated by GR is not repressed by
NFI-C. Since the coactivator proteins p300/CBP, SRC-1A, and RAC3 had previously
been shown to function at steroid hormone-responsive promoters, we asked whether 
they could influence NFI-C-mediated repression of MMTV expression. Expression of 
p300/CBP or SRC-1A alleviates repression by NFI-C, whereas RAC3 has no effect.
This abrogation of NFI-C-mediated repression by p300/CBP and SRC-1A suggests that
repression by NFI-C may occur by interference with coactivator function at the
MMTV promoter.

PMID: 10066764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Neurosci. 1999 Feb 15;19(4):1273-83.

Mutation in neurofilament transgene implicates RNA processing in the pathogenesis
of neurodegenerative disease.

Cañete-Soler R(1), Silberg DG, Gershon MD, Schlaepfer WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6079, USA.

A mouse neurofilament light subunit (NF-L) transgene with a 36 bp c-myc insert at
the end of the coding region was found to have neuropathic effects on enteric and
motor neurons of transgenic mice. The severity of phenotype was related directly 
to the levels of transgenic mRNA expression. High levels of transgene expression 
were lethal to newborn pups, causing profound alterations in the development of
the enteric nervous system and extensive vacuolar changes in motor neurons. Lower
levels of transgene expression led to a transient stunting of growth and focal
alterations of enteric and motor neurons. Because the positioning of the c-myc
insert coincided with the location of the major stability determinant of the NF-L
mRNA (Cañete-Soler et al., 1998a,b), additional studies were undertaken. These
studies showed that the c-myc insert alters the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes
that bind to the stability determinant and disrupts their ability to regulate the
stability of the transcripts. The findings indicate that expression of an NF-L
transgene with a mutant mRNA stability determinant is highly disruptive to
enteric and motor neurons and implicate alterations in RNA processing in the
pathogenesis of a neurodegenerative condition.

PMID: 9952405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Res. 1999 Jan 15;59(2):342-6.

Transcription factor Y-box binding protein 1 binds preferentially to
cisplatin-modified DNA and interacts with proliferating cell nuclear antigen.

Ise T(1), Nagatani G, Imamura T, Kato K, Takano H, Nomoto M, Izumi H, Ohmori H,
Okamoto T, Ohga T, Uchiumi T, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Japan School of Medicine, Kitakyushu Fukuoka.

The Y-box binding protein (YB-1) binds to inverted CCAAT box sequences that are
present in the promoter region of many genes. We previously showed that YB-1 is
overexpressed in human cancer cell lines that are resistant to cisplatin and that
the depletion of YB-1 by transfection of a vector expressing YB-1 antisense RNA
increases the sensitivity of human cancer cells to cisplatin. To determine
whether YB-1 can bind to cisplatin-modified DNA, we fused YB-1 cDNA to
glutathione S-transferase (GST) cDNA and purified the resulting GST fusion
protein. When we tested the fusion protein with unmodified or cisplatin-modified 
oligonucleotides, we found that GST-YB-1 bound more strongly to
cisplatin-modified oligonucleotides, as did GST fusion proteins of high mobility 
group 1 (HMG1), HMG2, and xeroderma pigmentosum group A protein. When we assayed 
the ability of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) to interact with the GST
fusion proteins, we observed binding to YB-1 but not to HMG1, HMG2, or xeroderma 
pigmentosum group A. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that YB-1 and PCNA
interact directly via the COOH-terminal region of YB-1. Using immunochemical
coprecipitation methods, we observed binding of YB-1 and PCNA in vivo. These
results suggest that YB-1 can function as a recognition protein for
cisplatin-damaged DNA and that it may be important in DNA repair or in directing 
the cellular response to DNA damage.

PMID: 9927044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Arthritis Rheum. 1998 Dec;41(12):2132-42.

Transcriptional activation of the alpha1(I) procollagen gene and up-regulation of
alpha1(I) and alpha1(III) procollagen messenger RNA in dermal fibroblasts from
tight skin 2 mice.

Christner PJ(1), Hitraya EG, Peters J, McGrath R, Jiménez SA.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107-5541, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the levels of expression of type I and type III
collagen genes in dermal fibroblasts from tight skin 2 (Tsk2) and normal mice and
to examine the transcriptional regulation of the alpha1(I) procollagen gene
(COL1A1) in these cells.
METHODS: Dermal fibroblasts from Tsk2 mice and from normal age- and sex-matched
control mice were studied. Steady-state levels of alpha1(I) and alpha1(III)
procollagen messenger RNA (mRNA) were evaluated by Northern and dot-blot
hybridization analyses. The transcriptional regulation of COL1A1 was examined by 
transient transfection experiments with deletion constructs containing portions
of the COL1A1 promoter ligated to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter 
gene. To identify DNA binding proteins that interact with regulatory elements
within the COL1A1 promoter, gel mobility shift assays were performed with nuclear
extracts prepared from normal and Tsk2 dermal fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Synthesis of collagen was almost 100% higher in Tsk2 dermal fibroblasts 
than in control fibroblasts. Up-regulation of mRNA for 2 extracellular matrix
proteins was observed in the Tsk2 dermal fibroblasts compared with the normal
cells: the alpha1(I) procollagen mRNA steady-state levels were 50% higher, and
those of the alpha1(III) procollagen mRNA 100% higher, in Tsk2 cells. The results
of transient transfection experiments with COL1A1 promoter constructs
demonstrated that the elevated levels of alpha1(I) collagen mRNA in Tsk2 cells
were largely due to increased transcriptional activity of the corresponding gene.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays performed with a probe encompassing a
relevant COL1A1 promoter region revealed increased DNA-protein binding activities
in nuclear extracts prepared from Tsk2 fibroblasts compared with normal
fibroblasts. Competition experiments using consensus Spl and nuclear factor 1
(NF-1) oligonucleotides and supershift experiments using anti-Sp1 and anti-NF-1
antibodies indicated that at least 2 transcription factors, Sp1 and NF-1, or
their homologs are involved in the up-regulated transcriptional activity of the
COL1A1 promoter in Tsk2 fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Dermal fibroblasts from Tsk2 mice display increased collagen
synthesis and up-regulation of alpha1(I) and alpha1(III) procollagen mRNA in
vitro. The data also directly demonstrate the transcriptional activation of
COL1A1 in dermal fibroblasts from Tsk2 mice and suggest that the transcription
factors Sp1 and NF-1 or their homologs play an important role in the upregulated 
expression of this gene in Tsk2 fibroblasts. These findings are similar to those 
described for fibroblasts from humans with systemic sclerosis and validate the
use of Tsk2 as a model for the study of the connective tissue alterations in this
disease.

PMID: 9870870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jan 15;27(2):517-25.

Increased nuclear factor 1 binding to its nucleosomal site mediated by
sequence-dependent DNA structure.

Blomquist P(1), Belikov S, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Medical Nobel Institute,Karolinska Institute, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The organization of DNA into chromatin is important in the regulation of
transcription, by influencing the access of transcription factors to their DNA
binding sites. Nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) is a transcription factor which binds to
DNA constitutively and which interacts with its cognate DNA site with high
affinity. However, this affinity is drastically reduced, approximately 100- to
300-fold, when the binding site is organized into a nucleosome. Here we
demonstrate that the introduction of stretches of adenines of length 5 nt
(A-tracts) on both sides of the NF-1 binding site has a distinct effect on NF-1
binding to a nucleosomal, but not to a free, NF-1 binding site. The position of
the A-tracts, relative to the rotational phase of a synthetic DNA bending
sequence, the TG-motif, decides whether the NF-1 affinity increases or decreases.
The NF-1 binding affinity is seven times stronger when the flanking A-tracts are 
positioned out-of-phase with the TG-motif than it is when the A-tracts are
positioned in-phase with the TG-motif. We demonstrate that this effect correlates
with differences in DNA curvature and apparent histone octamer affinity. We
conclude that DNA curvature influences the local histone-DNA contacts and hence
the accessibility of the NF-1 site in a nucleosome context.

PMCID: PMC148209
PMID: 9862974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Arch Virol. 1998;143(10):1967-83.

Regulation of the Epstein-Barr viral immediate early BRLF1 promoter through a
distal NF1 site.

Glaser G(1), Vogel M, Wolf H, Niller HH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Universität Regensburg,
Germany.

The immediate early BRLF1 and BZLF1 promoters of Epstein-Barr virus are crucial
for triggering the replicative cycle of the virus. To better understand the cell 
type dependence of the lytic cycle we conducted an analysis of the BRLF1-promoter
in the epithelial cell line HeLa and the lymphoid cell line IM9. To analyze
promoter activities, transient transfections with 5'-deletions of the
BRLF1-promoter in front of luciferase as reporter gene were conducted. Besides
the already known cis-acting elements of the promoter close to the TATA-box, more
distal elements were located and functionally tested. A nuclear factor 1
consensus site was found to act positively in HeLa cells, but did not in lymphoid
IM9 cells. The NF1 site was shown to bind protein by electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, antibody-supershifts and in vitro footprinting. Thus, a protein
belonging to the nuclear factor 1 family of proteins was identified as additional
cellular trans-acting factor for the BRLF1-promoter besides the already described
factors Sp1, Zta and Zif268.

PMID: 9856084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Matrix Biol. 1998 Oct;17(6):425-34.

Modulation of basal expression of the human alpha1(I) procollagen gene (COL1A1)
by tandem NF-1/Sp1 promoter elements in normal human dermal fibroblasts.

Artlett CM(1), Chen SJ, Varga J, Jimenez SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

We previously demonstrated that a segment of the human alpha1 type I procollagen 
gene (COL1A1) promoter encompassing nt -174 to -84 is responsible for the highest
transcriptional activity in collagen producing cells in vitro. Here, we
identified two almost identical tandem NF-1/Sp1 binding sites located between nt 
-129 to -107 (distal element) and nt -104 to -77 (proximal element) that are
responsible for the basal regulation of COL1A1 transcription in normal human
dermal fibroblasts. Transient transfection studies revealed that 85% of the basal
COL1A1 promoter activity resides within the distal element; however,
site-directed mutagenesis within the CCAAT motif in the proximal element resulted
in a 98% decrease of the COL1A1 promoter activity. We conclude that each of the
NF-1/Sp1 tandem binding sites has a different function. The distal element drives
the transcriptional activity of the COL1A1 promoter but is not sufficient for its
basal expression, whereas the NF-1 binding site in the proximal element is
essential for in vitro COL1A1 gene transcription.

PMID: 9840444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biomol NMR. 1998 Oct;12(3):463-4.

Resonance assignment and secondary structure of the cold shock domain of the
human YB-1 protein.

Kloks CP(1), Hoffmann A, Omichinski JG, Vuister GW, Hilbers CW, Grzesiek S.

Author information: 
(1)NSR Center for Molecular Structure, Design and Synthesis, University of
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

PMID: 9835056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32957-65.

A synergistic interaction of transcription factors AP2 and YB-1 regulates
gelatinase A enhancer-dependent transcription.

Mertens PR(1), Alfonso-Jaume MA, Steinmann K, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical
Center/University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

The matrix metalloproteinase gelatinase A plays a central role in several
critical physiologic processes, including angiogenesis, tumor
invasion/metastasis, and chronic inflammation. We demonstrate that high level
gelatinase A expression is mediated by a unique interaction of two
developmentally regulated transcription factors, AP2 and YB-1, within a discrete 
40-base pair enhancer element (RE-1) located in the 5'-flanking region of the
gelatinase A gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay studies and
immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed a direct interaction of AP2 with this
binding sequence in the form of AP2.YB-1 heteromeric complexes. Binding of
AP2.YB-1 complexes to the RE-1 sequence results in the formation of extended
single-stranded DNA regions and may stabilize DNA conformational changes.
Overexpression of YB-1 and AP2 proteins by gelatinase A synthesizing hepatoma
HepG2 cells induced a synergistic increase in the RE-1-mediated transcription of 
nearly 160-fold. Thus, the transcription of gelatinase A is subject to a
previously unrecognized interplay of double (AP2) and single-stranded (YB-1) DNA 
binding transcription factors to yield a highly regulated pattern of gene
expression.

PMID: 9830047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Arthritis Rheum. 1998 Nov;41(11):2048-58.

Identification of elements in the promoter region of the alpha1(I) procollagen
gene involved in its up-regulated expression in systemic sclerosis.

Hitraya EG(1), Varga J, Artlett CM, Jiménez SA.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107-5541, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify regulatory elements in the promoter region of the
alpha1(I) procollagen gene (COL1A1) involved in the transcriptional activation of
this gene in systemic sclerosis (SSc), and to identify the transcription factors 
interacting with these regulatory elements.
METHODS: Dermal fibroblasts from 6 patients with diffuse SSc of recent onset and 
from 6 healthy individuals were studied. The transcriptional regulation of COL1A1
was examined by transient transfections with deletion constructs containing
portions of the COL1A1 promoter. The DNA binding activity of nuclear proteins
recognizing the regulatory regions in the COL1A1 promoter was examined by gel
mobility shift assays. A procedure was established to allow the quantitative
determination of the amount of DNA binding proteins interacting with the COL1A1
promoter, employing DNA binding protein and DNA titration experiments analyzed by
gel mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: Maximal chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity was observed with a
-174-bp to +42-bp COL1A1 promoter construct in both normal and SSc cells;
however, the activity driven by this construct was 70-260% higher in SSc
fibroblasts. Most of the transcriptional activity of the COL1A1 promoter was
contained in a minimal promoter region encompassing -174 bp to -84 bp.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays performed with oligonucleotides
corresponding to the regions spanning -129/-107 bp and -104/-78 bp of the COL1A1 
promoter revealed marked increases in the intensities of DNA-protein complexes
formed with both oligonucleotides in nuclear extracts prepared from each of the
SSc cell lines in comparison with normal fibroblasts. Competition experiments
showed that each of these regions contained elements recognized by Sp1 and
nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) binding proteins. A quantitative determination of DNA
binding activity recognizing the Sp1 binding element within the -129/-107-bp
region showed that it was 23.6 nM in SSc fibroblasts compared with 6.9 nM in
normal fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate that a short region in the proximal promoter 
of COL1A1 containing 2 tandem NF-1/Sp1 elements displays up-regulated
transcriptional activity in SSc fibroblasts, and that SSc fibroblasts contain
3.4-fold greater DNA binding activity recognizing these elements than normal
cells.

PMID: 9811061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 9;273(41):26969-76.

Down-regulation of cytochrome P450 1A1 gene promoter by oxidative stress.
Critical contribution of nuclear factor 1.

Morel Y(1), Barouki R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U490, Centre Universitaire des Saints-Pères, 45 rue des Saints-Pères,
75006 Paris, France.

Oxidative stress interferes with several cellular functions, in particular
transcriptional regulation. We show here that the human cytochrome P450 1A1
(CYP1A1) is down-regulated at the transcriptional level by oxidative stress.
Basal as well as 2,3,7, 8-tetrachloro-p-dioxin-induced promoter activities are
strongly impaired by H2O2 treatment or glutathione depletion with
L-buthionine-(S,R)-sulfoximine. Tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibits CYP1A1
expression, and this inhibition is prevented by the antioxidant pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate. We show that these regulations depend on the integrity of the
nuclear factor 1 (NFI) site located in the proximal promoter. We therefore
examined the redox regulation of this transcription factor. Treatment of human
HepG2 or rat H4 hepatoma cells with H2O2 or L-buthionine-(S, R)-sulfoximine
inactivates the binding of the NFI transcription factor to its DNA consensus
sequence. Furthermore, H2O2 treatment leads to a dose-dependent decrease of
reporter gene expressions driven by promoters containing NFI binding sites.
Glutathione depletion and catalase inhibition also repress a NFI-driven promoter.
Under the same conditions, the CP-1 transcription factor activity is not affected
by oxidative stress. Thus, NFI seems particularly sensitive to oxidative stress. 
This accounts, at least partially, for the regulation of cyp1A1 gene expression.

PMID: 9756946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Clin Cancer Res. 1998 Sep;4(9):2273-7.

Nuclear expression of YB-1 protein correlates with P-glycoprotein expression in
human osteosarcoma.

Oda Y(1), Sakamoto A, Shinohara N, Ohga T, Uchiumi T, Kohno K, Tsuneyoshi M,
Kuwano M, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

The Y-box-binding protein, YB-1, is a member of the DNA-binding protein family.
It binds to the Y-box, an inverted CCAAT box, in the promoter region of the human
multidrug resistance 1 gene, which encodes P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Nuclear
localization of YB-1 protein has been reported to be associated with the
intrinsic expression of P-gp in human breast cancer. We studied the
immunohistochemical expression of YB-1 protein in 69 untreated biopsy specimens
of conventional osteosarcomas and compared it with the expression of P-gp.
Furthermore, cell proliferation, as determined by the MIB-1-labeling index
(MIB-1-LI), was measured by immunohistochemistry. In all 69 untreated
osteosarcomas, YB-1 protein was expressed in the cytoplasm. In 32 of 69 (46%)
cases, YB-1 was also localized in the nucleus. The expression of P-gp was evident
in 23 of these 32 cases, and there was a significant correlation between the
nuclear expression of YB-1 and P-gp expression (P < 0.0001). Chondroblastic
osteosarcoma expressed YB-1 in the nucleus more frequently (eight of nine cases) 
than did other types of osteosarcoma, whereas P-gp was also frequently expressed 
in chondroblastic subtype. There was no correlation between the nuclear
expression of YB-1 and histological grade. The MIB-1-LI was significantly higher 
in cases showing the nuclear expression of YB-1 (MIB-1-LI averaged 22.56 in cases
with only cytoplasmic expression of YB-1 but averaged 28.20 in cases with
cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of YB-1; P = 0.0477). In human osteosarcoma,
nuclear localization of YB-1 protein was associated with the expression of P-gp, 
suggesting that YB-1 could be a prognostic marker for multidrug resistance in
osteosarcoma.

PMID: 9748149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Int J Oncol. 1998 Oct;13(4):765-71.

Activity of human papillomavirus type 16 P97 promoter in immortal and tumorigenic
human oral keratinocytes.

Kook JK(1), Kim JH, Min BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry and Dental Research Institute, College of
Dentistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

We previously immortalized normal human oral keratinocytes (NHOK) by transfection
with cloned human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) genome and converted these
immortalized cells to tumorigenic cells with chemical carcinogens. Since the
tumorigenic cells expressed higher level of HPV-16 E6/E7 transcripts, we
predicted that enhanced E6/E7 expression was induced by mutations at the long
control region (LCR) of the viral genome integrated into cellular chromosome. To 
test this possibility, we sequenced the entire HPV-16 LCR from immortalized and
tumorigenic cells, but no difference in the sequences in all of the tested cells 
was observed. However, it is possible that such differences in the expression of 
E6/E7 could have originated from different activities of cellular transcription
factors in the different cells. To examine this prospect, we subcloned entire LCR
into a reporter gene and determined the promoter activity of LCR in immortalized 
and tumorigenic cells. We found that the LCR promoter activity was significantly 
higher in tumorigenic cells when comparing to immortalized cells. We also
observed that at least 477 nucleotides upstream of E6 open reading frame are
needed for the maximum LCR promoter activity in tumorigenic cells.

PMID: 9735407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Sep;12(9):1343-54.

Inhibition by insulin of glucocorticoid-induced gene transcription: involvement
of the ligand-binding domain of the glucocorticoid receptor and independence from
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.

Pierreux CE(1), Ursø B, De Meyts P, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School,
Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium.

Insulin can inhibit the stimulatory effect of glucocorticoid hormones on the
transcription of genes coding for enzymes involved in glucose metabolism. We
reported earlier that insulin inhibits the glucocorticoid-stimulated
transcription of the gene coding for liver 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFK-2). To
elucidate the mechanism of these hormonal effects, we have studied the regulatory
regions of the PFK-2 gene in transfection experiments. We found that both
glucocorticoids and insulin act via the glucocorticoid response unit (GRU)
located in the first intron. Footprinting experiments showed that the GRU binds
not only the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), but also ubiquitous [nuclear factor I 
(NF-I)] and liver-enriched [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3, HNF-6,
CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)] transcription factors. Site-directed
mutational analysis of the GRU revealed that these factors modulate
glucocorticoid action but that none of them seems to be individually involved in 
the inhibitory effect of insulin. We did not find an insulin response element in 
the GRU, but we showed that insulin targets the GR. Insulin-induced inhibition of
the glucocorticoid stimulation required the ligand-binding domain of the GR.
Finally, the insulin-signaling cascade involved was independent of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
Together, these results suggest that insulin acts on the PFK-2 gene via another
pathway and targets either the GR in its ligand-binding domain or a cofactor
interacting with this domain.

PMID: 9731703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Neurosci. 1998 Aug 15;18(16):6186-94.

Neuronal expression of the 5HT3 serotonin receptor gene requires nuclear factor 1
complexes.

Bedford FK(1), Julius D, Ingraham HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0444, USA.

The 5HT3 receptor (5HT3R) is a serotonin-gated ion channel whose expression is
restricted to a subset of cells within the central and peripheral nervous
systems. In vitro analysis shows that a small proximal region of the TATA-less
5HT3R promoter is sufficient to direct neuronal-specific reporter gene
expression. Three potential regulatory elements conserved between the mouse and
human genes were identified within this proximal promoter, two of which are known
sites for the ubiquitously expressed factors Sp1 and nuclear factor 1 (NF1).
Surprisingly, mutation of the NF1 binding site abolished all reporter activity in
cell transfection studies, suggesting that this element is essential for
neuronal-specific transcriptional activity of the 5HT3R. Furthermore, a complex
of neuronal proteins that includes a member(s) of the NF1 family binds to this
site, as shown by gel mobility super shift and DNaseI footprinting analyses.
Although NF1 has been proposed to mediate basal transcription of many
ubiquitously expressed genes, our data suggest that a member of the NF1
transcription factor family participates in neuronal-specific gene expression by 
promoting interactions with other regulatory factors found in sensory ganglia.

PMID: 9698312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jun 16;1398(2):148-56.

Nuclear factor 1 is essential for the expression of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1
gene during preadipocyte differentiation.

Singh MV(1), Ntambi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison 53706, USA.

Stearoyl CoA desaturase gene 1 (SCD1) is a delta 9 desaturase that is
transcriptionally activated during the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
into adipocytes. We have demonstrated that a SCD1/BP region in SCD1 proximal
promoter (-114 to -86 bp) is essential for the transcriptional activation of this
gene during differentiation. Mutation in this region abolished the basal activity
of the proximal promoter of SCD1, and also failed to induce transcription in
response to the differentiation cocktail in transfected cells. The SCD1/BP region
contains a TGGCA sequence at -90 bp from the transcription start site. Using
competitor oligonucleotides and nuclear factor 1 (NF1)-specific antibodies in gel
shift assays, we have shown that in preadipocytes, a NF1 protein binds to this
TGGCA sequence. On MDI-induced differentiation of preadipocyte into adipocyte, an
additional DNA-protein complex appeared. The appearance of a new NF1 complex is
related to the differentiation-specific transcriptional activation of the SCD1
gene. This is the first report to show a differentiation-related change in NF1
protein binding during preadipocyte differentiation.

PMID: 9689914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18538-46.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) isoforms differentially activate simple versus complex
NFI-responsive promoters.

Chaudhry AZ(1), Vitullo AD, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

Promoter-specific differences in the function of transcription factors play a
central role in the regulation of gene expression. We have measured the maximal
transcriptional activation potentials of nuclear factor I (NFI) proteins encoded 
by each of the four identified NFI genes (NFI-A, -B, -C, and -X) by transient
transfection in JEG-3 cells using two model NFI-dependent promoters: 1) a simple 
chimeric promoter containing a single NFI-binding site upstream of the adenovirus
major late promoter (NFI-Ad), and 2) the more complex mouse mammary tumor virus
long terminal repeat promoter. The relative activation potentials for the NFI
isoforms differed between the two promoters, with NFI-X being the strongest
activator of NFI-Ad and NFI-B being the strongest activator of the MMTV promoter.
To determine if these promoter-specific differences in activation potential were 
due to the presence of glucocorticoid response elements (GREs), we added GREs
upstream of the NFI-binding site in NFI-Ad. NFI-X remains the strongest activator
of the GRE containing simple promoter, indicating that differences in relative
activation potential are not due solely to the presence of GREs. Since NFI
proteins bind to DNA as dimers, we assessed the activation potentials of NFI
heterodimers. Here, we show that NFI heterodimers have intermediate activation
potentials compared with homodimers, demonstrating one potential mechanism by
which different NFI proteins can regulate gene expression.

PMID: 9660824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Gene. 1998 Jul 3;214(1-2):147-56.

Identification of two Y-box binding proteins that interact with the promoters of 
columbid annexin I genes.

Pratt SL(1), Horseman ND.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Molecular, Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.

Two annexin I (anxI) genes, called cp35 and cp37, are expressed from the pigeon
(Columba livia) genome, but they are regulated differently at both the
transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. The proximal promoter elements
of these two genes are very similar. A conserved sequence from the cp35 and cp37 
promoters bound specifically with proteins present in cropsac cell extracts. This
sequence of DNA was used to screen a lambdagt11 cDNA expression library. Clones
encoding two pigeon Y-box binding proteins (YB) were isolated. One of the pigeon 
YB cDNAs was found to be most similar to YB1 from other species, and the other
was most similar to chicken YB2. Each YB is encoded by a single-copy gene in the 
pigeon, and their mRNAs are expressed in many tissues. On Northern blots, the
sizes of the mRNAs encoding pigeon YB1 (pYB1) and pigeon YB2 (pYB2) were 1.8 and 
1.7kb, respectively. The sequences of both pYB1 and pYB2 diverge from their
previously identified relatives in the N-terminal domain 'A'. Antisera were
developed to unique peptide epitopes in YB1 or 2. Affinity-purified anti-YB1 and 
anti-YB2 detected immunoreactive proteins in extracts from a variety of pigeon
tissues, including the cropsac. To confirm that pYB1 and pYB2 interact with the
cp35 promoter, electrophoretic gel mobility shift reactions were carried out in
the presence or absence of YB antibodies. Binding to the cp35 promoter was
specifically neutralized by either anti-pYB1 or anti-pYB2. These results are the 
first evidence that two YB proteins simultaneously bind to a promoter element,
and thereby may interact during regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 9651510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biochem J. 1998 Jul 1;333 ( Pt 1):77-84.

Nuclear factor 1 regulates the distal silencer of the human PIT1/GHF1 gene.

Rajas F(1), Delhase M, De La Hoya M, Verdood P, Castrillo JL, Hooghe-Peters EL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Medical School, Free University of Brussels (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, B-1090 Brussels, Belgium.

Here we report the characterization of 12 kb genomic DNA upstream of the human
PIT1/GHF1 promoter. Different regions involved in the modulation of human
PIT1/GHF1 gene expression were defined by transient transfection studies. Two
regions, one proximal (-7.1/-2. 3) and one distal (-11.8/-10.9), presented an
enhancer activity in pituitary cells when placed upstream of the SV40 promoter.
The 0.9 kb distal region was analysed further and found to decrease the basal
transcriptional activity of the human PIT1/GHF1 minimal promoter, indicating that
this region behaves as a silencer for its own promoter. Three Pit-1/GHF-1-binding
sites and two ubiquitous nuclear factor 1 (NF-1)-binding sites were identified by
DNase I footprinting in the distal regulatory region. Deletion analysis indicated
that NF-1 or NF-1-related protein(s) participate in the down-regulation of human 
PIT1/GHF1 gene expression by interacting with an NF-1-binding site within the
distal regulatory region.

PMCID: PMC1219558
PMID: 9639565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):16134-9.

Functional consequences of monoglucosylation of Ha-Ras at effector domain amino
acid threonine 35.

Herrmann C(1), Ahmadian MR, Hofmann F, Just I.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Physiologie, Rheinlanddamm 201, D-44139
Dortmund, Germany.

Monoglucosylation of low molecular mass GTPases is an important
post-translational modification by which microbes interfere with eukaryotic cell 
signaling. Ha-Ras is monoglucosylated at effector domain amino acid threonine 35 
by Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin, resulting in a blockade of the downstream 
mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. To understand the molecular
consequences of this modification, effects of glucosylation on each step of the
GTPase cycle of Ras were analyzed. Whereas nucleotide binding was not
significantly altered, intrinsic GTPase activity was markedly decreased, and
GTPase stimulation by the GTPase-activating protein p120(GAP) and neurofibromin
NF-1 was completely blocked, caused by failure to bind to glucosylated Ras.
Guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Cdc25)-catalyzed GTP loading was decreased,
but not completely inhibited. A dominant-negative property of modified Ras to
sequester exchange factor was not detectable. However, the crucial step in
downstream signaling, Ras-effector coupling, was completely blocked. The Kd for
the interaction between Ras.GTP and the Ras-binding domain of Raf was 15 nM,
whereas glucosylation increased the Kd to >1 mM. Because the affinity of Ras.GDP 
for Raf (Kd = 22 microM) is too low to allow functional interaction, a glucose
moiety at threonine 35 of Ras seems to block completely the interaction with Raf.
The net effect of lethal toxin-catalyzed glucosylation of Ras is the complete
blockade of Ras downstream signaling.

PMID: 9632667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 May;17(5):461-70.

Nuclear factor-1 motif and redundant regulatory elements comprise
phenobarbital-responsive enhancer in CYP2B1/2.

Liu S(1), Park Y, Rivera-Rivera I, Li H, Kemper B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, College of Medicine at
Urbana-Champaign, University of Illinois 61801, USA.

Although the induction of drug-metabolizing systems by phenobarbital has been
recognized for about 40 years, the mechanism by which cytochrome P450 gene
expression is increased is still not well understood. A 163-bp fragment at about 
-2.2 Kb in CYP2B2 has been shown to mediate phenobarbital induction in primary
rat hepatocytes (Trottier, et al. [1995] Gene 158:263-268) and by an in situ
transient transfection assay in rat liver (Park, Y., et al. [1996]. J. Biol.
Chem. 271:23725-23728). Deletion mutations of this fragment indicated that the
88-bp stretch from -2258 to -2170 was the minimal sequence that could mediate
phenobarbital induction in the in situ system if single copies of the deleted
fragments fused to the CYP2C1 proximal promoter were assayed. If three copies of 
the fragments were present, 5' and 3' deletions defined a minimal 37-bp core
fragment, which, although necessary for phenobarbital responsiveness, was not
sufficient unless additional sequence was present at either end, suggesting that 
redundant elements were present in the two flanking regions. Site-specific
mutagenesis of an NF-1 site within the 88-bp fragment and linker scanning
mutagenesis across the fragment indicated that the NF-1 site and a region to the 
5' side of the site contributed to the magnitude of the response, but neither the
NF-1 mutations nor any of the linker scanning mutations eliminated the response
to phenobarbital. Mutation in a region 3' of the NF-1 site resulted in elevated
basal expression without substantial effects on phenobarbital-induced expression.
Binding of NF-1 to the 37-bp core fragment was established by gel-shift
competition studies and by supershifts of the protein-DNA complexes by antisera
to NF-1. Additional protein-DNA complexes were detected in the regions flanking
the NF-1 site. These studies indicate that the CYP2B2 phenobarbital-responsive
enhancer contains multiple constitutive and phenobarbital-responsive elements.
Binding of nuclear proteins from control or phenobarbital-treated animals in
vitro to this region was very similar. The only difference detected was a complex
that was substantially reduced by phenobarbital treatment and mapped to the 3'
side of the NF-1 site.

PMID: 9628589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13387-90.

Nuclear factor I regulates expression of the gene for phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (GTP).

Crawford DR(1), Leahy P, Hu CY, Chaudhry A, Gronostajski R, Grossman G, Woods J, 
Hakimi P, Roesler WJ, Hanson RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4935, USA.

Nuclear factor-I (NFI) binds to the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP)
(PEPCK) gene promoter immediately 5' to the cAMP regulatory element (CRE). This
suggests an interaction between NFI and factors that bind the CRE. Of the four
NFI isoforms expressed in mammalian tissues, NFI-A and -B stimulate basal
transcription from the PEPCK gene promoter in HepG2 cells, while NFI-C and -X are
slightly inhibitory. All four NFI isoforms abrogate the 20-fold protein kinase Ac
(PKAc)-mediated induction of transcription from the PEPCK gene promoter. Normal
PKAc-mediated induction was noted when the CRE was moved 10 base pairs 3' of its 
original location. However if the CRE was moved 5 base pairs 3', placing it out
of phase with the other elements in the promoter, or moved 5' to -285 (the P3(I) 
site in the promoter), some PKA-mediated stimulation was lost. The NFI-C isoform 
effectively inhibited PKAc induction regardless of the relative positions of the 
CRE and the NFI binding sites. NFI-C also abrogated cAMP regulatory
element-binding protein (CREB)-induced activity of wild type and mutant PEPCK
promoters. There was some cooperativity in the binding of CREB and NFI to their
respective binding sites but this did not appear to be physiologically important.

PMID: 9593667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998 Jan;178(1-2):187-96.

Histone H1 isoforms purified from rat liver bind nonspecifically to the nuclear
factor 1 recognition sequence and serve as generalized transcriptional
repressors.

Gao B(1), Jaffe H, Kunos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298, USA.

Two polypeptides with molecular masses of 34 and 30 kDa were copurified from rat 
liver during DNA affinity purification of a sequence-specific transcription
factor binding to the footprint II sequence within the P2 promoter of the rat
alpha1B adrenergic receptor (alpha1B AR) gene, and were identified by
microsequencing their endoproteinase Lys-C-derived peptides as histone H1d and
histone H1c, respectively. Histone H1 was previously reported to bind to the
nuclear factor 1 (NF1) recognition sequence, although the specificity of this
binding has been controversial. Here, DNA mobility shift and supershift assays,
DNase I footprinting and mutational analyses indicated that the binding of
histone H1 to the NF1 sites located within footprint II of the alpha1B AR gene P2
promoter is nonspecific. Transient cotransfections into Hep3B cells of histone
H1d cDNA with CAT constructs containing promoter regions of different genes
resulted in generalized and non-specific suppression of CAT activity. The histone
H1d-mediated repression of the activities of the alpha1B AR gene P2/CAT or beta2 
AR gene P(-186/1307)/CAT constructs was reversed by the cotransfection of a cDNA 
encoding the sequence-specific transcription factor NF1/X, and the fold increase 
in CAT activities was similar to that obtained in the absence of histone H1d.
These results suggest that sequence-specific transcription factors counteract the
histone H1-mediated transcriptional repression in vivo by a true activation,
which is different from the in vitro antirepression in histone H1-repressed
chromatin templates (Laybourn and Kadonaga, (1991) Science 254: 238-245).

PMID: 9546599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):5997-6000.

Direct involvement of the Y-box binding protein YB-1 in genotoxic stress-induced 
activation of the human multidrug resistance 1 gene.

Ohga T(1), Uchiumi T, Makino Y, Koike K, Wada M, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University, School of Medicine, 3-1-1
Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-82, Japan. ohga@biochem1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The human multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene encoding P-glycoprotein is often
overexpressed in various human tumors after chemotherapy. During treatment with
various chemotherapeutic agents, the MDR1 gene is activated at the
transcriptional level and/or amplified, resulting in overexpression. Our previous
studies demonstrated that an inverted CCAAT box (Y-box) might be a critical
cis-regulatory element regulating UV or drug-induced MDR1 gene expression. We
have now established various cell lines from human head and neck cancer KB cells 
which were stably transfected with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
reporter gene driven by various MDR1 promoter deletion constructs. Transient
transfection of antisense YB-1 expression constructs resulted in a decrease of
both YB-1 protein levels and DNA binding activity to the inverted CCAAT box, as
determined by Western blot and gel mobility shift assays. The limited expression 
and binding activity due to expression of antisense YB-1 constructs were also
observed when cells were treated with UV. CAT activity of constructs containing
the Y-box was enhanced after treatment with UV irradiation as well as genotoxic
agents such as cisplatin and etoposide. Moreover, this activation was reduced by 
50-80% by transfection of antisense YB-1 expression constructs. In contrast,
transfection of antisense YB-1 expression constructs had no effect on CAT
activity driven by MDR1 promoter constructs not containing the Y-box. These data 
indicate that YB-1 is directly involved in MDR1 gene activation in response to
genotoxic stress.

PMID: 9497311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 6;273(10):5443-6.

Identification and molecular cloning of a human selenocysteine insertion
sequence-binding protein. A bifunctional role for DNA-binding protein B.

Shen Q(1), Wu R, Leonard JL, Newburger PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Medical Center, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells incorporate the unusual amino acid
selenocysteine at a UGA codon, which conventionally serves as a termination
signal. Translation of eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNA requires a nucleotide
selenocysteine insertion sequence in the 3'-untranslated region. We report the
molecular cloning of the binding protein that recognizes the selenocysteine
insertion sequence element in human cellular glutathione peroxidase gene (GPX1)
transcripts and its identification as DNA-binding protein B, a member of the
EFIA/dbpB/YB-1 family. The predicted amino acid sequence contains four
arginine-rich RNA-binding motifs, and one segment shows strong homology to the
human immunodeficiency virus Tat domain. Recombinant DNA-binding protein B binds 
the selenocysteine insertion sequence elements from the GPX1 and type I
iodothyronine 5'-deiodinase genes in RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays
and competes with endogenous GPX1 selenocysteine insertion sequence binding
activity in COS-1 cytosol extracts. Addition of antibody to DNA-binding protein B
to COS-1 electromobility shift assays produces a slowly migrating "supershift"
band. The molecular cloning and identification of DNA-binding protein B as the
first eukaryotic selenocysteine insertion sequence-binding protein opens the way 
to the elucidation of the entire complex necessary for the alternative reading of
the genetic code that permits translation of selenoproteins.

PMID: 9488664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Oncogene. 1998 Feb 19;16(7):865-72.

Identification of NFIB as recurrent translocation partner gene of HMGIC in
pleomorphic adenomas.

Geurts JM(1), Schoenmakers EF, Röijer E, Aström AK, Stenman G, van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven & Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Belgium.

Approximately 12% of all pleomorphic adenomas of the salivary glands are
characterized by chromosome aberrations involving the chromosome segment
12q13-15. Several chromosomes have been found as translocation partners of
chromosome 12, and some of these recurrently. Recently, the HMGIC gene was
identified as the target gene affected by the 12q13-15 aberrations. Here, we
report the identification and characterization of a new translocation partner
gene of HMGIC in pleomorphic adenomas. 3'-RACE analysis of a primary adenoma with
an apparently normal karyotype revealed an HMGIC fusion transcript containing
ectopic sequences derived from the human NFIB gene, previously mapped to
chromosome band 9p24.1. The HMGIC NFIB fusion transcript was also confirmed by
RT-PCR. Since the chromosome segment 9p12-24 is repeatedly involved as
translocation partner of chromosome 12q13-15 in pleomorphic adenomas, we tested
whether NFIB might be a recurrent partner of HMGIC. RT-PCR analysis of a second
adenoma with an ins(9;12)(p23;q12q15) as the sole anomaly, revealed that also in 
this tumor an HMGIC/NFIB hybrid transcript was present. The reciprocal NFIB/HMGIC
fusion transcript, however, could not be detected in any of these tumors.
Nucleotide sequence analysis of the fusion transcripts indicated that the genetic
aberration in both tumors resulted in the replacement of a carboxy-terminal
segment of HMGIC by the last five amino acids of NFIB. In conclusion, our results
reveal the recurrent involvement of the NFIB gene as translocation partner gene
of HMGIC in pleomorphic adenomas.

PMID: 9484777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Gen Virol. 1998 Feb;79 ( Pt 2):239-46.

Transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) promoter in
central nervous system cells: effect of YB-1 on expression of the HIV-1 long
terminal repeat.

Sawaya BE(1), Khalili K, Amini S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for NeuroVirology and NeuroOncology, Department of Neurology, Allegheny
University of the Health Sciences, Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA.

Transcription of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) is regulated by a
series of host DNA-binding proteins which interact with the upstream viral
promoter sequences, and the viral regulatory protein Tat which associates with
TAR RNA sequences located in the leader of the viral transcript. Here we have
examined the ability of the cellular protein YB-1 to modulate transcription of
the HIV-1 promoter in a human astrocytic cell line (U-87MG), a neuronal cell line
(SK-N-MC) and lymphoid cells (Jurkat) by transfection assay. Ectopic expression
of YB-1 in U-87MG and SK-N-MC augments basal transcriptional activity of the
viral sequence located between -80 and -43, which encompasses the GC-rich motif. 
In accord with the previous report, in Jurkat cells YB-1-mediated activation of
the HIV-1 promoter required sequences which are located further upstream from the
GC-rich motif. Combined overexpression of YB-1 and the GC-rich binding protein,
SP1, in the transfected cells decreased the level of activation of the viral
promoter, suggesting that YB-1 and SP1 may exert negative effects on each other's
function. Results from band shift assay with purified YB-1 and SP1 indicated that
SP1 and YB-1 bind to the GC-rich DNA sequence in the double-stranded and
single-stranded configurations, respectively. However, efficient binding of SP1
to the double-stranded GC-rich motif corresponding to the HIV-1 long terminal
repeat (LTR) is diminished in the presence of YB-1. Similarly, in the presence of
SP1, YB-1 loses its ability to become associated with its target single-stranded 
DNA probe. No evidence for direct association of YB-1 and SP1 either in the
presence or in the absence of DNA was observed. These data suggest that while
YB-1 stimulates expression of the LTR in central nervous system cells, the level 
of activity of other cellular proteins, such as SP1, may dictate binding of YB-1 
to its target sequence, and therefore affect the regulatory function of this
protein.

PMID: 9472608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Gene. 1998 Jan 5;206(1):93-7.

Genomic organization of the human Y-box protein (YB-1) gene.

Toh S(1), Nakamura T, Ohga T, Koike K, Uchiumi T, Wada M, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Maidashi,
Fukuoka, Japan.

The human Y-box protein (YB-1) is a member of a family of DNA-binding proteins
containing a highly conserved cold shock domain. The genomic organization of the 
human YB-1 gene was determined from five overlapping genomic clones that
encompassed all exons of the gene. Sequence analysis of these clones revealed
that human YB-1 spans approximately 19 kb of genomic DNA and contains eight
exons. The cold shock domain is encoded by exons 1-5. Both exon-splitting and
codon-splitting in the region of the gene encoding the cold shock domain are
similar to those in the corresponding region of another Y-box binding protein,
dbpA. Exon-intron structures and nucleotide sequences of the regions encoding the
N-terminal and C-terminal domains of the two proteins differ markedly between
YB-1 and dbpA. These observations suggest that YB-1 and dbpA arose by duplication
of a common ancestral gene encoding all these domains.

PMID: 9461420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):392-7.

Thioltransferase (glutaredoxin) reactivates the DNA-binding activity of
oxidation-inactivated nuclear factor I.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Starke DW, Mieyal JJ, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Lerner Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

The reversible oxidative inactivation of transcription factors has been proposed 
to be important in cellular responses to oxidant stress and in several signal
transduction pathways. The nuclear factor I (NFI) family of transcription factors
is sensitive to oxidative inactivation due to the presence of a conserved,
oxidation-sensitive cysteine residue within the NFI DNA-binding domain. Here we
show that restoration of the DNA-binding activity of oxidized NFI-C can be
catalyzed in vitro by the cellular enzyme thioltransferase (glutaredoxin) coupled
to GSH and GSSG reductase. To test whether GSH-dependent pathways play a role in 
the maintenance of NFI activity in vivo, we used buthionine sulfoximine, an agent
that inhibits GSH synthesis, and N-acetylcysteine, an agent that can replenish
intracellular GSH. Pretreatment of HeLa cells with buthionine sulfoximine greatly
potentiated the inactivation of NFI by the oxidizing agent diamide. Inclusion of 
N-acetylcysteine in the culture medium during the recovery period following
diamide treatment increased the extent of restoration of NFI activity. These
results suggest that maintenance of the DNA-binding activity of NFI proteins
during oxidant stress in vivo requires a GSH-dependent pathway, likely involving 
thioltransferase-catalyzed reduction of the oxidation-sensitive cysteine residue 
on NFI.

PMID: 9417094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 26;272(52):32759-66.

Nuclear factor I family members regulate the transcription of surfactant
protein-C.

Bachurski CJ(1), Kelly SE, Glasser SW, Currier TA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229, USA. cindy.bachurski@chmcc.org

Transcription of the surfactant protein-C (SP-C) gene is restricted to Type II
epithelial cells in the adult lung. We have shown previously that the
0.32-kilobase pair (kb) mouse SP-C promoter is functional in transient
transfection assays of the lung epithelial cell-derived cell line, MLE-15, and
that thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) transactivates promoter activity. The
0.32-kb SP-C promoter can be separated into a proximal promoter region (-230 to
+18) and an enhancer region (-318 to -230). Three DNase I footprints were mapped 
in the promoter region (C1 through C3) and two in the enhancer region (C4 and
C5). We now show that nuclear factor I (NFI) family members bind to both
individual NFI half-sites in footprints C1, C3, and C5, and to a composite site
in footprint C4 by competition gel retardation and antibody supershift analyses. 
Mutational analysis of the 0.32-kb mouse SP-C promoter and transient transfection
of MLE-15 cells demonstrated that the NFI binding sites are required for promoter
activity in this cell type. Site-specific mutation of the proximal or distal NFI 
sites drastically reduced transactivation by a co-transfected NFI-A expression
vector in HeLa cells. These data indicate that NFI family member(s), binding to
sites in both the promoter and enhancer regions, regulate SP-C gene expression in
a process independent of TTF-1.

PMID: 9407049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):249-63.

Repression mechanisms of the I-A beta gene of the major histocompatibility
complex.

Lloberas J(1), Soler C, Celada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology (Immunology), Faculty of Biology, University of
Barcelona, Spain.

The mechanisms of regulation of I-A beta gene expression in the murine major
histocompatibility complex by transcriptional repression are reviewed. Active and
passive repression mechanisms are presented. The transcription factor PU.1
actively inhibits the expression of I-A beta through the binding to a DNA
sequence near the Y box, a cis-element in the promoter necessary for
transcription. This interaction probably interferes with the preinitiation
complex assembly. NF-Y is a transcription factor that binds to the Y box and has 
two constituents: NF-YA (that binds weakly to DNA) and NF-YB (that increases the 
binding of NF-YA to DNA). The dbpA protein represses the expression of I-A beta
by a quenching mechanism, forming a complex with NF-YA and the dbpB protein by
sequestering the NF-YB protein. A similar mechanism is observed with the
glucocorticoid receptor that binds to the X-box binding proteins and inhibits
their interaction with the X box. These results are examples of cross-talk
between proteins, which may help us to understand the regulation of I-A beta gene
expression.

PMID: 9442396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Dec 1;25(23):4764-70.

Identification and developmental characterization of a novel Y-box protein from
Drosophila melanogaster.

Thieringer HA(1), Singh K, Trivedi H, Inouye M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The Y-box proteins are a family of highly conserved nucleic acid binding proteins
which are conserved from bacteria to human. In this report we have identified a
new member of this family from Drosophila melanogaster. Degenerate-PCR was used
to identify a conserved region within the highly conserved cold-shock domain
(CSD) of Y-box proteins. Subsequently, the cDNA for this gene was sequenced, and 
the identified open reading frame was named ypsilon schachtel (yps). The
expression pattern of yps indicates that this gene is expressed throughout
development with the highest level of expression found in adult flies. In situ
hybridization shows that the yps mRNA is maternally loaded into the egg
cytoplasm. In addition, there appears to be expression of yps mRNA in mesodermal 
tissue during embryogenesis. YPS, while containing a conserved CSD, is novel in
that it completely lacks the alternating acidic and basic regions found in the
C-terminus of the other vertebrate eukaryotic Y-box proteins. The CSD of yps was 
purified and gel-shift analysis showed that this domain can interact with RNA. We
predict that YPS would be an RNA-binding protein due to these results and the
motifs which have been identified within the amino acid sequence.

PMCID: PMC147121
PMID: 9365254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Gene. 1997 Dec 19;204(1-2):79-83.

Cloning of a T-cell receptor beta-chain enhancer binding protein.

Gaikwad JS(1), Fotedar A.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, Department of Molecular
Biology, San Diego, CA 92122, USA. jgaikwad@mail.db.uth.tmc.edu

Several eukaryotic DNA binding proteins have been isolated by screening lambda
expression libraries with DNA probes containing their binding site. This strategy
has been employed to isolate clones of the factor that interacts with the T-cell 
receptor beta-chain enhancer motif. A cDNA clone encoding a protein similar to
YB-1 has been isolated with this. It seems probable that this protein YB, might
interact with other proteins and regulate the transcription of the T-cell
receptor beta-chain gene.

PMID: 9434168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Endocrinology. 1998 Jan;139(1):280-9.

Major histocompatibility class II HLA-DR alpha gene expression in thyrocytes:
counter regulation by the class II transactivator and the thyroid Y box protein.

Montani V(1), Taniguchi SI, Shong M, Suzuki K, Ohmori M, Giuliani C, Napolitano
G, Saji M, Fiorentino B, Reimold AM, Ting JP, Kohn LD, Singer DS.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Aberrant expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II proteins
on thyrocytes, which is associated with autoimmune thyroid disease, is mimicked
by gamma-interferon (gamma-IFN). To define elements and factors that regulate
class II gene expression in thyrocytes and that might be involved in aberrant
expression, we have studied gamma-IFN-induced HLA-DR alpha gene expression in rat
FRTL-5 thyroid cells. The present report shows that class II expression in FRTL-5
thyrocytes is positively regulated by the class II transactivator (CIITA), and
that CIITA mimics the action of gamma-IFN. Thus, as is the case for gamma-IFN,
several distinct and highly conserved elements on the 5'-flanking region of the
HLA-DR alpha gene, the S, X1, X2, and Y boxes between -137 to -65 bp, are
required for class II gene expression induced by pCIITA transfection in FRTL-5
thyroid cells. CIITA and gamma-IFN do not cause additive increases in HLA-DR
alpha gene expression in FRTL-5 cells, consistent with the possibility that CIITA
is an intermediate factor in the gamma-IFN pathway to increased class II gene
expression. Additionally, gamma-IFN treatment of FRTL-5 cells induces an
endogenous CIITA transcript; pCIITA transfection mimics the ability of gamma-IFN 
treatment of FRTL-5 thyroid cells to increase the formation of a specific and
novel protein/DNA complex containing CBP, a coactivator of CRE binding proteins
important for cAMP-induced gene expression; and the action of both gamma-IFN and 
CIITA to increase class II gene expression and increase complex formation is
reduced by cotransfection of a thyroid Y box protein, which suppresses MHC class 
I gene expression in FRTL-5 thyroid cells and is a homolog of human YB-1, which
suppresses MHC class II expression in human glioma cells. We conclude that CIITA 
and TSH receptor suppressor element binding protein-1 are components of the
gamma-IFN-regulated transduction system which, respectively, increase or decrease
class II gene expression in thyrocytes and may, therefore, be involved in
aberrant class II expression associated with autoimmune thyroid disease.

PMID: 9421426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. FEBS Lett. 1997 Nov 17;417(3):390-4.

Nuclear translocation of the Y-box binding protein by ultraviolet irradiation.

Koike K(1), Uchiumi T, Ohga T, Toh S, Wada M, Kohno K, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan. xtckk@biochem1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The Y-box binding protein, YB-1, is a member of a DNA binding protein family with
a structurally and functionally conserved cold shock domain. Using Western
blotting and immunohistochemical methods, larger amounts of YB-1 were detected in
the cytosol, particularly at the perinuclear region, than in the nucleus of human
cancer cells. UV irradiation increased accumulation of YB-1 in the nucleus at 20 
min and thereafter. This translocation of YB-1 into the nucleus by UV irradiation
was blocked by the protein kinase inhibitor H-7, but not HA-1004. Both green
fluorescent protein (GFP)-YB-1 and GFP-YB-1C with the C-terminus (248-317) of
YB-1 were located mainly in the cytosol, but GFP-YB-1deltaC with a deletion at
the C-terminus of YB-1 was located in the nucleus. YB-1 is translocated into the 
nucleus by UV irradiation, possibly through a protein kinase C-mediated signal
transduction pathway, and the C-terminal region of YB-1 might be important for
cytoplasmic retention of YB-1.

PMID: 9409758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biochem. 1997 Oct;122(4):795-801.

Genomic organization of the rat nuclear factor I-A gene.

Xu M(1), Osada S, Imagawa M, Nishihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, Suita.

The nuclear factor 1 (NF1) protein family functions as a cellular transcription
factor as well as an adenovirus DNA replication factor. This family consists of
four subtypes, NFI-A, NFI-B, NFI-C, and NFI-X, each encoded by a different gene. 
Each subtype possesses different isoforms generated by alternative splicing. To
date, only a porcine NFI-C gene has been cloned, and the gene structures of the
other NF1 proteins have not yet been identified. We recently isolated four kinds 
of NFI-A cDNA clones from the rat liver. To gain additional insight into the
structure of NFI-A, we isolated the rat NFI-A gene. This gene is composed of 11
exons spanning over 70 kb. All of the exon/intron boundaries are consistent with 
the GT/AG rule, and consensus sequences surrounding the splice boundaries are
also found. The 5'-flanking region lacks a canonical TATA box, but contains
several GC-box and AP2 binding sites. A 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA end
analysis indicated that the transcription of the NFI-A gene is initiated at
multiple sites. We also found conservation in the genomic structure between the
rat NFI-A and the porcine NFI-C, suggesting that duplication of an ancestral gene
occurred rather recently to produce the NFI-A and NFI-C genes.

PMID: 9399584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Gene. 1997 Oct 1;198(1-2):5-16.

Characterization of a Schistosoma mansoni gene encoding a homologue of the Y-box 
binding protein.

Franco GR(1), Garratt RC, Tanaka M, Simpson AJ, Pena SD.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica e Immunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

We have cloned and characterized a Schistosoma mansoni cDNA encoding a basic
protein homologous to the human Y-box binding protein 1 (YB-1). The 1.3-kb S.
mansoni YB-1 transcript, which was shown to be expressed in various stages of the
parasite life cycle, codes for a protein of 217 amino acids containing, towards
its N-terminus, a nucleic acid binding motif, known as the cold-shock domain
(CSD). This domain is 64% identical to the cold-shock domain of other members of 
the Y-box binding protein family and 43% identical to the cold-shock protein CspA
of Escherichia coli. In S. mansoni YB-1, the cold-shock domain possess some
structural characteristics that permit dimer formation as occurs in the Bacillus 
subtilis cold-shock protein CspB. The C-terminal region of S. mansoni YB-1
differs from the other Y-box binding proteins because of the presence of tandem
repeats of Arg and Gly, suggesting the formation of a fibroin-like beta-sandwich 
structure. This novel folding pattern for the C-terminus of S. mansoni YB-1 might
suggest a distinct specific function for this protein in the parasite.

PMID: 9370259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Sep 29;238(3):744-7.

Identification of the transcriptional repression domain of nuclear factor 1-A.

Osada S(1), Ikeda T, Xu M, Nishihara T, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

We previously showed that nuclear factor 1-A (NF1-A) binds to the silencer
elements in the glutathione transferase P (GST-P) gene, and the carboxy terminal 
region of NF1-A represses the transcription activity of human metallothionein IIA
(hMTIIA) promoter. In this study, we identified a repression region which is
divided into two 100 amino acid domains (RD1 and RD2). RD1 increased the
repression activity of RD2 to the hMTIIA promoter activity. The NF1-A repression 
domain inhibited the promoter activities of not only the hMTIIA gene but also
those of the GST-P and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta genes. RD1 and RD2
had abundant serine and glycine residues, and proline and serine residues,
respectively. Whereas some repression domains identified previously are enriched 
with alanine, proline, or serine, and are associated with the general
transcription factors, the NF1-A repression domains did not interact with
transcription factor IIB, TATA-binding protein (TBP), or TBP-associated factors
in vitro.

PMID: 9325160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 5;272(36):22905-12.

Glomerular mesangial cell-specific transactivation of matrix metalloproteinase 2 
transcription is mediated by YB-1.

Mertens PR(1), Harendza S, Pollock AS, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical
Center/University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Mesangial cell (MC) activation plays a pivotal role in the development of the end
stage sclerotic lesion characteristic of most forms of chronic glomerular
disease. We have previously demonstrated that MC activation is directly linked to
high level expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) enzyme (Turck,
J., Pollock, A. S., Lee, L., Marti, H.-P., and Lovett, D. H. (1996) J. Biol.
Chem. 25, 15074-15083), the transcription of which is regulated in a
tissue-specific fashion. Recent studies (Harendza, S., Pollock, A., Mertens, P.
R., and Lovett, D. H. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 18786-18796) delineated a strong
cis-acting enhancer element, designated MMP-2 RE1, within the 5'-flanking region 
of the rat MMP-2 gene. Gel shift, DNA footprint, and transcriptional analyses
mapped the enhancer element to a unique 40-base pair (bp) sequence located at
-1322 to -1282 bp relative to the translational start site.
Bromodeoxyuridine-substituted UV cross-linking of the 40-bp enhancer element with
MC nuclear extracts yielded a single protein of 52 kDa, while Southwestern blot
analysis with MMP-2 RE1 demonstrated three hybridizing nuclear proteins of 52,
62, and 86 kDa size. Screening of a human MC cDNA expression library with MMP-2
RE1 exclusively yielded clones with the identical sequence of the transcription
factor YB-1. Western blot and supershift gel analysis of MC nuclear extracts with
an anti-YB-1 antibody confirmed the presence of YB-1 within the shifted complex. 
Examination of the MMP-2 RE1 sequence revealed an incomplete Y-box sequence
(CTGCTGGGCAAG), which specifically interacted with recombinant YB-1 on DMS
protection footprinting analysis. YB-1 protein preferentially bound the
single-stranded components of the 40-bp MMP-2 RE1 and, with increasing
concentrations, formed multimeric complexes. Co-transfection of YB-1 in MC
increased the enhancer activity within the context of the native MMP-2 promoter, 
while transfection of non-MMP-2-synthesizing glomerular epithelial cells with
YB-1 led to transcriptional suppression. This study indicates that YB-1 is a
major, cell type-specific transactivator of MMP-2 transcription by glomerular
mesangial cells.

PMID: 9278454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 6;272(23):14943-9.

Characterization of a phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module in mouse P450
Cyp2b10 gene.

Honkakoski P(1), Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

Induction of drug- and carcinogen-metabolizing cytochrome P450s by xenobiotic
chemicals is a common cellular defense mechanism, usually leading to increased
detoxification of xenobiotics but sometimes, paradoxically, to formation of more 
toxic and carcinogenic metabolites. Phenobarbital (PB) is an archetypal
representative for chemicals including industrial solvents, pesticides, plant
products, and clinically used drugs that induce several genes within CYP
subfamilies 2B, 2A, 2C, and 3A in rodents and humans. Although the transcription 
of these CYP genes is activated by PB, the associated molecular mechanisms have
not yet been elucidated. Here we have analyzed, in detail, enhancer activity of a
far upstream region of mouse Cyp2b10 gene and report a 132-base pair
PB-responsive enhancer module (PBREM) with a 33-base pair core element containing
binding sites for nuclear factor I- and nuclear receptor-like factors. Mutations 
of these binding sites abolish the ability of PBREM to respond to inducers in
mouse primary hepatocytes.

PMID: 9169466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mamm Genome. 1997 Jun;8(6):456.

Assignment of the porcine nuclear factor I/CTF (NFI/CTF) gene to chromosome
2q12-13 by FISH.

Frönicke L(1), Scherthan H.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Humanbiologie und Humangenetik, Universität Kaiserslautern,
Postfach 3049, D-67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany.

PMID: 9166600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Nihon Rinsho. 1997 May;55(5):1054-8.

[Molecular mechanism of the stress induction of MDR1 gene].

[Article in Japanese]

Kohno K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Japan, School of Medicine.

MDR1 promoter activity increases in response to various environmental stimuli,
including anticancer drugs and in a manner that is dependent on the inverted
CCAAT box. The binding activity of a nuclear factor MDR-NF1 that interacts with
this promoter region was augmented when the nuclear extract was prepared from
cells that had been treated with either UV or anticancer drugs. In an attempt to 
understand the molecular basis for the stress-dependent induction of MDR1
promoter activity, the cDNA for MDR-NF1 have been cloned. The amino acid sequence
encoded by the cloned cDNA was identical to that of YB-1. The human Y-Box binding
protein (YB-1) is a member of a DNA-binding protein family with a structurally
and functionally conserved cold shock domain. YB-1 was found to be much higher in
all cisplatin-resistant cell lines than that in the respective drug-sensitive
parental counterparts. Two transfectants with a YB-1 antisense construct showed
increased sensitivity to cisplatin, mitomycin C and UV irradiation, but not to
vincristine, doxorubicin, camptothecin or etoposide. Thus, YB-1 may protect cells
from the cytotoxic effects of agents that induce cross-linking of DNA, suggesting
a novel function of this ancestor DNA binding protein. Regulatory mechanism of
the YB-1 gene expression and the cellular functions of YB-1 are currently under
investigation in relation to drug resistance.

PMID: 9155152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 May 1;341(1):140-52.

Effect of acetaldehyde on Sp1 binding and activation of the mouse alpha 2(I)
collagen promoter.

Miao K(1), Potter JJ, Anania FA, Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2195, USA.

Acetaldehyde activates the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter and this effect is 
mediated in part by increased binding of nuclear factor I (NF-I). Additional
mechanisms may exist since deletions in the promoter upstream to the NF-I binding
site prevented enhancement by acetaldehyde. Three adjacent areas of binding by
nuclear proteins from activated hepatic stellate cells were identified at -568 to
-554 (region 1), -542 to -518 (region 2), and -473 to -453 (region 3) of the
promoter using DNase I protection analyses. Multiple DNA-protein complexes were
formed in electrophoretic mobility shift assays with oligonucleotide probes
specifying the three regions. Sp1 and NF-1 bound to all three regions, while Sp3 
bound to region 2. Acetaldehyde decreased nuclear protein binding to all three
regions. Mutations of regions 1, 2, and 3 reduced basal activity of the promoter 
and inhibited acetaldehyde stimulation in transfected stellate cells.
Acetaldehyde inhibited the stimulatory effect of the Sp1 vector pPacSp1 on the
promoter in transfected Drosophila cells. In conclusion, three regions of Sp1
binding were identified and are required for optimal activity of the alpha 2(I)
collagen promoter. Sp1 is required for basal activity of the alpha 2(I) collagen 
promoter; however, the enhancing effect of acetaldehyde on the promoter is not
mediated by Sp1.

PMID: 9143363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10739-45.

NFI-B3, a novel transcriptional repressor of the nuclear factor I family, is
generated by alternative RNA processing.

Liu Y(1), Bernard HU, Apt D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 119260, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) proteins constitute a family of sequence-specific
transcription factors whose functional diversity is generated through
transcription from four different genes (NFI-A, NFI-B, NFI-C, and NFI-X),
alternative RNA splicing, and protein heterodimerization. Here we describe a
naturally truncated isoform, NFI-B3, which is derived from the human NFI-B gene, 
in addition to characterizing further human NFI-B1 and NFI-B2, two differentially
spliced variants previously isolated from hamster and chicken. Although NFI-B1
and NFI-B2 proteins are translated from an 8. 7-kilobase message, the mRNA for
NFI-B3 has a size of only 1.8 kilobases. The NFI-B3 message originates from the
failure to excise the first intron downstream of the exons encoding the DNA
binding domain and subsequent processing of this transcript at an intron-internal
polyadenylation signal. The translation product includes the proposed DNA binding
and dimerization domain and terminates after translation of two additional
"intron" encoded codons. In SL-2 cells, which are void of endogenous NFI, NFI-B3 
by itself had no effect on transcriptional regulation and failed to bind DNA.
Coexpression of NFI-B3 with other isoforms of the NFI-B, -C, and -X family,
however, led to a strong reduction of transcriptional activation compared with
the expression of these factors alone. Gel shift analysis indicated that NFI-B3
disrupts the function of other NFI proteins by reducing their DNA binding
activity by heterodimer formation. The efficiency of NFI-B3 heterodimers to bind 
to DNA correlated with the degree of transcriptional repression. The abundance of
NFI-B transcripts varied significantly between different human cell lines and
tissues, suggesting a potential involvement of these factors in the complex
mechanisms that generate cell type specificity.

PMID: 9099724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biochem. 1997 Apr;121(4):711-6.

Nucleotide sequence of the promoter region of chicken cytosolic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene.

Sato A(1), Takahashi H, Konishi K, Suzuki T, Kochi H.

Author information: 
(1)Information Science Major, Faculty of Liberal Arts, Tohoku-Gakuin University, 
Izumi-ku, Sendai. asato@izcc.tohoku-gakuin.ac.jp

The nucleotide sequence of the promoter region and its flanking regions which
span - 1855 to +2083 in the chicken cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
gene was determined. The transcription initiation site was located at 119
nucleotides downstream of the previously reported chicken kidney transcription
initiation site of this gene. The nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 3 were 
highly homologous to the corresponding exons of the rat gene. Homology of the
sequence - 1 to - 500 to that of rat gene was 52% and most of the
hormone-responsive sequences in rat gene, such as the glucocorticoid-responsive
region, were not conserved in the chicken gene, in accord with the
species-specific responsiveness to starvation. In contrast, in the region of - 1 
to - 300, some sequence motifs conserved both in the chicken and rat genes were
found at essentially the same positions in the promoters. Such sequence motifs
included a cAMP-responsive element (CRE), a nuclear factor-1 (NF-1/CTF)-binding
site, and a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1)-binding site. Transient
expression of the reporter luciferase gene ligated to the 3' end of this chicken 
sequence (-1855 to +7) was observed in a primary culture of chick hepatocytes
when dibutyryl cyclic AMP was added to the culture medium.

PMID: 9163522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 1;94(7):2885-90.

Nucleosome-mediated synergism between transcription factors on the mouse mammary 
tumor virus promoter.

Chávez S(1), Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Marburg, Germany.

In unstimulated mammalian cells and in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter is silent and organized into positioned
nucleosomes, one of which encompasses the binding sites for glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) and nuclear factor I (NFI). Glucocorticoid induction in vivo
involves a functional synergism between GR and NFI and simultaneous occupancy of 
the promoter sites for both proteins that cannot be reproduced on naked DNA. The 
role of chromatin in the process of induction was investigated by manipulating
the nucleosome density in yeast strains carrying a regulated histone H4 gene.
Following depletion of nucleosomes, independent transactivation by NFI or by GR, 
as well as binding of the individual proteins to the MMTV promoter, were
enhanced, in agreement with a repressive function of nucleosomes. In contrast,
NFI-dependent hormone induction of the promoter and the simultaneous binding of
receptor and NFI were compromised by nucleosome depletion. This effect could be
partly mediated by a cryptic binding site for the receptor that is functional
only in the nucleosomal context. Thus, positioned nucleosomes do not only account
for constitutive repression of the MMTV promoter, but also participate in
induction by mediating cooperative binding and functional synergism between GR
and NFI.

PMCID: PMC20292
PMID: 9096316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Nat Med. 1997 Apr;3(4):447-50.

Nuclear localization and increased levels of transcription factor YB-1 in primary
human breast cancers are associated with intrinsic MDR1 gene expression.

Bargou RC(1), Jürchott K, Wagener C, Bergmann S, Metzner S, Bommert K, Mapara MY,
Winzer KJ, Dietel M, Dörken B, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Universitätsklinikum Rudolf Virchow,
Robert-Rössle Klinik, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 1997 Apr;3(4):378-80.

Breast cancers are either primarily resistant to chemotherapy (intrinsic
resistance), or respond to chemotherapy but later recur with a
multidrug-resistant phenotype because of overexpression of the multidrug
transporter P-glycoprotein. The MDR1 gene encoding P-glycoprotein may be
transcriptionally regulated by a Y-box transcription factor. We now report that, 
in multidrug-resistant MCF-7 breast cancer cells, nuclear localization of YB-1 is
associated with MDR-1 gene expression. In drug-sensitive MCF-7 cells, however,
YB-1 was localized to the cytoplasm. Regulated overexpression of YB-1 in
drug-sensitive diploid breast epithelial cells induced MDR-1 gene expression and 
multidrug resistance. In 27 out of 27 untreated primary breast cancers, YB-1
protein was expressed in the cytoplasm although it was undetectable in normal
breast tissue of these patients. In a subgroup of tumors (9/27), however, YB-1
was also localized to the nucleus and, in these cases, high levels of
P-glycoprotein were present. These results show that in a subset of untreated
primary breast cancers, nuclear localization of YB-1 protein is associated with
intrinsic multidrug resistance. Our data show that YB-1 has an important role in 
controlling MDR1 gene transcription and this finding provides a basis for the
analysis of molecular mechanisms responsible for intrinsic multidrug resistance
in human breast cancer.

PMID: 9095180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Nat Med. 1997 Apr;3(4):378-80.

Multidrug resistance--a multiplex phenomenon.

Baldini N.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1997 Apr;3(4):447-50.

PMID: 9095165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Dev Dyn. 1997 Mar;208(3):313-25.

Expression patterns of the four nuclear factor I genes during mouse embryogenesis
indicate a potential role in development.

Chaudhry AZ(1), Lyons GE, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Ohio 44195, USA.

The nuclear factor I (NFI) family of site-specific DNA-binding proteins is
required for both the cell-type specific transcription of many viral and cellular
genes and for the replication of adenovirus DNA. Although binding sites for NFI
proteins within the promoters of several tissue-specific genes have been shown to
be essential for their expression, it is unclear which NFI gene products function
in specific tissues during development. We have isolated cDNAs from all four
murine NFI genes (gene designations Nfia, Nfib, Nfic, and Nfix), assessed the
embryonic and postnatal expression patterns of the NFI genes, and determined the 
ability of specific NFI proteins to activate transcription from the NFI-dependent
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. In adult mice, all four NFI genes are 
most highly expressed in lung, liver, heart, and other tissues but only weakly
expressed in spleen and testis. The embryonic expression patterns of the NFI
genes is complex, with NFI-A transcripts appearing earliest-within 9 days
postcoitum in the heart and developing brain. The four genes exhibit unique but
overlapping patterns of expression during embryonic development, with high level 
expression of NFI-A, NFI-B, and NFI-X transcripts in neocortex and extensive
expression of the four genes in muscle, connective tissue, liver, and other organ
systems. The four NFI gene products studied differ in their ability to activate
expression of the NFI-dependent MMTV promoter, with the NFI-B protein being most 
active and the NFI-A protein being least active. These data are discussed in the 
context of the developmental expression patterns of known NFI-responsive genes.
The differential activation of an NFI-dependent promoter, together with the
expression patterns observed for the four genes, indicate that the NFI proteins
may play an important role in regulating tissue-specific gene expression during
mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 9056636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Feb 28;1350(3):287-92.

Characterization of human cyclooxygenase 2 gene promoter localization of a
TGF-beta response element.

Yang X(1), Hou F, Taylor L, Polgar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118,
USA.

We characterized 2.3 kb of 5'-flanking region of the human cyclooxygenase 2 gene 
and analyzed its promoter activity. We localized three positive and two negative 
cis-acting regulatory regions and a TGF-beta response region. Basal promoter
activity was located between -77 and +99 bp. Maximal promoter activity was
observed from -1838 to +99 bp. A TGF-beta response region was found between -454 
and -288 bp. This region included an NF-I site. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that TGF-beta caused a marked change in the pattern and intensity
of this NF-I like protein complex.

PMID: 9061025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biochem. 1997 Feb;121(2):355-63.

Nuclear factor 1 family proteins bind to the silencer element in the rat
glutathione transferase P gene.

Osada S(1), Daimon S, Ikeda T, Nishihara T, Yano K, Yamasaki M, Imagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Osaka University.

We have previously identified a silencer region in the glutathione transferase P 
(GST-P) gene, of which the expression is completely repressed in liver of the
rat. At least three trans-acting factors bind to multiple cis-elements in this
region. Since GST-P silencer 4 (GSP4) is a dominant element in this silencer, we 
purified the GSP4 binding protein, called Silencer Factor A (SF-A). Purified SF-A
was separated into several proteins on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and the amino
acid sequences of four major components of SF-A were determined. The amino acid
sequences of three fragments were identical to those of rat NF1-L, and that of
the other fragment was the same as that of hamster NF1/Red1. It is known that
nuclear factor 1 (NF1) family proteins are encoded by at least four independent
genes in vertebrates, and NF1-L and NF1/Red1 are derived from different genes,
NFI-A and NFI-B, respectively. The microsequencing of SF-A revealed that at least
two types of NF1 existed in rat liver. Functional analysis by using GAL4-fusion
protein in HepG2 cells revealed that NFI-A represented the transcription activity
from human metallothionein IIA promoter. Our findings indicate that multiple
forms of the NF1 family bind to the silencer region and contribute to the
negative regulation of the GST-P gene expression.

PMID: 9089412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Development. 1997 Feb;124(4):793-804.

CARP, a cardiac ankyrin repeat protein, is downstream in the Nkx2-5 homeobox gene
pathway.

Zou Y(1), Evans S, Chen J, Kuo HC, Harvey RP, Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)American Heart Association-Bugher Foundation Center for Molecular Biology,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093, USA.

To identify the molecular pathways that guide cardiac ventricular chamber
specification, maturation and morphogenesis, we have sought to characterize
factors that regulate the expression of the ventricular myosin light chain-2
gene, one of the earliest markers of ventricular regionalization during mammalian
cardiogenesis. Previously, our laboratory identified a 28 bp HF-la/MEF-2 element 
in the MLC-2v promoter region, which confers cardiac ventricular chamber-specific
gene expression during murine cardiogenesis, and showed that the ubiquitous
transcription factor YB-1 binds to the HF-la site in conjunction with a
co-factor. In a search for interacting co-factors, a nuclear ankyrin-like repeat 
protein CARP (cardiac ankyrin repeat protein) was isolated from a rat neonatal
heart cDNA library by yeast two-hybrid screening, using YB-1 as the bait.
Co-immunoprecipitation and GST-CARP pulldown studies reveal that CARP forms a
physical complex with YB-1 in cardiac myocytes and immunostaining shows that
endogenous CARP is localized in the cardiac myocyte nucleus. Co-transfection
assays indicate that CARP can negatively regulate an HF-1-TK minimal promoter in 
an HF-1 sequence-dependent manner in cardiac myocytes, and CARP displays a
transcriptional inhibitory activity when fused to a GAL4 DNA-binding domain in
both cardiac and noncardiac cell context. Northern analysis revealed that carp
mRNA is highly enriched in the adult heart, with only trace levels in skeletal
muscle. During murine embryogenesis, endogenous carp expression was first clearly
detected as early as E8.5 specifically in heart and is regulated temporally and
spatially in the myocardium. Nkx2-5, the murine homologue of Drosophila gene
tinman was previously shown to be required for heart tube looping morphogenesis
and ventricular chamber-specific myosin light chain-2 expression during mammalian
heart development. In Nkx2-5(-/-)embryos, carp expression was found to be
significantly and selectively reduced as assessed by both whole-mount in situ
hybridizations and RNase protection assays, suggesting that carp is downstream of
the homeobox gene Nkx2-5 in the cardiac regulatory network. Co-transfection
assays using a dominant negative mutant Nkx2-5 construct with CARP
promoter-luciferase reporter constructs in cardiac myocytes confirms that Nkx2-5 
either directly or indirectly regulates carp at the transcriptional level.
Finally, a carp promoter-lacZ transgene, which displays cardiac-specific
expression in wild-type and Nkx2-5(+/-) background, was also significantly
reduced in Nkx2-5(-/-) embryos, indicating that Nkx2-5 either directly or
indirectly regulates carp promoter activity during in vivo cardiogenesis as well 
as in cultured cardiac myocytes. Thus, CARP is a YB-1 associated factor and
represents the first identified cardiac-restricted downstream regulatory gene in 
the homeobox gene Nkx2-5 pathway and may serve as a negative regulator of
HF-1-dependent pathways for ventricular muscle gene expression.

PMID: 9043061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):895-905.

Glucocorticoid receptor-glucocorticoid response element binding stimulates
nucleosome disruption by the SWI/SNF complex.

Ostlund Farrants AK(1), Blomquist P, Kwon H, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The organization of DNA in chromatin is involved in repressing basal
transcription of a number of inducible genes. Biochemically defined multiprotein 
complexes such as SWI/SNF (J. Côté, J. Quinn, J. L. Workman, and C. L. Peterson, 
Science 265:53-60, 1994) and nucleosome remodeling factor (T. Tsukiyama and C.
Wu, Cell 83:1011-1020, 1995) disrupt nucleosomes in vitro and are thus candidates
for complexes which cause chromatin decondensation during gene induction. In this
study we show that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a hormone-inducible
transcription factor, stimulates the nucleosome-disrupting activity of the
SWI/SNF complex partially purified either from HeLa cells or from rat liver
tissue. This GR-mediated stimulation of SWI/SNF nucleosome disruption depended on
the presence of a glucocorticoid response element. The in vitro-reconstituted
nucleosome probes used in these experiments harbored 95 bp of synthetic
DNA-bending sequence in order to rotationally position the DNA. The GR-dependent 
stimulation of SWI/SNF-mediated nucleosome disruption, as evaluated by DNase I
footprinting, was 2.7- to 3.8-fold for the human SWI/SNF complex and 2.5- to
3.2-fold for the rat SWI/SNF complex. When nuclear factor 1 (NF1) was used
instead of GR, there was no stimulation of SWI/SNF activity in the presence of a 
mononucleosome containing an NF1 binding site. On the other hand, the SWI/SNF
nucleosome disruption activity increased the access of NF1 for its nucleosomal
binding site. No such effect was seen on binding of GR to its response element.
Our results suggest that GR, but not NF1, is able to target the
nucleosome-disrupting activity of the SWI/SNF complex.

PMCID: PMC231816
PMID: 9001244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):656-66.

A combination of MEF3 and NFI proteins activates transcription in a subset of
fast-twitch muscles.

Spitz F(1), Salminen M, Demignon J, Kahn A, Daegelen D, Maire P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, Université René
Descartes, Paris, France.

The human aldolase A pM promoter is active in fast-twitch muscles. To understand 
the role of the different transcription factors which bind to this promoter and
determine which ones are responsible for its restricted pattern of expression, we
analyzed several transgenic lines harboring different combinations of pM
regulatory elements. We show that muscle-specific expression can be achieved
without any binding sites for the myogenic factors MyoD and MEF2 and that a 64-bp
fragment comprising a MEF3 motif and an NFI binding site is sufficient to drive
reporter gene expression in some but, interestingly, not all fast-twitch muscles.
A result related to this pattern of expression is that some isoforms of NFI
proteins accumulate differentially in fast- and slow-twitch muscles and in
distinct fast-twitch muscles. We propose that these isoforms of NFI proteins
might provide a molecular basis for skeletal muscle diversity.

PMCID: PMC231791
PMID: 9001219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Methods. 1997 Feb;11(2):235-45.

Visualization of multicomponent transcription factor complexes on chromatin and
nonnucleosomal templates in vivo.

Archer TK(1), Lee HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, The University of Western Ontario,
London Regional Cancer Centre, Canada.

There is increasing evidence that specific chromatin structures play an important
role in the regulation of transcription in eukaryotes. The mouse mammary tumor
virus (MMTV) promoter, which is reproducibly assembled into a phased array of six
nucleosomes when introduced into cells, represents a particularly well-studied
example. The second or B nucleosome of the phased array is disrupted in response 
to hormone stimulation, allowing the assembly of a preinitiation complex and the 
activation of transcription. In vitro experiments demonstrate that the assembly
of the proximal promoter into chromatin is sufficient to prevent the binding of
transcription factors such as nuclear factor 1. Consequently it is argued that
chromatin serves to restrict the access of ubiquitous transcription factors in
the absence of hormone stimulation. We have employed an in vivo exonuclease III
(ExoIII)/Taq polymerase footprinting assay to study the hormone-dependent loading
of transcription factors on the MMTV promoter. This assay makes use of stable
mouse and human cell lines harboring bovine papilloma virus chimeras of the MMTV 
promoter attached to a reporter gene. To ascertain the significance of
protein-chromatin interactions vs protein-DNA interactions, we examined
transcription factor binding to chromatin and nonchromatin templates of the MMTV 
promoter within the same cells. By the use of primers specific for each of the
two distinct reporter genes, and restriction enzymes that generate entry sites
for ExoIII, we can distinguish chromatin and nonnucleosomal templates in vivo.
This system has allowed us to visualize the assembly of multicomponent
transcription preinitiation complexes and to ascertain the consequences of
defined chromatin structures on the binding of individual transcription factors
in vivo.

PMID: 8993036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Virology. 1997 Jan 6;227(1):7-12.

Dual NF1-requiring effect of human neurotropic JC virus composite pentanucleotide
repeat elements on early and late viral gene expression.

Liu M(1), Kumar KU, Pater MM, Pater A.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, Canada.

Human polyoma JC virus (JCV) is a largely brain cell-specific virus that is
associated with AIDS. The neurotropism involves the various transcription factors
interacting with their cognate sequences in the JCV early (JCVE) and late (JCVL) 
promoters-enhancer, but the mechanism is unclear. The JCV tandem AGGGA
pentanucleotide double repeat element (Pnt2) and the abutting NF1 site form a
composite Pnt2 (cPnt2). Here, we studied the roles of both sites of cPnt2 in the 
expression of JCVE and JCVL. JCVE activity was progressively increased in U-87 MG
human glioblastoma cells following the site-specific mutation of Pnt2 in one and 
both 98-bp repeats. In contrast, the activity for JCVL was progressively reduced 
by mutating single and double Pnt2s. However, JCVE activity was unaffected by
mutating both Pnt2s when both NF1 sites of cPnt2 were mutated. The activity of
JCVL was also unaffected by double Pnt2 mutations after the NF1 sites were
mutated. Differentiating P19 glial cells showed similar results. Next,
Pnt2-interacting proteins were examined by two in vitro assays with a Pnt2
oligonucleotide. Mobility shift assays showed one Pnt2-protein complex for U-87
MG cell extracts and two for P19 glial cell extracts. However, similar results
were obtained for glial, muscle, and undifferentiated P19 cells. In UV
cross-linking assays, two Pnt2-binding proteins (Pnt2BPs) were detected. The
results suggested that the effects on JCVE and JCVL expression of Pnt2BP and NF1 
via cPnt2 are dual and require a glial cell-specific NF1 function.

PMID: 9007053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jan;8(1):69-82.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha promoter regulation involves recognition by
cell-specific factors, thyroid transcription factor-1, and autoactivation.

Peterson RS(1), Clevidence DE, Ye H, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha (HNF-3 alpha) and -3 beta proteins share
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and regulate
cell-specific transcription in hepatocytes and respiratory epithelium. In this
study, we used transfection assays to demonstrate that the -520 nucleotides
upstream of the rat HNF-3 alpha gene were sufficient for cell-specific
expression. We identified binding sites for a liver and kidney-enriched nuclear
factor and a kidney-enriched protein that recognizes two distinct promoter
elements. We showed that the rat HNF-3 alpha promoter binds the HNF-3 protein
isoforms, which may serve an auto- and/or cross-regulatory role. Furthermore, we 
showed that cotransfection of the thyroid transcription factor-1 expression
vector enhanced HNF-3 alpha promoter activity. We discuss these results with
respect to the transcriptional induction of the HNF-3 alpha gene in respiratory
epithelium during embryogenesis. Because the HNF-3 alpha promoter region bound
nuclear factors in kidney extracts, we used in situ hybridization to demonstrate 
that it was expressed in the urothelium of the renal pelvis in adult and
embryonic kidney. We also report on a novel expression pattern of HNF-3 alpha in 
the epithelium of the urinary bladder, penile urethra, and the prostate gland,
and show that its expression in the intestinal epithelium increases from the
proximal duodenum to distal ileum. We also demonstrate that HNF-3 alpha is
abundantly expressed in the colonic epithelium. Furthermore, we use the HNF-3 DNA
binding consensus sequence to identify putative target genes in the renal pelvis 
and gut epithelium.

PMID: 8993836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):61-8.

Suppression of grp78 core promoter element-mediated stress induction by the dbpA 
and dbpB (YB-1) cold shock domain proteins.

Li WW(1), Hsiung Y, Wong V, Galvin K, Zhou Y, Shi Y, Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Cancer Center,
University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

The highly conserved grp78 core promoter element plays an important role in the
induction of grp78 under diverse stress signals. Previous studies have
established a functional region in the 3' half of the core (stress-inducible
change region [SICR]) which exhibits stress-inducible changes in stressed nuclei.
The human transcription factor YY1 is shown to bind the SICR and transactivate
the core element under stress conditions. Here we report that expression library 
screening with the core element has identified two new core binding proteins,
YB-1 and dbpA. Both proteins belong to the Y-box family of proteins characterized
by an evolutionarily conserved DNA binding motif, the cold shock domain (CSD). In
contrast to YY1, which binds only double-stranded SICR, the Y-box/CSD proteins
much prefer the lower strand of the SICR. The Y-box proteins can repress the
inducibility of the grp78 core element mediated by treatment of cells with
A23187, thapsigargin, and tunicamycin. In gel shift assays, YY1 binding to the
core element is inhibited by either YB-1 or dbpA. A yeast interaction trap screen
using LexA-YY1 as a bait and a HeLa cell cDNA-acid patch fusion library
identified YB-1 as a YY1-interacting protein. In cotransfection experiments, the 
Y-box proteins antagonize the YY1-mediated enhancement of transcription directed 
by the grp78 core in stressed cells. Thus, the CSD proteins may be part of the
stress signal transduction mechanism in the mammalian system.

PMCID: PMC231730
PMID: 8972186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31322-33.

Binding of THZif-1, a MAZ-like zinc finger protein to the nuclease-hypersensitive
element in the promoter region of the c-MYC protooncogene.

Sakatsume O(1), Tsutsui H, Wang Y, Gao H, Tang X, Yamauchi T, Murata T, Itakura
K, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical and Chemical
Research), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan. kazunari@rtc.riken.go.jp

A detailed analysis is reported of the binding of the zinc finger protein THZif-1
to the nuclease-hypersensitive element (NHE) in the promoter region of the c-MYC 
gene using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay and a series of mutants of a 
fusion protein composed of glutathione S-transferase and THZif-1. The THZif-1
protein bound specifically to the single-stranded (ss) pyrimidine-rich DNA of the
NHE (ss c-myc NHE-C) with an apparent dissociation constant (Kd (app)) of 0.077
microM. By contrast, no binding to the single-stranded purine-rich DNA of the NHE
(ss c-myc NHE-G) was detected. Moreover, the binding affinity of THZif-1 protein 
was 2-fold higher for the single-stranded 5-methyl-2'-deoxycytidine derivative of
NHE (ss c-myc NHE-me5C) than for the unmethylated NHE. In the case of the binding
of THZif-1 to methylated double-stranded (ds) NHE (ds c-myc NHE-me5CG), no
significant binding to the DNA was observed. The decrease in binding to DNA of
THZif-1 was significant in the case of mutated ds c-myc NHE, in which more than
two sites of deoxycytidine residues were methylated. However, the binding
affinity of THZif-1 protein for methylated and for unmethylated triple-helical
DNA of the NHE was almost identical. Moreover, the domain of the THZif-1 protein 
that made the major contribution to binding to ss c-myc NHE-C or ss c-myc
NHE-me5C corresponded to the amino-terminal second zinc finger motif. Taken
together, the results indicate that the THZif-1 protein exhibits preferential
DNA-binding activity with ss c-myc NHE-C, ds c-myc NHE-CG, and ts c-myc NHE but
not with ss c-myc NHE-G and ds c-myc NHE-me5CG in vitro.

PMID: 8940139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Dec;26(12):3144-52.

Inducible nuclear factors binding the IgM heavy chain pre-mRNA secretory poly(A) 
site.

Phillips C(1), Schimpl A, Dietrich-Goetz W, Clements JB, Virtanen A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie und Immunologie der Universität Würzburg, Germany.
cathy.phillips@medgen.uu.se

Two alternative forms of IgM heavy-chain mRNA are produced from a common
precursor mRNA as a result of competition between cleavage/poly(A) addition at
the upstream (secretory) poly(A) site and cleavage/poly(A) addition at the
downstream (membrane) poly(A) site coupled with splicing. The efficiency of
cleavage at the secretory poly(A) site is thought to play a crucial role in this 
alternative processing. We therefore examined RNA binding factors recognizing the
secretory poly(A) site, in the absence of the splicing option, to look for
transacting factors that may play a role in cleavage/polyadenylation efficiency
at this site. Purified primary B cells produce the secretory form of mu mRNA when
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and the membrane form of mu mRNA when
their antigen receptors are ligated by anti-mu antibodies. We compared RNA
binding factors in nuclear extracts from cells produced by these different
stimulatory conditions and show that induction of the secretory form of mu mRNA
by LPS correlates with the induction of a 28-32-kDa secretory poly(A)
site-specific polypeptide which is also present in the plasmacytoma cell line
J558L. Visualization of the 28-32-kDa polypeptide in UV cross-linking assays
depends on a GU-rich element downstream of the secretory poly(A) site. We show
that this GU-rich region enhances polyadenylation efficiency in vivo by
transfection of luciferase reporter constructs into the plasmacytoma J558L. We
also examined nuclear extracts from B cells doubly stimulated with LPS and
anti-mu antibodies in which expression of the secretory form of mu mRNA is
selectively inhibited. This inhibition may be due to a down-regulation of
polyadenylation at the secretory poly(A) site or an up-regulation of the
competitive splicing process. This form of stimulation does not lead to the
disappearance of the 28-32-kDa polypeptide, but to an enhanced binding of a
50-55-kDa factor which binds both the secretory and membrane poly(A) site. We
report the first detection of changes in RNA binding factors taking place at the 
secretory poly(A) site which correlate with the expression of different forms of 
mu mRNA produced by primary B cells under different stimulation conditions.

PMID: 8977316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Mol Med (Berl). 1996 Dec;74(12):711-24.

Chromatin structure and the regulation of gene expression: remodeling at the MMTV
promoter.

Beato M(1).

Author information: 
(1)IMT, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

The role of the various levels of chromatin organization in the control of
eukaryotic gene expression is discussed on the basis of recent advances in our
understanding of chromatin structure in well-defined model systems. Particular
attention is devoted to the precise structure and the possible functions of
positioned nucleosomes and to the enzymatic mechanism of nucleosome remodeling.
Some of the principles involved are illustrated with genomic footprinting results
obtained with the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter, the nucleosomal
organization of which is remodeled following transcriptional induction by steroid
hormones. In this system a positioned nucleosome is responsible for
transcriptional repression prior to hormone administration and participates in
hormonal induction by facilitating the functional interaction among transcription
factors on the promoter.

PMID: 8974015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8558-63.

E5 proteins of human papillomavirus types 11 and 16 transactivate the c-fos
promoter through the NF1 binding element.

Chen SL(1), Lin YK, Li LY, Tsao YP, Lo HY, Wang WB, Tsai TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Human papillomavirus type 11 (HPV-11) and HPV-16 contain an E5 gene that can
induce c-fos gene expression in mouse fibroblasts. This study investigated the
human c-fos promoter characteristics by mapping the c-fos promoter sequence with 
several deletion and point mutants that confer responsiveness to E5 of HPV-11 or 
HPV-16. The mutant studies show that NF1 binding sequences within the c-fos
promoter were crucial for the induction of the c-fos gene by E5, and the gel
shift assay study suggested that E5 of both HPV-11 and HPV-16 is associated,
perhaps indirectly, with this NF1 element in the transactivation of the human
c-fos promoter. Using an inducible system, we demonstrate that increased
induction of the HPV-11 E5 gene in cells led to increased transactivation of the 
NF1 element. In addition, the transactivating activity of a series of HPV-11 E5
mutants on the NF1 element had a strong correlation with their respective
transforming activities.

PMCID: PMC190948
PMID: 8970980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 1996 Nov-Dec;14(6):669-72.

Y box-binding trans-regulatory nuclear proteins and susceptibility to rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Singal DP(1), Ye M, Fleisig H, Buchanan WW, Qiu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Inappropriately high levels of expression of HLA-DR molecules or their
expression on inappropriate cells, e.g. synovial tissue and T cells, may result
in an aberrant tissue-destructive immune response and thus cause susceptibility
to rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Patients and controls were typed for HLA-DR antigens by oligonucleotide 
typing of PCR-amplified DNA. Trans-regulatory nuclear proteins that bind to the Y
box in DRB promotors were examined by the gel-mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: We found that the trans-regulatory nuclear protein (NF-Y), which binds
to the Y box in DRB promoters and which plays a dominant role on the level of the
expression and inducibility of DR genes, was absent in 50% of RA patients but not
in healthy individuals (0%). Furthermore, we observed that all patients (100%)
either lacked the NF-Y protein and/or carried the disease susceptibility DRB1
gene, which gives the highest relative risk value (RR = 46.6; p < 1.6 x 10(-6))
reported so far for susceptibility to RA.
CONCLUSION: The absence of the trans-regulatory nuclear protein that binds to the
Y box with an inverted CCAAT motif in DRB promotors and the presence of the DRB1 
gene with the amino acid motif QKRAA and QRRAA cause susceptibility to RA.

PMID: 8978965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):5997-6008.

Transcriptional regulation of alpha(1b) adrenergic receptors (alpha(1b)AR) by
nuclear factor 1 (NF1): a decline in the concentration of NF1 correlates with the
downregulation of alpha(1b)AR gene expression in regenerating liver.

Gao B(1), Jiang L, Kunos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298, USA. BGAO@GEMS.VCU.EDU

The 5' upstream region from --490 to --540 (footprint II) within the dominant P2 
promoter of the rat alpha(1b) adrenergic receptor (alpha(1b)AR) gene is
recognized by a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein (B. Gao, M. S. Spector, and
G. Kunos, J. Biol. Chem. 270:5614-5619, 1995). This protein, detectable in
Southwestern (DNA-protein) blots of crude nuclear extracts as 32- and 34-kDa
bands, has been purified 6,000-fold from rat livers by DEAE-Sepharose,
heparin-Sepharose, and DNA affinity chromatography. Sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and UV cross-linking of the purified
protein indicated the same molecular mass as that in crude extracts. Methylation 
interference analysis revealed strong contact with a TTGGCT hexamer and weak
contact with a TGGCGT hexamer in the 3' and 5' portions of footprint II,
respectively. Nucleotide substitutions within these hexamers significantly
reduced protein binding to footprint II and the promoter activity of P2 in Hep3B 
cells. The purified protein also bound to the nuclear factor 1 (NF1)/CTF
consensus sequence, albeit with lower affinity. Gel mobility supershift and
Western blotting (immunoblotting) analyses using an antibody against the NF1/CTF 
protein identified the purified 32- and 34-kDa polypeptides as NF1 or a related
protein. Cotransfection into Hep3B cells or primary rat hepatocytes of cDNAs of
the NF1-like proteins NF1/L, NF1/X, and NF1/Redl resulted in a three- to fivefold
increase in transcription directed by wild-type P2 but not by the mutated P2.
Partial hepatectomy markedly decreased the levels of NF1 in the remnant liver and
its binding to P2, which paralleled declines in the rate of transcription of the 
alpha(1b)AR gene and in the steady-state levels of its mRNA. These observations
indicate that NF1 activates transcription of the rat alpha(1b)AR gene via
interacting with its P2 promoter and that a decline in the expression of NF1 is
one of the mechanisms responsible for the reduced expression of the alpha(1b)AR
gene during liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC231602
PMID: 8887629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 18;271(42):25994-8.

Suppression of stellate cell type I collagen gene expression involves AP-2
transmodulation of nuclear factor-1-dependent gene transcription.

Chen A(1), Beno DW, Davis BH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The regulation of collagen gene expression was studied in culture-activated rat
hepatic stellate cells, the fibrogenic effector cell involved in hepatic
fibrogenesis. Treatment of cells with a 5-lipoxygenase-specific inhibitor caused 
a reduction in alphaI(I) collagen mRNA transcript abundance, which suggested that
leukotriene production was involved in maintaining the activated cell's high
level of collagen mRNA production. The underlying mechanism involved a decrease
in collagen gene transcription. Suppression of gene transcription was localized
to an nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) binding domain in the proximal promoter and an AP-2
binding domain adjacent to it. Gel retardation assays demonstrated that an
increase in AP-2 binding adjacent to the NF-1 site was likely to be the
transmodulator responsible for the suppression of the NF-1-dependent gene
expression. The data suggest that post-translational alterations in AP-2 activity
are responsible for this unappreciated mechanism of regulating the collagen gene.

PMID: 8824237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1):203-7.

Y-box proteins interact with the S1 nuclease-sensitive site in the chicken alpha 
2(I) collagen gene promoter.

Bayarsaihan D(1), Enkhmandakh B, Lukens LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Wesleyan University,
Middletown, CT 06459-0175, USA.

The sequence of the chicken alpha 2(I) collagen promoter from -712 to -85,
relative to exon 1, has been shown to be important for transcriptional activity. 
Within this region a pyrimidine/purine asymmetrical element at -200 bp forms an
in vitro S1 nuclease-sensitive site. The pyrimidine-rich strand of this element
interacts specifically with single-stranded DNA-binding proteins present in
fibroblast nuclear extracts [Bayarsaihan and Lukens (1996) Biochem. J. 314,
293-296]. To identify these proteins we performed expression screening of a chick
embryo fibroblast cDNA library using a single-stranded polypyrimidine sequence
derived from this element. One of the isolated clones was found to encode a
member of the cold-shock gene family, either chicken YB-1 or a highly homologous 
protein. This protein and a known chicken Y-box protein were both found to bind
sequence-specifically to the pyrimidine-rich strand of the pyrimidine/purine
asymmetrical element in the chicken alpha 2(I) collagen promoter. The binding
mechanism of these proteins could be based on the formation of a non-canonical
triplex DNA structure (H-DNA). Although members of this widespread and conserved 
protein family have been reported to modulate the expression of a number of
genes, the findings reported here provide the first evidence for a possible role 
of cold-shock proteins in the regulation of type I collagen genes.

PMCID: PMC1217756
PMID: 8870670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer Res. 1996 Sep 15;56(18):4224-8.

Role of the human Y box-binding protein YB-1 in cellular sensitivity to the
DNA-damaging agents cisplatin, mitomycin C, and ultraviolet light.

Ohga T(1), Koike K, Ono M, Makino Y, Itagaki Y, Tanimoto M, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.

The Y box-binding protein (YB-1) binds to DNA sequences, present in the control
regions of many genes, that contain an inverted CCAAT box. The binding activity
of a nuclear factor, designated MDR-NF1, to an inverted CCAAT box in the promoter
of the multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene has previously been shown to be
increased in nuclear extracts of cells exposed to UV radiation or various
anticancer agents. The MDR-NF1 cDNA has now been cloned by screening a human
colon library with an active fragment of the MDR1 promoter. The amino acid
sequence encoded by the cloned cDNA was identical to that of YB-1. Northern blot 
analysis revealed that YB-1 mRNA was present in all human tissues examined.
Rabbit antibodies were generated against synthetic peptides corresponding to
YB-1, and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy with these antibodies showed
that the concentration of YB-1 in all cisplatin-resistant cell lines examined was
higher than that in the respective drug-sensitive parental cells. Transfection of
human epidermoid cancer KB cells with a YB-1 antisense construct established two 
cell lines with reduced concentrations of YB-1. These transfectants showed
increased sensitivity to cisplatin, mitomycin C, and UV radiation but not to
vincristine, doxorubicin, camptothecin, or etoposide. Thus, YB-1 may protect
cells from the cytotoxic effects of agents that induce cross-linking of DNA,
suggesting a novel function of this ancestor DNA-binding protein.

PMID: 8797596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):22271-9.

The CCAAT-binding proteins CP1 and NF-I cooperate with ATF-2 in the transcription
of the fibronectin gene.

Alonso CR(1), Pesce CG, Kornblihtt AR.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular,
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas of Argentina), Vuelta 
de Obligado 2490, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

We have previously proposed a molecular interaction between the liver factors
that bind to the cyclic AMP response element (CRE) and CCAAT sites of the
fibronectin (FN) gene based on the following evidence: (i) the close spacing of
20 base pairs between CRE and CCAAT elements is conserved in the FN genes from
rats, mice, and humans; (ii) footprinting competitions showed that CRE
oligonucleotides are able to detach both liver factors; (iii) CCAAT binding and
transcriptional activity of liver extracts are reduced when the distance between 
the CRE and CCAAT elements is increased; and (iv) CCAAT-binding is stimulated by 
the addition of a liver extract fraction containing the CRE-binding factor ATF-2.
This report provides binding and immunochemical evidence that nuclear factor I
(CTF/NF-I) and CP1 (NF-Y or CBF) are the only liver factors that bind to the -150
CCAAT element of the FN gene, forming distinct complexes. We show that these
factors bind less efficiently to the CCAAT site of a FN promoter in which the
-170 CRE has been disrupted by site-directed mutagenesis and that each element
contributes positively to the liver transcriptional activity assessed in vitro
with a G-less cassette construct and in vivo by transfection of hepatoma cells
with CAT constructs. Furthermore, using a method that combines UV cross-linking
and immunoprecipitation, we show that antibodies specific to ATF-2 are able to
specifically precipitate protein-protein-DNA complexes containing NF-I and CP1.
This simple method preserves weak macromolecular interactions, avoiding the
disruptive electrophoresis conditions of gel mobility shifts assays.

PMID: 8703044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Virol. 1996 Sep;70(9):5944-53.

Transcriptional regulation of human polyomavirus JC: evidence for a functional
interaction between RelA (p65) and the Y-box-binding protein, YB-1.

Raj GV(1), Safak M, MacDonald GH, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jefferson Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19107, USA.

The transcriptional control region of the human neurotropic polyomavirus JC virus
contains a consensus NF-kappa B site which has been shown to enhance both basal
and extracellular stimulus-induced levels of transcription of JC promoters. Here,
we show that the expression of JC late promoter constructs containing the
NF-kappa B site is decreased by cotransfection with the NF-kappa B/rel subunits, 
p50 and p52, but enhanced by the p65 subunit. However, JC promoter constructs
lacking the NF-kappa B site were activated by p52 and p50 and repressed by p65.
This antithetical response of the JC promoter mapped specifically to the D
domain, which is a target site for the cellular transcription factor, YB-1. Band 
shift studies indicated that YB-1 and p65 modulate each other's binding to DNA:
YB-1 augments the affinity of p65 for the NF-kappa B site, while p65 reduces the 
binding of YB-1 to the D domain. Results from coimmunoprecipitation followed by
Western blot (immunoblot) analysis suggest an in vivo interaction between p65 and
YB-1 in glial cells. Functionally, YB-1 appears to act synergistically with p65
to control transcription from the NF-kappa B site. A converse pattern is seen
with the D domain, in which YB-1 acts synergistically with p50 and p52 to
regulate transcription. p50 and p52 may function as transcriptional activators on
the D domain by removing the repressive effect of p65 on YB-1 binding to the D
domain. On the basis of these data, we propose a model in which NF-kappa B/rel
subunits functionally interact with consensus NF-kappa B sites or YB-1-binding
sites, with disparate effects on eukaryotic gene expression.

PMCID: PMC190614
PMID: 8709216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 30;271(35):21413-21.

An NF1-like protein functions as a repressor of the von Willebrand factor
promoter.

Jahroudi N(1), Ardekani AM, Greenberger JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

The expression of the von Willebrand factor (vWf) gene is restricted to
endothelial cells and megakaryocytes. We have previously reported the
identification of a region of the vWf gene that regulates its cell-type-specific 
expression in cell culture. This region (spanning nucleotides -487 to +247)
consists of a core promoter (spanning nucleotides -90 to +22), a positive
regulatory region (spanning nucleotides +155 to +247), and a negative regulatory 
region spanning nucleotides -312 to -487. To identify the trans-acting factor(s) 
that interacts with the negative regulatory region, we carried out gel mobility
and DNase1 footprint analyses of sequences -312 to -487. These analyses
demonstrated that an NF1-like protein interacts with DNA sequences spanning -440 
to -470 nucleotides in the negative regulatory region of the vWf promoter. Base
substitution mutations of the NF1 binding site abolished the NF1-DNA interaction.
Furthermore, mutation of the NF1 binding site in the promoter fragment (-487 to
+155) that contained the core and the negative regulatory region resulted in
activation of the mutant promoter in both endothelial and nonendothelial cells.
The wild type promoter fragment (-487 to +155) was not activated in either cell
type. These results demonstrate that an NF1-like protein functions as a repressor
of vWf promoter activity. In contrast, the mutation of the same NF1 binding site,
but now in the context of the larger 734-base pair endothelial cell-specific
promoter fragment (-487 to +247), did not result in promoter activation in
nonendothelial cells. The data indicate that there are additional repressor
elements within the vWf promoter region suppressing its activity specifically, in
nonendothelial cells, and suggest that there is a secondary repressor element(s) 
that is located in the terminal region of the first exon of this gene.

PMID: 8702923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;134(4):815-26.

The periphery of nuclear domain 10 (ND10) as site of DNA virus deposition.

Ishov AM(1), Maul GG.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

After DNA viruses enter the nucleus, they initiate a transcriptional cascade
which is followed by replication. We investigated whether these processes take
place at specific nuclear sites or, as suggested by the mode of entry, randomly
throughout the nucleus. Three distinct nuclear domains, nuclear factor-1 sites,
coiled bodies, and nuclear domain 10 (ND10), were used as markers to investigate 
the relative position of DNA virus replication sites. We found that all three
nuclear domains had a very high spatial correlation with each other in uninfected
cells. After adenoviral infection, nuclear factor 1 and coiled bodies were found 
associated with some viral replication domains. Simian virus 40 begins
replication adjacent to ND10 but adenovirus 5 and herpes simplex type 1 modified 
ND10s before replication. Adenovirus E4orf 3 gene deletion mutants retain ND10
and begin replication at the peripheries of ND10. The same was found for the
herpes simplex virus type 1 immediate early gene 1 mutants. That the deposition
and replication of adenovirus 5 and herpesvirus type 1 at ND10 was not a mutant
phenotype was confirmed by finding the input wild-type virus juxtaposed to ND10. 
The transport of viral genomes to ND10 does not require viral gene expression.
Thus, the peripheries of ND10 represent preferred sites where early steps of
transcription and replication of at least three DNA virus families take place,
suggesting a new set of functional properties for this large nuclear domain.

PMCID: PMC2120958
PMID: 8769408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Neurochem. 1996 Aug;67(2):473-81.

Human JC virus nuclear factor 1 binding motifs and large tumor antigen region
rquired for transactivation of late promoter.

Kumar KU(1), Devireddy LR, Tang SC, Pater A, Pater MM.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, St. John's, Canada.

The nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) motifs, NF-1 II/III, In the two 98-bp repeats of the 
transcription-regulatory region of JC virus (JCV), have a critical role in
brain-specific transcription from the JCV early promoter-enhancer. In this study,
the role of these motifs in transactivation of the JCV late promoter-enhancer
(JCVL) was examined in differentiating glial P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. The
expression of papovaviral large tumor antigen (T-Ag) in the glial cells was shown
by double immunofluorescence assays. By using site-directed mutagenesis and in
vivo assays, the two wild-type NF-1 II/III sites, but not the third site, were
found to be essential for the transactivation of JCVL by JCV T-Ag. In vitro
transcription assays confirmed this specific transactivation and the
transactivation was abolished by T-Ag antibody. In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, expression of JCV T-Ag increased the binding of a factor(s) to the 98-bp 
repeat. T-Ag antibody abolished the increase of binding. Binding assays with
oligonucleotides of NF-1 11/111 motifs showed that the increased binding
specifically required the wild-type NF-1 II/III sequences and confirmed the
requirement of T-Ag. To determine the region of T-Ag necessary for
transactivation Of JCVL, the coding sequences were mutated. The amino-terminal
region of JCV Ag in amino acids 1-437 was essentially required for efficient
transactivation. These results indicated that transactivation of JCVL and
increased binding require a factor(s) found specifically in glial cells, the JCV 
NF-1 II/III sites, and the T-Ag amino-terminal region.

PMID: 8764570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4073-80.

Two regions within the DNA binding domain of nuclear factor I interact with DNA
and stimulate adenovirus DNA replication independently.

Dekker J(1), van Oosterhout JA, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

The cellular transcription factor nuclear factor I (NFI) stimulates adenovirus
DNA replication by up to 50-fold. The NFI DNA binding domain (NFI-BD) is
sufficient for stimulation and interacts with the viral DNA polymerase, thereby
recruiting the precursor terminal protein-DNA polymerase complex (pTP-pol) to the
origin of replication. The mechanism of DNA binding by NFI is unknown. To examine
DNA binding and stimulation of adenovirus DNA replication by NFI-BD in more
detail, we generated a series of deletion mutants and show that the DNA binding
domain of NFI consists of two subdomains: a highly basic N-terminal domain that
binds nonspecifically to DNA and a C-terminal domain that binds specifically but 
with very low affinity to the NFI recognition site. Both of these subdomains
stimulate DNA replication, although not to the same extent as the intact DNA
binding domain. The N-terminal domain has an alpha-helical structure, as shown by
circular dichroism spectroscopy. The C-terminal domain interacts with the pTP-pol
complex and is able to recruit the pTP-pol complex to DNA, which leads to
pTP-pol-dependent stimulation of replication. The N-terminal domain also
stimulates replication in a pTP-pol-dependent manner and enhances binding of
pTP-pol to DNA. Since we could not detect a direct protein-protein interaction
between pTP-pol and the N-terminal domain, we suggest that this domain stimulates
replication by inducing structural changes in the DNA.

PMCID: PMC231403
PMID: 8754805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Surgery. 1996 Aug;120(2):374-80; discussion 380-1.

Injury induces rapid changes in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1: DNA binding.

Burke PA(1), Luo M, Zhu J, Yaffe MB, Forse RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Deacones Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Mass,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptional regulation in the liver plays a critical role in
mediating the acute phase response to injury. The molecular mechanisms driving
these transcriptional events, however, are poorly defined in vivo. The
liver-specific transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 binds to
the 5' upstream region of many acute phase genes. To explore the connection
between injury and transcriptional regulatory mechanisms, we investigated the
effect of injury on HNF-1 binding activity.
METHODS: Liver nuclear extracts were prepared from animals after burn or
anesthetized sham burn injury. HNF-1 binding activity, affinity, and off rate
were assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift analysis.
RESULTS: HNF-1 binding activity decreased by 28% 1 1/2 hours after injury. The
dissociation constant for HNF-1 increased from 0.6 nm to 11.8 nm at 1 1/2 hours
after burn injury partly because of an increase in off rate for the HNF-1: DNA
complex.
CONCLUSIONS: Burn injury leads to a significant decrease in HNF-1 binding
activity as a result of decreased affinity of HNF-1 for DNA. These injury-induced
alterations in binding of a liver-specific transcription factor for its DNA
binding site represent a mechanism for rapidly modulating acute phase gene
transcription in vivo.

PMID: 8751607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 May 15;24(10):1873-8.

Structural and functional analysis of the human Y-box binding protein (YB-1) gene
promoter.

Makino Y(1), Ohga T, Toh S, Koike K, Okumura K, Wada M, Kuwano M, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyushu University School of Medicine, Japan.

We have isolated three overlapping genomic clones containing the 5'portion of the
human YB-1 gene. These clones span approximately 25 kb of contiguous DNA
containing 10 kb of 5' flanking sequence and 15 kb of the gene. The nucleotide
sequence of the first exon and of 2000 upstream base pairs (bp) was determined.
The first axon is unusually large and contains a 166 bp coding sequence and a 331
bp untranslated region. CpG sequences cover the 5'-end of the YB-1 gene including
its first axon and intron as well as the upstream regions. The GC content around 
the first exon is approximately 70% and a CpG-free region was located in the
untranslated sequence. The segment preceding the major transcription initiation
site does not contain a TATA box, CCAAT box and the binding sequence for known
transcription factors. A transient expression assay using the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) gene showed that the sequence from +24 to +281 was
critical for CAT expression. Fluorescence in situ hybridization demonstrated the 
chromosomal locus of YB-1 gene on chromosome 1p34. Polymerase chain reaction
analysis on other genomic phage DNAs showed that several clones were derived from
pseudogenes.

PMCID: PMC145870
PMID: 8657568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Apr;7(4):501-10.

Altered expression of the developmentally regulated NFI gene family during
phorbol ester-induced differentiation of human leukemic cells.

Kulkarni S(1), Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

The nuclear factor I (NFI) family of transcription/replication proteins is
required for the cell type-specific expression of a number of cellular and viral 
genes. There are four evolutionarily conserved NFI genes (NFI-A, -B, -C and -X)
that encode DNA-binding proteins of similar or identical DNA-binding specificity.
To address the role of this family of highly conserved transcription/replication 
proteins in cell differentiation and development, we have assessed the expression
of NFI proteins (by DNA binding) and mRNAs of each of the four NFI genes during
the in vitro differentiation of several human leukemic cell lines. These cell
lines differ in their pattern of differentiation upon exposure to the phorbol
ester 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). In K562 and OCI/AML-3 cells,
the levels of the four NFI mRNAs and the mobility of NFI-DNA complexes present in
nuclear extracts changed during treatment with TPA. The TPA-induced change in
mobility of NFI-DNA complexes in OCI/AML-3 cells was blocked by an inhibitor of
protein synthesis, cycloheximide. These changes in NFI protein and mRNA
expression appear to be cell type-or lineage-specific since no changes were seen 
during the TPA-induced differentiation of HL-60 or U937 cells. These studies
indicate that although their DNA-binding specificities are similar, the proteins 
encoded by the four NFI genes may differ in their biological functions and play
distinct roles in hematopoietic development.

PMID: 9052991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Neurovirol. 1996 Apr;2(2):87-100.

Expression of multiple classes of the nuclear factor-1 family in the developing
human brain: differential expression of two classes of NF-1 genes.

Sumner C(1), Shinohara T, Durham L, Traub R, Major EO, Amemiya K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurovirol. 1996 Apr;2(2):57-9.

Nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) is a multifunctional protein that participates in both
transcription and replication. NF-1 proteins exist as a family of proteins that
share some common structural and functional features but also demonstrate organ
and cell type specific expression. Based upon these characteristics, the family
of NF-1 proteins is divided into four classes, A, B, C and D. Several NF-1
binding sites have been identified in the regulatory sequences of the human
polyomavirus, JCV, which multiplies most efficiently in glial cells derived from 
human fetal brain. Nuclear proteins from these cultures bind specifically to
these NF-1 sites. It is not known, however, which member(s) of the NF-1 family is
expressed in cells susceptible to JCV infection. We have examined glial cells as 
well as HeLa cells, which are not permissive to JCV, for NF-1 expression. By
RT-PCR analysis, all four classes of NF-1 are expressed in human fetal glial
cells and HeLa cells. However, by Northern analysis the expression of class D
gene is much higher in the glial cells than HeLa cells. Expression of the class C
gene, first identified in HeLa cells as NF-1/CTF1, is barely detectable in glial 
cells but highly expressed in HeLa cells. The screening of cDNA libraries from
two early human brain tissues resulted in the identification of a number of
clones which appear to be related and belong to a single class of the NF-1
family, class D. Nucleotide sequence of one clone, designated NF-1/AT1, confirms 
this. The NF-1/AT1 protein was overexpressed in E coli and found to bind
specifically to an NF-1 probe by gel shift analysis. Southern analysis of human
fetal glial cells indicates that the NF-1/AT1 gene, class D, is derived from a
different gene than NF-1/CTF1. These results suggest the possibility that genes
or viruses, like JCV, which use NF-1 for their expression in human brain derived 
cells may preferentially use the NF-1 class D protein.

PMID: 8799200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Neurochem. 1996 Apr;66(4):1354-61.

The cerebellum-enriched form of nuclear factor I is functionally different from
ubiquitous nuclear factor I in glial-specific promoter regulation.

Krebs CJ(1), Dey B, Kumar G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) binding sites are present in a wide range of
brain-specific gene enhancer and promoter sequences and appear to play a role in 
establishing cell type-specific expression within the CNS. The precise mechanisms
used by various members of the NFI family of proteins to confer brain-specific
expression are unclear. We have addressed this issue by comparing the
transactivating capabilities of two forms of NFI in directing gliotropic
expression from two different JC virus (JCV) promoter configurations. The JCV is 
an opportunistic pathogen of humans that causes lytic destruction of the
oligodendrocytes and thus demyelination in immunocompromised patients. Our
results show that the cerebellum-enriched form of NFI (NFI-A1) transactivates two
gliotropic JCV early promoters to a greater extent than the ubiquitous form of
NFI (NFI-C1). Activation by NFI-A1 was dramatically greater in glial than in
nonglial cells. These results suggest that NFI proteins direct brain-specific
expression through combinatorial interactions with cell specific coactivators
and/or transcription factors that recognize adjacent sites within brain specific 
promoters.

PMID: 8627286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 15;271(11):6273-82.

Nuclear factor I as a potential regulator during postembryonic organ development.

Puzianowska-Kuznicka M(1), Shi YB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, NICHD, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5430, USA.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) family members are transcription factors that are believed
to also participate in DNA replication. We have cloned two Xenopus laevis NFIs
that are up-regulated by thyroid hormone. They are 84-95% identical to their
counterparts in birds and mammals. In contrast, the two Xenopus NFIs are much
less homologous to each other, sharing only 58% homology, which largely resides
in the DNA binding domain at the amino terminus. However, both NFIs can bind to a
consensus NFI binding site and activate the transcription of a promoter bearing
the site. Northern blot reveals that both NFI genes are regulated in tissue- and 
developmental stage-dependent manners. They are first activated, independently of
thyroid hormone, to low levels at stages 23/24, around the onset of larval
organogenesis. After stage 54, their mRNA levels are dramatically upregulated by 
endogenous thyroid hormone, and high levels of their expression correlate with
organ-specific metamorphosis. Furthermore, gel mobility shift assay indicates
that the NFI proteins are present in different organs and that their levels are
regulated similarly to the mRNA levels. These results strongly suggest that NFIs 
play important roles during postembryonic organ development, in contrast to the
general belief that NFIs are ubiquitous factors.

PMID: 8626421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Mar 7;220(1):186-91.

Identification of a 42-kDa nuclear factor (NF1-MUC5B) from HT-29 MTX cells that
binds to the 3' region of human mucin gene MUC5B.

Pigny P(1), Van Seuningen I, Desseyn JL, Nollet S, Porchet N, Laine A, Aubert JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 377, Lille, France.

MUC5B gene is one of the four human mucin genes mapped to chromosome 11p15. The
identification of three potential Sp1 binding sites located between the tandem
repeat and the 3' end of MUC5B suggests a possible regulatory role for this
region. In this report we show by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that only 
one potential Sp1 binding site (NAU62) leads to a specific interaction with a
nuclear factor from HT-29 MTX cells which does not exist in parental HT-29 cells.
By using mutated versions of NAU62, an 18 mer sequence within this later was
shown to be directly involved in the interaction. The nuclear factor called
NF1-MUC5B which binds to this element has a Mr of 42000 and is not Sp1. These
results suggest that MUC5B contains a sequence in its 3' region that might act as
a cis-element. This report opens the field of transcriptional regulation of human
mucin genes encoding secreted mucins.

PMID: 8602841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 5;271(1):153-9.

The affinity of nuclear factor 1 for its DNA site is drastically reduced by
nucleosome organization irrespective of its rotational or translational position.

Blomquist P(1), Li Q, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska 
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

A DNA-bending sequence has been used for in vitro reconstitution of nucleosomes
in order to direct a nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) binding site into different
nucleosome positions. By this strategy nucleosomes were obtained that had one of 
two rotational positions of the NF-1 binding site, one oriented toward the
periphery and the other toward the histone octamer, translationally positioned 50
and 45 base pairs, respectively, from the nucleosome dyad. The affinity of
partially purified NF-1 for these nucleosomal targets was compared with its
affinity for free DNA by dimethylsulfate methylation protection and DNase I
footprinting assays. The binding affinity of NF-1 to all nucleosomal targets was 
reduced 100-300-fold compared with its affinity for free DNA. The two rotational 
settings of the NF-1 site showed the same binding affinity for NF-1 as did other 
nucleosome constructs in which the NF-1 binding site was translationally
positioned from 10 to 40 base pairs from the nucleosome dyad. We conclude that
the nucleosomal inhibition of NF-1 binding is an inherent characteristic of NF-1 
since another transcription factor, the glucocorticoid receptor, is able to bind 
to its DNA site in a nucleosome.

PMID: 8550551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Intervirology. 1996;39(5-6):331-42.

Regulation of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early gene expression.

Meier JL(1), Stinski MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, USA.

The positive and negative cis-acting elements that affect transcription from the 
human cytomegalovirus major immediate-early (MIE) promoter and the viral and
cellular proteins that bind to these elements are discussed. The data obtained
using in vitro transcription and transient transfection assays are reviewed and
compared to recent data using recombinant viruses with cis-acting elements
deleted. The effects of cell type and cellular differentiation on activation of
transcription from the MIE promoter are compared with the effects of mitogens and
virion-associated tegument proteins that directly or indirectly activate protein 
kinase pathways. The repressor and enhancer regions upstream of the MIE promoter 
in the large unique component of the viral genome are compared to the elements
upstream of the more simplified IEUS3 promoter in the short unique component of
the viral genome.

PMID: 9130043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Jan;10(1):76-89.

A Y-box protein is a suppressor factor that decreases thyrotropin receptor gene
expression.

Ohmori M(1), Shimura H, Shimura Y, Kohn LD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Metabolism, National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892, USA.

The decanucleotides in a tandem repeat, -162 to -140 bp, are suppressor elements 
that decrease TSH receptor (TSHR) gene expression by different mechanisms. A
factor(s) interacting with the 3'-decanucleotide compete for proteins that bind
the cAMP response element, -139 to -132 bp, a constitutive enhancer necessary for
efficient TSHR expression. The 5'-decanucleotide is in a CT-rich, S1
nuclease-sensitive region of the promoter; its suppressor activity has been
related to its ability to bind a nonthyroid-specific protein to its coding
strand. In this report we clone a complementary DNA encoding a single strand
DNA-binding protein that forms a specific protein-DNA complex with the coding
strand of the 5'- but not the 3'-decanucleotide and not with the
5'-decanucleotide noncoding or double strand. We show, by cotransfection with
TSHR promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase chimeras, that the protein is a
suppressor that regulates the function of the 5'- but not the 3'-decanucleotide. 
The protein is a Y-box protein that was previously cloned as an enhancer factor
from the rat liver; it is, however, 95% identical to human YB-1, which suppresses
major histocompatibility class II gene expression, and to human
nuclease-sensitive element protein-1, a Y-box protein identified by its ability
to bind single strand, CT-rich, nuclease-sensitive elements of genes that, like
the TSHR, have GC-rich promoters. Unexpectedly, the Y-box protein binds two other
sites in the minimal TSHR promoter in a single strand-specific fashion and acts a
suppressor at each of these sites. One is associated with the insulin response
element of the minimal TSHR promoter and is not in an overtly CT-rich region. The
other is located 3' to the cAMP response element in a region termed the S-box,
-120 to -113 bp, because of its homology to the S-box of the major
histocompatibility class II promoter; this site is in a CT-rich area and, as in
the class II promoter, is linked to cAMP-induced gene suppression. A conserved
CCTC sequence in each site is important for the binding and suppressor function
of the Y-box protein.

PMID: 8838147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1996 Jan;57(1-2):19-31.

The hormone responsive region of mouse mammary tumor virus positions a nucleosome
and precludes access of nuclear factor I to the promoter.

Candau R(1), Chávez S, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, University of Marburg,
Germany.

The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter is transcriptionally silent prior
to hormonal induction, partly because its organization into phased nucleosomes
precludes access of transcription factors to their cognate sites. A T47D-derived 
cell line carrying a single integrated copy of the MMTV promoter exhibited a
positioned nucleosome, which prevented binding of nuclear factor I (NFI). To
study the molecular mechanisms controlling promoter accessibility we have made
use of a strong chimeric transactivator, NFI-VP16, composed of NFI linked to the 
transactivation function of VP16. T47D cells transiently transfected with an
MMTV-CAT reporter show little transcription even after cotransfection of an
expression vector for NFI-VP16. However, a truncated MMTV promoter, lacking the
hormone regulatory region (HRR) was transactivated by cotransfected NFI-VP16. The
repressive effect of the HRR was not due to binding of a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor, and was evident with the DEAE-Dextran transfection
procedure but not with the calcium phosphate technique. A similar behavior was
observed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae carrying wild type or truncated MMTV-lacZ
reporters and expressing NFI-VP16. Reconstitution experiments suggest that the
promoter lacking the HHR generates less stable nucleosomes, a fraction of which
contain a more accessible NFI site. Recombinant NFI binds to nucleosomes
assembled on this truncated promoter but not to nucleosomes encompassing the HRR.
These results are compatible with the notion that transiently transfected MMTV
promoters behave like their stably integrated counterparts, in that the HRR
drives positioning of a nucleosome and mediates transcriptional repression by
preventing access of NFI to its cognate site.

PMID: 8645614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Immunol. 1996 Jan 1;156(1):168-75.

Promoter region of the human gene coding for beta-chain of C4b binding protein.
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 and nuclear factor-I/CTF transcription factors are
required for efficient expression of C4BPB in HepG2 cells.

Arenzana N(1), Rodríguez de Córdoba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biological Research (CSIC), Madrid,
Spain.

Differential expression of the human genes coding for the alpha and beta
polypeptides of the human C component C4b binding protein (C4BP) modulates the
levels of C4BP molecules containing C4BP beta polypeptides, providing a mechanism
to avoid the potential harmful effects of elevated concentrations of C4BP beta in
plasma. To understand how the expression of the C4BPB gene is controlled, we have
examined, in the major promoter of the human C4BP B gene, potential regulatory
elements. A region from nucleotide -126 to +25 was able to drive high expression 
of a reporter gene in the human hepatoma cell line HepG2. A small subfragment of 
this region (from -126 to -90) is responsible for more than 90% of the promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that transcription
factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) and nuclear factor-I (NFI/CTF)
families were able to bind to this region in a sequence-specific manner. We have 
characterized binding sites for these transcription factors and determined their 
relative contribution to the activity of the C4BPB promoter. The results suggest 
that cooperative interaction between HNF-3 and NF-I/CTF is required to obtain a
full C4BPB promoter activity. Comparison of the structures of the C4BPA and C4BPB
promoters reveals significant differences that could explain the differential
transcription of the C4BP alpha and C4BP beta polypeptides during the acute phase
response.

PMID: 8598458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 22;270(51):30499-507.

The Y-box motif mediates redox-dependent transcriptional activation in mouse
cells.

Duh JL(1), Zhu H, Shertzer HG, Nebert DW, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

We show here that the OxyR response element (ORE) in the bacterial oxyR promoter 
can also function as a redox-dependent enhancer in mammalian cells. Fusion of ORE
to an SV40 basal promoter driving chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
expression confers H2O2 inducibility to expression of the cat gene in mouse
Hepa-1 hepatoma cells. Nuclear extracts from these cells contain DNA-binding
proteins that specifically interact with ORE DNA, cannot be completed by cognate 
oligonucleotides to AP-1 or NF kappa B, and are constitutively expressed, since
treatment with H2O2 causes no detectable changes in binding activity or
DNA-protein interaction. Recombinant cDNA clones that express ORE-binding
proteins were isolated from a mouse hepatoma expression library and found to be
representatives of two different members of the murine Y-box family of
transcription factors. Canonical Y-box and ORE oligonucleotides compete with each
other for binding to Y-box proteins in gel shift assays and antibodies to FRGY2, 
a Xenopus Y-box protein, supershift both Y-box and ORE DNA-protein complexes. In 
addition, antisense oligonucleotides to mouse YB-1 mRNA abolish induction of
ORE-mediated cat expression by H2O2, and luciferase reporter constructs
containing ORE, or the Y-box from the human MHC class II HLA-DQ gene, exhibit
identical dose-dependent H2O2 inducibilities, which can be abolished by addition 
of 2-mercaptoethanol to the culture medium. These results suggest that the Y-box 
proteins may be an integral component of a eukaryotic redox signaling pathway.

PMID: 8530481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6987-98.

Constitutive repression and nuclear factor I-dependent hormone activation of the 
mouse mammary tumor virus promoter in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Chávez S(1), Candau R, Truss M, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

To study the influence of various transactivators and the role of nucleosomal
structure in gene regulation by steroid hormones, we have introduced mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter sequences along with expression vectors for
the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and nuclear factor I (NFI) in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, an organism amenable to genetic manipulation. Both in the context of 
an episomal multicopy vector and in a centromeric single-copy plasmid, the MMTV
promoter was virtually silent in the absence of inducer, even in yeast strains
expressing GR and NFI. Induction was optimal with deacylcortivazol and required
both GR and NFI. The transactivation function AF1 in the N-terminal half of GR is
required for ligand-dependent induction and acts constitutively in truncated GR
lacking the ligand binding domain. A piece of the MMTV long terminal repeat
extending from -236 to +111 is sufficient to position a nucleosome, B, over the
regulatory region of the promoter from -45 to -190 and another nucleosome over
the transcription start region. The rotational orientation of the DNA on the
surface of nucleosome B is the same as that previously found in animal cells and 
in reconstitution experiments. This orientation is compatible with binding of GR 
to two sites, while it should preclude binding of NFI and hence be responsible
for constitutive repression. Upon ligand induction, there is no major chromatin
rearrangement, but the proximal linker DNA, including the TATA box, becomes
hypersensitive to nucleases. The transcriptional behavior of the MMTV promoter
was unaffected by deletions of the genes for zuotin or SIN1/SPT2, two proteins
which have been claimed to assume some of the functions of linker histones. Thus,
despite the lack of histone H1, yeast cells could be a suitable system to study
the contribution of nucleosomal organization to the regulated expression of the
MMTV promoter.

PMCID: PMC230954
PMID: 8524266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 27;270(43):25812-8.

Transcriptional modulators affect in vivo protein binding to the low density
lipoprotein receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
promoters.

Lloyd DB(1), Thompson JF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Sciences Department, Pfizer Inc., Groton, Connecticut 06340, USA.

Treatment of HepG2 cells with known effectors of low density lipoprotein receptor
(LDLR) gene expression altered the in vivo pattern of protein-DNA interactions in
the promoter. The observed changes are consistent with proteins binding in vivo
to the sterol regulatory element (SRE), to Sp1-like sites, as well as to other
regions. Protein bound to the SRE in all conditions, but the nature of the
dimethyl sulfate reactivity changed depending on the physiological state of the
cell. Hypermethylation within the SRE of the low density lipoprotein receptor
promoter was observed when cells were treated with cholesterol synthesis
inhibitors, insulin, or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, suggesting that the SRE 
regulates this promoter through sterol-independent as well as sterol-dependent
mechanisms. No significant changes were observed in binding to the Sp1-like
sites, suggesting that differential binding to these sites does not play a role
in altered transcription levels. Analysis of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase promoter also revealed protections that varied in a cell
type-specific manner. Binding to the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A
reductase SRE and putative nuclear factor 1 sites could be observed but varied
little in different physiological conditions.

PMID: 7592765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biochem J. 1995 Oct 15;311 ( Pt 2):541-7.

A negative regulatory element in the promoter region of the rat alpha
2A-adrenergic receptor gene overlaps an SP1 consensus binding site.

Handy DE(1), Zanella MT, Kanemaru A, Tavares A, Flordellis C, Gavras H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118, USA.

Three subtypes of alpha 2-adrenergic receptors (alpha 2A, alpha 2B and alpha 2C) 
have been described that differ in their primary sequence and tissue-specific
expression and are encoded by three distinct genes. Previous work has shown that 
the human alpha 2A-adrenergic receptor gene promoter consists of a TATA-box
(TATAAA), palindromic sequence (CCCACGTGGG) and GC-box (GGGGCGG) motif. Sequence 
analysis of the putative promoter region of the rat alpha 2A-adrenergic receptor 
gene showed that these promoter regions are conserved in their sequence and
relative location. We analysed the transcriptional activity of these regions
using RINm5F, a rat insulinoma cell line that expresses the endogenous alpha
2A-adrenergic receptor gene. These results showed that the region from -484 to
-92 has a negative effect on transcription, as deletion of this region in alpha
2A-adrenergic receptor gene-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter constructs
increased reporter gene activity. This region included the GC-box sequence which 
is a consensus binding site for the nuclear factor SP1, which is a positive
activator of transcription. Gel-mobility-shift assays and supershift assays with 
an antibody that recognizes SP1 showed binding of the SP1 nuclear factor as well 
as other nuclear factors to this GC-box region. Additional nuclear factors bind
to the downstream palindromic region. We suggest that positive- and
negative-acting nuclear factors contribute to the activity of the alpha
2-adrenergic receptor promoter.

PMCID: PMC1136033
PMID: 7487893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5552-62.

Regulation of the DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of Xenopus laevis
NFI-X by a novel C-terminal domain.

Roulet E(1), Armentero MT, Krey G, Corthésy B, Dreyer C, Mermod N, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

The nuclear factor I (NFI) family consists of sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins that activate both transcription and adenovirus DNA replication. We have
characterized three new members of the NFI family that belong to the Xenopus
laevis NFI-X subtype and differ in their C-termini. We show that these
polypeptides can activate transcription in HeLa and Drosophila Schneider line 2
cells, using an activation domain that is subdivided into adjacent variable and
subtype-specific domains each having independent activation properties in
chimeric proteins. Together, these two domains constitute the full NFI-X
transactivation potential. In addition, we find that the X. laevis NFI-X proteins
are capable of activating adenovirus DNA replication through their conserved
N-terminal DNA-binding domains. Surprisingly, their in vitro DNA-binding
activities are specifically inhibited by a novel repressor domain contained
within the C-terminal part, while the dimerization and replication functions per 
se are not affected. However, inhibition of DNA-binding activity in vitro is
relieved within the cell, as transcriptional activation occurs irrespective of
the presence of the repressor domain. Moreover, the region comprising the
repressor domain participates in transactivation. Mechanisms that may allow the
relief of DNA-binding inhibition in vivo and trigger transcriptional activation
are discussed.

PMCID: PMC230806
PMID: 7565707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Virol. 1995 Sep;69(9):5843-8.

Transcriptional regulation of human JC polyomavirus promoters by cellular
proteins YB-1 and Pur alpha in glial cells.

Chen NN(1), Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA.

Transcription of the human polyomavirus (JCV) genome is regulated by host cell
proteins and the viral early protein, T antigen. A region called the lytic
control element (LCE), located within the enhancer of JCV, is important for
transcription of JCV early and late promoters. Earlier studies have led to the
identification of two single-stranded DNA-binding proteins, YB-1 and Pur alpha,
with the ability to interact with nucleotides on the early and late strands of
LCE, respectively. Of particular interest is the notion that the unique interplay
between these two cellular proteins and JCVT antigen determines their binding
activities with the LCE. In this study, we employed a series of cotransfection
experiments to evaluate the levels of transcription from JCV early and late
promoters in the presence of YB-1, Pur alpha, and T antigen. Results from these
studies indicated that Pur alpha stimulates JCV early and has little effect on
the late promoter. Moreover, T antigen was able to decrease the induced level of 
early gene transcription by Pur alpha. On the other hand, the extent of
transactivation of the viral late promoter by T antigen was reduced upon
overexpression of Pur alpha in the transfected cells. These observations suggest 
that Pur alpha and T antigen exert an antagonistic effect on each other's
regulatory action upon their responsive promoters. Of particular interest was the
observation that YB-1 liberated T-antigen-induced late promoter activity from
repression imposed by overexpression of pur alpha. Under similar conditions,
overexpression of YB-1 showed no effect on the transcriptional activity of the
early promoter in cells transfected with T-antigen- and Pur alpha-producing
plasmids. On the basis of the data presented here and the previous binding
results, a model is proposed which describes the potential role of Pur alpha,
YB-1, and T antigen in differential expression of the viral genome during the
lytic cycle.

PMCID: PMC189456
PMID: 7637031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 18;270(33):19643-50.

Organization of the alpha-globin promoter and possible role of nuclear factor I
in an alpha-globin-inducible and a noninducible cell line.

Rein T(1), Förster R, Krause A, Winnacker EL, Zorbas H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Ludwig-Maximilans-Universität München, Germany.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) was suggested to be involved in the expression of the
human alpha-globin gene. Two established cell lines, which express alpha-globin
differentially, were therefore compared for differences in binding of NFI at the 
alpha-globin promoter in vivo. HeLa cells, in which alpha-globin is repressed,
show a high density promoter occupation with several proteins associated with
structurally distorted DNA. Cell line K562, which is inducible for alpha-globin, 
surprisingly was found to be heterogeneous consisting mainly of cells
(approximately 95%) unable to express alpha-globin. However, the promoter of the 
nonexpressing K562 cells was clearly different from that of HeLa cells, being
occupied only at basal transcriptional elements. Therefore, the alpha-globin gene
in these K562 cells may not be truly repressed, but in an intermediate state
between repression and active transcription. The NFI site of the alpha-globin
promoter appeared occupied in HeLa but free of proteins in K562 cells. All cells 
of both cell lines produce NFI, but the composition and DNA binding affinity of
NFI species differ significantly between the two cell lines. Therefore, distinct 
forms of NFI may repress alpha-globin transcription in HeLa cells. However, NFI
is apparently not involved in establishing the latent transcriptional state of
the majority of K562 cells.

PMID: 7642653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Genomics. 1995 Jul 1;28(1):66-73.

Chromosomal localization of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human
transcription factor nuclear factor I by FISH.

Qian F(1), Kruse U, Lichter P, Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

Nuclear Factor I (NFI) proteins constitute a family of dimeric DNA-binding
proteins with very similar, possibly identical, DNA-binding specificity. They
function as cellular transcription factors and as replication factors for
adenovirus DNA replication. Diversity in this protein family is generated by
multiple genes, differential splicing, and heterodimerization. To determine the
chromosomal position of NFI genes in the human genome, we isolated partial cDNA
sequences derived from four independent genes: NFIA, NFIB, NFIC, and NFIX.
Corresponding clones of genomic DNA served as probes for fluorescence in situ
hybridization on human metaphase chromosomes. The NFIA and NFIB genes map to
positions 1p31.2-p31.3 and 9p24.1, respectively. The NFIC and the NFIX genes were
both localized to position 19p13.3 in the order centromere-NFIX-NFIC-telomere.
Comparison of the position of NFI genes and JUN genes revealed a close physical
linkage between members of the NFI and JUN gene families in the human genome.

PMID: 7590749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Bull Cancer. 1995 Jul;82(7):541-50.

[Several transcription factors participate in the functioning of the
alpha-fetoprotein gene promoter].

[Article in French]

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Thomassin H, Richard F, Ikonomova R, Denissenko M, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche sur l'endocrinologie moléculaire et le développement,
CNRS, UPR 1511 Meudon, France.

The oncodevelopmentally regulated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene offers a very good
model system to better understand the molecular mechanisms which dictate the
specificity of gene expression in liver and control its tight modulation in the
course of development and carcinogenesis. Transcription factors of the
CCAAT/enhance-binding protein (C/EBP), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), and
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families can bind in vitro to the promoter of the rat AFP
gene, which makes the expression of the AFP gene specific to the liver. We have
evaluated the influence of some of these factors on the activity of the AFP
promoter by transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression 
vector plus a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar
plasmid bearing the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, and 
C/EBP beta acted as transactivators on the AFP promoter, while LIP, a truncated
form of C/EBP beta, was a potent negative regulator of the promoter.
Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in
activating the AFP promoter in the HepG2 cells. This effect was highly promoter
and cell specific since it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter or in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. HNF-1 beta, which is produced earlier than HNF-1
alpha during liver development, would thus have the greater influence on the AFP 
promoter in early development. Our results pointed to a key role that NF1 might
play in the functioning of the AFP promoter. Indeed, overexpression of NF1
induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. Competition
between NF1 and HNF-1 for binding to their overlapping binding sites on the AFP
promoter would be critical for modulating its activity.

PMID: 7549116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Hepatology. 1995 Jun;21(6):1640-8.

Effects of acetaldehyde on nuclear protein binding to the nuclear factor I
consensus sequence in the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter.

Anania FA(1), Potter JJ, Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Acetaldehyde has been shown to increase collagen production in cultured rat
myofibroblastlike cells and to activate the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter in
transfected NIH 3T3 cells. Nuclear factor I (NF-I), a CCAAT binding transcription
factor, is known to bind and activate the alpha 1(I) and alpha 2(I) collagen
genes. Activation of the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter was not observed when the
NF-I binding site of the promoter was deleted. In this study, we determined if
acetaldehyde influences the binding of NF-I to the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter. 
Nuclear proteins extracted from NIH 3T3 cells, or myofibroblastlike cells, 36
hours after the addition of acetaldehyde (200 mumol/L) in serum-free media showed
increased binding to the consensus sequence of the NF-I binding site by DNase I
protection analysis and by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) as
compared with control nuclear extracts that were not exposed to acetaldehyde.
Furthermore, nuclear proteins extracted from myofibroblastlike cells that had
been previously exposed to acetaldehyde had a marked increase in NF-I protein, as
shown by Western blot with NF-I antibodies. Antisera to NF-I resulted in a slow
migrating DNA-protein-antibody complex (supershift) on EMSA. However, the NF-I
antibody did not supershift all the DNA-protein complexes, and the supershift
band was not increased with nuclear proteins from acetaldehyde-treated cells
despite the increased binding of these nuclear protein preparations to the NF-I
oligo. Therefore, nuclear proteins, in addition to NF-I, bind to the NF-I
consensus sequence and may have their binding altered by acetaldehyde.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7768510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):2972-82.

EFIA/YB-1 is a component of cardiac HF-1A binding activity and positively
regulates transcription of the myosin light-chain 2v gene.

Zou Y(1), Chien KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0613, USA.

Transient assays in cultured ventricular muscle cells and studies in transgenic
mice have identified two adjacent regulatory elements (HF-1a and HF-1b/MEF-2) as 
required to maintain ventricular chamber-specific expression of the myosin
light-chain 2v (MLC-2v) gene. A rat neonatal heart cDNA library was screened with
an HF-1a binding site, resulting in the isolation of EFIA, the rat homolog of
human YB-1. Purified recombinant EFIA/YB-1 protein binds to the HF-1a site in a
sequence-specific manner and contacts a subset of the HF-1a contact points made
by the cardiac nuclear factor(s). The HF-1a sequence contains AGTGG, which is
highly homologous to the inverted CCAAT core of the EFIA/YB-1 binding sites and
is found to be essential for binding of the recombinant EFIA/YB-1. Antiserum
against Xenopus YB-3 (100% identical in the DNA binding domain and 89% identical 
in overall amino acid sequence to rat EFIA) can specifically abolish a component 
of the endogenous HF-1a complex in the rat cardiac myocyte nuclear extracts. In
cotransfection assays, EFIA/YB-1 increased 250-bp MLC-2v promoter activity by
3.4-fold specifically in the cardiac cell context and in an HF-1a site-dependent 
manner. EFIA/YB-1 complexes with an unknown protein in cardiac myocyte nuclear
extracts to form the endogenous HF-1a binding activity. Immunocoprecipitation
revealed that EFIA/YB-1 has a major associated protein of approximately 30 kDa
(p30) in cardiac muscle cells. This study suggests that EFIA/YB-1, together with 
the partner p30, binds to the HF-1a site and, in conjunction with HF-1b/MEF-2,
mediates ventricular chamber-specific expression of the MLC-2v gene.

PMCID: PMC230528
PMID: 7760795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 28;270(17):10212-21.

Identification of a nuclear factor-I family protein-binding site in the silencer 
region of the cartilage matrix protein gene.

Szabó P(1), Moitra J, Rencendorj A, Rákhely G, Rauch T, Kiss I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged.

Cartilage matrix protein (CMP) is synthesized by chondrocytes in a
developmentally regulated manner. Here we have dissected promoter upstream
elements involved in its transcriptional regulation. We show that although the
79-base pair CMP minimal promoter is promiscuous, 1137 base pairs of 5'-flanking 
region are capable of directing tissue- and developmental stage-specific
transcription when fused to a reporter gene. This results from two positive
control regions which, in proliferating chondrocytes, relieve the repression
mediated by two non-tissue-specific negative control regions. Characterization of
the promoter proximal silencer by DNase I footprinting and gel shifts revealed
the presence of two elements, SI and SII, which bound mesenchymal cell proteins. 
Methylation interference analysis indicated a gapped palindromic binding site
similar to nuclear factor I (NF-I) family proteins within SI, but only a
half-site within SII. Gel shift assays with specific NF-I and mutated SI
competitors, binding of recombinant NF-I, as well as supershift analysis with
NF-I-specific antiserum verified the binding of NF-I family proteins to the SI
element. Double-stranded SI and SII oligonucleotides inserted in single copy in
either orientation were found to repress both homologous and heterologous
promoters upon transfection into mesenchymal cells. Transcriptional repression
also occurred when a consensus NF-I site itself was fused to the CMP minimal
promoter. We conclude that NF-I-related protein(s) can mediate transcriptional
repression in cells of mesenchymal origin.

PMID: 7730325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):2063-70.

Nuclear factor I and mammary gland factor (STAT5) play a critical role in
regulating rat whey acidic protein gene expression in transgenic mice.

Li S(1), Rosen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

The rat whey acidic protein (WAP) gene contains a mammary gland-specific and
hormonally regulated DNase I-hypersensitive site 830 to 720 bp 5' to the site of 
transcription initiation. We have reported previously that nuclear factor I (NFI)
binding at a palindromic site and binding at a half-site are the major
DNA-protein interactions detected within this tissue-specific
nuclease-hypersensitive region. We now show that point mutations introduced into 
these NFI-binding sites dramatically affect WAP gene expression in transgenic
mice. Transgene expression was totally abrogated when the palindromic NFI site or
both binding sites were mutated, suggesting that NFI is a key regulator of WAP
gene expression. In addition, a recognition site for mammary gland factor
(STAT5), which mediates prolactin induction of milk protein gene expression, was 
also identified immediately proximal to the NFI-binding sites. Mutation of this
site reduced transgene expression by approximately 90% per gene copy, but did not
alter tissue specificity. These results suggest that regulation of WAP gene
expression is determined by the cooperative interactions among several enhancers 
that constitute a composite response element.

PMCID: PMC230433
PMID: 7891701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Gene. 1995 Mar 10;154(2):299-300.

Human Y-box transcription factors: sequences of two new YB-1 alleles.

Singal DP(1), Miller PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The complete nucleotide (nt) sequences of two new alleles of the human
Y-box-binding protein are described. These alleles show over 93% nt similarity to
published sequences of YB-1.

PMID: 7890183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Neurovirol. 1995 Mar;1(1):40-9.

Evaluation of the role of cytokine activation in the multiplication of JC virus
(JCV) in human fetal glial cells.

Atwood WJ(1), Wang L, Durham LC, Amemiya K, Traub RG, Major EO.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Neuroscience, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The human polyomavirus, JCV, is the etiologic agent of the fatal central nervous 
system demyelinating disease, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy occurs most frequently in patients
with underlying immunosuppressive disorders and is the direct result of virus
multiplication in oligodendrocytes, the myelin producing cell in the central
nervous system. In this report we test the ability of cellular activation signals
to modulate expression of the JCV genome in either transfected or infected human 
fetal glial cells. In addition, we analyze the binding of nuclear proteins
isolated from untreated and cytokine treated human fetal glial cells to
transcription factor binding sites in the JCV regulatory region. In contrast to
the effects of cellular activation on the expression of the HIV-1 promoter in
these cells, none of the cellular activators tested increased expression of JCV. 
The cytokine, TNF-alpha, increased binding of NF kappa B (p50/p65) to a JC NF
kappa B site but did not modulate the binding of nuclear proteins to the
overlapping NF-1/AP1 region of the JCV enhancer. When taken together these
results suggest that the response of JCV to cellular activation signals may be
fundamentally different from the response of HIV-1 to these signals in human
fetal glial cells and that the JC NF kappa B site may not be required for JCV
gene expression or multiplication in vivo.

PMID: 9222341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Mar;6(3):219-27.

Nuclear factor I interferes with transformation induced by nuclear oncogenes.

Schuur ER(1), Kruse U, Iacovoni JS, Vogt PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The four nuclear factor I genes (NFI-A, NFI-B, NFI-C, and NFI-X) give rise to
multiple isoforms by alternative splicing in many tissues. These NFI proteins
cooperate with AP-1, Myc, and other transcription factors in regulating
transcription of numerous cellular and viral genes. We have investigated the
growth-regulatory potential of NFI by overexpressing cDNAs from chicken NFI genes
-A, -B, -C, and -X in chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF). None of the NFI cDNAs
induced oncogenic transformation of CEF. However, overexpression of each of the
NFI proteins caused similar morphological alteration of the cells, inducing them 
to become flattened and polygonal and to show increased adherence. The growth
properties of these cells were similar to normal CEF. When these morphologically 
altered CEF were challenged by superinfection with oncogenic retroviruses, they
were resistant to transformation by the nuclear oncogenes jun, fos, junD, myc,
and qin but were readily transformed by cytoplasmic oncogenes src, mil/raf, ras, 
and fps. The NFI-A1 protein was able to alter transactivation by the cellular and
viral Jun proteins in a promoter-dependent manner. The changes in cell morphology
and reduced susceptibility to nuclear oncogenes were not seen with a
carboxy-terminal truncation in the transactivation domain of NFI, suggesting that
this region of the protein is essential for the observed effects. The dichotomy
between the activities of nuclear and of cytoplasmic oncogenes in this system is 
discussed.

PMID: 7794790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3527-33.

The transcriptional regulatory protein, YB-1, promotes single-stranded regions in
the DRA promoter.

MacDonald GH(1), Itoh-Lindstrom Y, Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill 27599-7295.

YB-1 is a member of a newly defined family of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins, the 
Y box factors. These proteins have been shown to affect gene expression at both
the transcriptional and translational levels. Recently, we showed that YB-1
represses interferon-gamma-induced transcription of class II human major
histocompatibility (MHC) genes (1). Studies in this report characterize the DNA
binding properties of purified, recombinant YB-1 on the MHC class II DRA
promoter. The generation of YB-1-specific antibodies further permitted an
analysis of the DNA binding properties of endogenous YB-1. YB-1 specifically
binds single-stranded templates of the DRA promoter with greater affinity than
double-stranded templates. The single-stranded DNA binding sites of YB-1 were
mapped to the X box, whereas the double-stranded binding sites were mapped to the
Y box of the DRA promoter, by methylation interference analysis. Most
significantly, YB-1 can induce or stabilize single-stranded regions in the X and 
Y elements of the DRA promoter, as revealed by mung bean nuclease analysis. In
concert with the findings that YB-1 represses DRA transcription, this study of
YB-1 binding properties suggests a model of repression in which YB-1 binding
results in single-stranded regions within the promoter, thus preventing loading
and/or function of other DRA-specific transactivating factors.

PMID: 7876087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Feb 14;92(4):1087-91.

Cooperative action of cellular proteins YB-1 and Pur alpha with the tumor antigen
of the human JC polyomavirus determines their interaction with the viral lytic
control element.

Chen NN(1), Chang CF, Gallia GL, Kerr DA, Johnson EM, Krachmarov CP, Barr SM,
Frisque RJ, Bollag B, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA 19107.

Human JC polyomavirus (JCV) is the etiologic agent of the neurodegenerative
disease progressive mulifocal leukoencephalopathy. By using JCV as a model, we
investigated the role of the viral early protein tumor antigen (TAg) in the
binding of two cellular proteins, Pura alpha and YB-1, to JCV regulatory
sequences. Results from band-shift assays with purified YB-1, Pur alpha, and TAg 
indicated that efficient binding of Pur alpha, a strong activator of early gene
transcription, to a single-stranded target sequence corresponding to the viral
lytic control element, is diminished in the presence of the late gene activator
YB-1, which recognizes the opposite strand of the Pur alpha binding site. Of
particular interest was the ability of Pur alpha and TAg to enhance binding of
YB-1 to DNA molecules without being associated with this complex. Binding studies
using a mutant peptide encompassing the N terminus of YB-1 indicated that the C
terminus of YB-1 is important for its DNA binding activity. The ability of Pur
alpha and TAg to increase binding of YB-1 to DNA is independent of the YB-1 C
terminus. Similarly, results from band-shift assays using Pur alpha variants
indicated that two distinct regions of this protein contribute either to its
ability to bind DNA or to its ability to enhance YB-1 DNA binding activity. Based
on the interaction of Pur alpha, YB-1, and TAg, and their binding to DNA, a model
is proposed for the role of these proteins in transcription of viral early and
late genes during the lytic cycle.

PMCID: PMC42642
PMID: 7862639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Invest Dermatol. 1995 Feb;104(2):282-6.

Pentoxifylline, pentifylline, and interferons decrease type I and III procollagen
mRNA levels in dermal fibroblasts: evidence for mediation by nuclear factor 1
down-regulation.

Duncan MR(1), Hasan A, Berman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami School of
Medicine, Florida.

Pentoxifylline (PTX) is a methylxanthine that exhibits multiple biologic
activities, including the inhibition of collagen synthesis by dermal fibroblasts.
Because some PTX activities have recently been linked to transcription
factor-mediated regulation of gene transcription, we have investigated if PTX
acts to inhibit collagen synthesis at a transcriptional locus by measuring
procollagen mRNA levels by assaying for the presence of an activator of
procollagen gene promoters, nuclear factor (NF)-1. The effects of another
methylxanthine, pentifylline (PTF), shown herein to be a tenfold more potent
inhibitor of collagen synthesis than PTX, and interferon-alpha, -beta, and -gamma
were studied in parallel. Analysis of extracellular protein and RNA from
48-h-treated fibroblasts showed that PTX, PTF, and interferons decreased alpha
1(I), alpha 2(I), and alpha 1(III) procollagens by reducing the steady-state
levels of the corresponding procollagen mRNA transcripts. Reduction of
procollagen mRNA levels appeared to be dependent on new protein synthesis, as it 
was prevented by treatment with cycloheximide. Assay for the presence of nuclear 
NF-1 by gel mobility shift analysis showed that extracts from interferon, PTX,
and PTF-treated fibroblasts lacked proteins recognizing the consensus DNA binding
sequence for NF-1. Taken together, these observations suggest interferons and
methylxanthines may inhibit fibroblast collagen synthesis by a common mechanism
requiring new protein synthesis that suppresses procollagen gene transcription
through down-regulation of NF-1.

PMID: 7530274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Sci Prog. 1995;78 ( Pt 4):301-10.

The cold-shock response in bacteria.

Wolffe AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Biology, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The 'cold shock' response that occurs when exponentially growing Escherichia coli
at 37 degrees C are transferred to 10 degrees C leads to the cesation of most
protein synthesis, however, about 14 'cold shock' proteins continue to be made.
These 'cold shock' proteins facilitate growth at low temperatures. Central to the
regulation of this switch in gene expression is the 200 fold induction in the
relative rate of synthesis of a small cold-shock protein only 70 amino acids in
length, known as CS7.4. There is a remarkable conservation through evolution of
the primary sequence found in this small cold shock protein and that of a nucleic
acid binding domain within the Y-box family of eukaryotic gene regulatory
proteins. Parallel studies on CS7.4 and the Y-box proteins have elucidated both
molecular mechanisms regulating the cold shock response and a novel site for the 
regulation of eukaryotic gene expression.

PMID: 8850997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Biol Rep. 1995;21(3):147-58.

A complex interplay of positive and negative elements is responsible for the
different transcriptional activity of liver NF1 variants.

Monaci P(1), Nuzzo M, Stampfli S, Tollervey D, De Simone V, Nicosia A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P Angeletti, (Roma), Italy.

A full-length cDNA of the rat liver Nuclear Factor 1 (NF1L21) has been cloned and
expressed in S. cerevisiae to analyse the architecture of its activation domain. 
NF1L21 displays a specific DNA-binding activity, as well as the ability to
activate transcription from an artificial NF 1-responsive promoter in yeast.
Interaction of two or more NF1L21 molecules with multiple sites on the same
promoter activated transcription in a synergistic fashion. Functional analysis of
the activation domain of NF1L21 reveals a tripartite structure. Two distinct
positive elements are required for NF1L21 -mediated transcription activation. A
proline-rich element sandwiched between these two positive domains attenuates
their transactivation potential. A shorter NF1L variant (NFlL4) in which the
distal positive element is replaced by a different sequence was also isolated.
NF1L4 displays the same DNA-binding activity and dimerisation properties as
NF1L21, but is unable to activate transcription in yeast.

PMID: 8832903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Ciba Found Symp. 1995;191:7-17; discussion 17-23.

Transcriptional control by steroid hormones: the role of chromatin.

Truss M(1), Candau R, Chávez S, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

The mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter contains a complex
hormone-responsive unit composed of four hormone-responsive elements, a nuclear
factor I (NFI) binding site and two octamer motifs. All these sites are required 
for optimal hormonal induction. Although synergism has been found between hormone
receptors and octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct-1/OTF-1), we were unable to
detect a positive interaction between receptors and NFI in vitro. In chromatin,
the MMTV hormone-responsive unit is contained in a phased nucleosome. The precise
positioning of the DNA double helix on the surface of the histone octamer
precludes binding of NFI and Oct-1/OTF-1 to their cognate sequences, while still 
allowing recognition of two hormone-responsive elements by the hormone receptors.
Hormone treatment leads to a characteristic change in chromatin structure that
makes the centre of the nucleosome more accessible to digestion by DNase I and
facilitates binding of receptors, NFI and Oct-1/OTF-1 to the nucleosomally
organized promoter. The MMTV promoter functions in yeast in a hormone
receptor-dependent and NFI-dependent fashion. Depletion of nucleosomes activates 
hormone-independent transcription from the MMTV promoter. These results imply
that nucleosome positioning not only represses hormone-independent transcription,
but also enables binding of a full complement of transcription factors to the
hormone-responsive unit after hormone induction.

PMID: 8582206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1995;41(2):85-95.

NFI/X proteins: a class of NFI family of transcription factors with positive and 
negative regulatory domains.

Nebl G(1), Cato AC.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute of Genetics, Germany.

NFI is a family of transcription factors that binds discrete nucleotide sequence 
and regulates transcriptional activity of genes. Transactivation occurs through
proline-rich sequences. Among the genes whose transcriptional activity is
regulated are those expressed in a cell-type specific manner. This suggests the
possible existence of NFI proteins with distinct properties. With the use of the 
polymerase chain reaction technique, we have cloned and analyzed the activity of 
three spliced variants of NFI (class X) genes in murine cells. Expression vectors
containing the regulatory regions of these proteins fused to the DNA binding
domain of the yeast transcription factor GAL4 helped identify both negative and
positive regulatory domains. In the context of the whole NFI/X proteins, spliced 
variants lacking the positive regulatory sequences functioned as repressors,
whereas those containing both regulatory domains functioned as weak activators.
With the identification of the negative domain in the NFI/X proteins, we
demonstrate here a novel regulatory feature of these proteins in positive and
negative modulation of gene expression.

PMID: 8581067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Bioessays. 1995 Jan;17(1):9-11.

A role for Y-box proteins in cell proliferation.

Ladomery M(1), Sommerville J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Medical Sciences, University of St Andrews, Fife,
Scotland.

Members of the Y-box (YB) family of transcription factors are expressed in a wide
range of cell types and are implicated in the regulation of a rapidly increasing 
number of genes. Although the biological activities of YB proteins appear to be
varied, distinct patterns, relating to the timing of their expression and the
identity of their target genes, are beginning to emerge. A recent report by Ito
et al. focusses attention on cell proliferation and adds support to earlier
suggestions that a primary function of YB proteins is to help activate
growth-associated genes.

PMID: 7702598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Dec 11;22(24):5235-40.

Early dissociation of nuclear factor I from the origin during initiation of
adenovirus DNA replication studied by origin immobilization.

Coenjaerts FE(1), van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

The DNA-binding domain of Nuclear Factor I (NFIBD) enhances initiation of
adenovirus DNA replication up to 50-fold by binding to the auxiliary region of
the origin and positioning the viral DNA polymerase. To study if and when NFIBD
dissociates from the template, we immobilized origin DNA to glutathione-agarose
beads by means of a GST-NFIBD fusion protein. This immobilized template is active
in replication. By analyzing the release of prelabeled templates from the beads
under different conditions, we show that NFIBD dissociates already early during
initiation. During preinitiation NFIBD remains bound, but as soon as dCTP, dATP
or dTTP are added, efficient dissociation occurs. A much lower dissociation level
was induced by addition of dGTP. Since dCTP, dATP and dTTP are required for
formation of a pTP-CAT initiation intermediate, we explain our results by
conformational changes occurring in the polymerase during initiation leading to
disruption of both the interaction between the polymerase and NFI as well as the 
interaction between NFI and the DNA.

PMCID: PMC332066
PMID: 7816611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 25;269(47):29949-55.

Identification of a conserved oxidation-sensitive cysteine residue in the NFI
family of DNA-binding proteins.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Research Institute, 
Ohio 44195.

The nuclear factor I (NFI) family of site-specific DNA-binding proteins plays a
role in both transcription and adenovirus DNA replication. The DNA binding domain
of NFI family members contains 4 cysteine residues (Cys-2, Cys-3, Cys-4, and
Cys-5) that are conserved in all NFI proteins. Mutation of the Cys-2, Cys-4, and 
Cys-5 residues in the human NFI-C protein to several other amino acids abolished 
DNA binding, while 8 of 10 mutations of the Cys-3 residue had little or no effect
on binding. Wild-type NFI-C was inactivated by N-ethylmaleimide in vitro, while
the active Cys-3 mutant proteins were resistant to N-ethylmaleimide. Treatment of
wild-type NFI in vitro with the oxidizing agent diamide also inactivated DNA
binding, and subsequent reduction with dithiothreitol restored binding activity. 
The active Cys-3 mutant NFI proteins were resistant to diamide-inactivation,
indicating that the Cys-3 residue is required for modulation of DNA-binding by
oxidation state. These studies indicate that oxidative-inactivation can play an
important role in the modifying NFI-DNA-protein interactions. The presence of
this nonessential Cys-3 residue in all known NFI proteins raises the possibility 
that it may function in a manner similar to redox-sensitive cysteine residues
found in other site-specific DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 7961993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Virology. 1994 Nov 1;204(2):600-8.

An NF1 motif plays a central role in hepatitis B virus enhancer.

Ori A(1), Atzmony D, Haviv I, Shaul Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

The hepatitis B virus enhancer plays an important role in transcription
regulation of the viral genes in a liver-specific manner. In animal models a
homologous element seems to be involved in activation of cellular oncogenes and
tumorigenesis. Previously, the enhancer was divided into several functional
domains, whereby each one seemed to be required for optimal transcription
activity. To gain more information on the mode of action of these elements and
their role in viral genome, we mutagenized the individual enhancer elements and
analyzed their functions in three different experimental systems. All show that
the NF1b motif of the enhancer plays a central role, with the most dramatic
results obtained from the cell-free in vitro transcription assay. Furthermore, an
intact viral genome mutated at the NF1b site is a poor template for the synthesis
of the 3.5-kb pregenomic RNA. These data are rather unexpected, given the
ubiquitous appearance of this factor. On the other hand, our findings are in
agreement with a large number of recently reported cases in which NF1 seems to
determine tissue-specific expression of a wide range of cellular and viral
promoters.

PMID: 7941327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Virol. 1994 Nov;68(11):7637-43.

Transcription of a human neurotropic virus promoter in glial cells: effect of
YB-1 on expression of the JC virus late gene.

Kerr D(1), Chang CF, Chen N, Gallia G, Raj G, Schwartz B, Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

We have isolated a partial recombinant cDNA clone from a HeLa expression library 
which encodes a protein capable of binding to the central region of the human
neurotropic JC virus (JCV) enhancer/promoter, termed the B region. Sequence
analysis revealed a complete homology of the partial cDNA clone to the N-terminal
region, of a previously described DNA-binding protein, termed YB-1. Band shift
analyses have indicated that the bacterially produced YB-1 interacts specifically
with the double-stranded B oligonucleotide as well as the corresponding
single-stranded DNA fragment representing the early promoter sequence. Further
analysis indicated that the YB-1 protein binds specifically to the C/T-rich
sequence of the B domain, which is located in close proximity to the TATA box
within the virus enhancer/promoter. Results from cotransfection experiments
demonstrated that the full-length (YB-1) but not the partial cDNA enhances
expression of the JCV late (JCVL) promoter in glial cells. Cointroduction into
glial cells of a recombinant expressing the YB-1 and JCVL deletion mutants
indicated that removal of the C/T-rich sequence of the B domain reduces the level
of activation of the virus promoter by YB-1. Further cotransfection experiments
revealed that the virus transactivating protein T antigen appears to diminish the
ability of YB-1 to activate JCVL gene expression. RNA studies indicated that YB-1
is expressed in several cell types and tissues. Examination of YB-1 RNA from
mouse brain at various stages of development revealed high levels of YB-1 RNA at 
early stages of development and lower levels at all subsequent developmental
stages.

PMCID: PMC237216
PMID: 7933155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Immunol. 1994 Nov 1;153(9):4122-33.

The role of NF-Y and IRF-2 in the regulation of human IL-4 gene expression.

Li-Weber M(1), Davydov IV, Krafft H, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.

Activity of the IL-4 promoter was shown to be regulated by multiple cis-acting
elements. In this study, two additional regulatory elements, a CCAAT element and 
a 15-nucleotide element homologous to the IFN- and virus-stimulation response
element (ISRE), were identified in the human promoter region at -195 to -172. The
ISRE-homologous sequence was shown to interact with two nuclear proteins, IRF-2, 
a transcriptional repressor of the IFN genes, and an NF-1-like factor. Mutations 
of the ISRE site increased overall IL-4 promoter activity twofold, suggesting a
possible negative role of IRF-2 in the regulation of IL-4 transcription. The
CCAAT element was found to interact with NF-Y, a nuclear factor essential for
expression of MHC class II genes. Mutations of the CCAAT element at -195 to -172 
resulted in a substantial decrease of IL-4 promoter activity. Furthermore, NF-Y
was also found to bind to the previously described NF-ATp binding site of the
IL-4 promoter (-79 to -62, originally described as "P element"), and the
previously described P-binding complex NF-P was shown to contain NF-Y. These
findings suggest that NF-Y may play an important role in the regulation of IL-4
gene expression.

PMID: 7930616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Oct 11;22(20):4344-5.

Detection of transcription factor binding in vivo using lambda exonuclease.

Mymryk JS(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Western Ontario, London,
Canada.

PMCID: PMC331963
PMID: 7937164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1994 Oct;51(1-2):21-32.

Two independent pathways for transcription from the MMTV promoter.

Möws CC(1), Preiss T, Slater EP, Cao X, Verrijzer CP, van Der Vliet PC, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Phillips Universität,
Marburg, Germany.

The influence of progesterone receptor (PR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) on
transcription from the mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) promoter was analyzed
using cell-free transcription of DNA templates with a G-free cassette.
Preincubation of the templates with either PR or GR stimulates the rate of
transcription initiation 10-50 fold, whereas the recombinant DNA binding domain
of GR is inactive. Mutations that inactivate the nuclear factor I (NFI) binding
site, or NFI depletion of the nuclear extract, decrease basal transcription
without influencing receptor-dependent induction. Recombinant NFI, but not its
DNA-binding domain, restores efficient basal transcription of the depleted
extract. Recombinant OTF1 or OTF2, but not the POU domain of OTF1, enhance MMTV
transcription independently of NF1. In agreement with this finding, NFI and OTF1 
do not cooperate, but rather compete for binding to the wild type MMTV promoter, 
though they have the potential to bind simultaneously to properly oriented sites.
Our results imply the existence of two independent pathways for MMTV
transcription: one initiated by NFI and the other dependent on octamer
transcription factors. Only the second pathway is stimulated by steroid hormone
receptors in vitro.

PMID: 7947347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):23861-4.

Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates the DNA binding activity of a nuclear factor
1-like repressor protein.

Reifel-Miller AE(1), Calnek DS, Grinnell BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, Indiana
46285.

We have previously identified an ubiquitous repressor binding site that binds a
nuclear factor 1 (NF-1)-like transcription factor designated BEF-1. The DNA
binding activity of BEF-1, a 98-kDa protein, is increased by the oncoproteins of 
adenovirus, the early region 1a proteins (E1a), which results in the induction of
further repression. Using the prototype repressor sequence, first identified in
the enhancer of the human polyoma virus BKV-P2 we have shown that phosphorylation
of BEF-1 is required for its DNA binding activity. We demonstrate here that the
inhibition of DNA binding by BEF-1 dephosphorylated with potato acid phosphatase 
or calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase was reversed by sodium orthovanadate, a
specific inhibitor of phosphotyrosyl-protein phosphatases. In addition, BEF-1
binding activity, but not the binding of related factor NF-1, could be inhibited 
by dephosphorylation with a specific phosphotyrosine phosphatase. We found that
both polyclonal and monoclonal phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies blocked
binding of the repressor protein to the BEF-1 site. Moreover, BEF-1 activity
could be adsorbed on an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody column and specially eluted
with phosphotyrosine. In transfection studies in HeLa cells, which contain high
levels of BEF-1, we show that E1a-induced repression mediated by BEF-1 was
relieved with the tyrosine kinase inhibitors genistein and tyrphostin. Together, 
these results demonstrate that a phosphotyrosine on the BEF-1 repressor protein
regulates DNA binding activity and thus regulates repression of the BKV-P2
enhancer. This report represents the first demonstration that the phosphorylated 
state of a tyrosine can control gene expression by altering the DNA binding
activity of a transcription factor.

PMID: 7929029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3825-33.

Cloning and functional analysis of spliced isoforms of human nuclear factor I-X: 
interference with transcriptional activation by NFI/CTF in a cell-type specific
manner.

Apt D(1), Liu Y, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore.

Previous studies of the epithelial specificity of the human papillomavirus type
16 (HPV-16) enhancer pointed out an important role of nuclear factor I (NFI). In 
epithelial cells, NFI proteins are derived from the NFI-C gene and referred to as
NFI/CTF. In contrast, fibroblasts, where the enhancer is inactive, express high
levels of NFI from the NFI-X gene. To compare NFI-C and NFI-X derived
transcription factors, we cloned and functionally investigated two differentially
spliced forms of NFI-X from human fibroblasts. NFI-X1 has 95% homology with a
transcript previously identified in hamster liver cells. NFI-X2, a spliced
variant, misses 41 amino acids of the proline-rich activation domain. NFI-X
expression, examined by Northern blots, shows strong cell-type specific variation
in comparison with NFI/CTF. While the transcriptional activation domain of
NFI-X2, functionally tested as GAL4-fusion protein in epithelial and fibroblast
cells, activates transcription from promoter as well as enhancer position similar
to NFI/CTF-1, the activation domain of NFI-X1 fails to activate transcription
from enhancer position. In Drosophila cells, void of endogenous NFI proteins,
full length NFI/CTF-1 and NFI-X2 activate a reporter construct containing only
NFI sites as well as the NFI dependent HPV-16 enhancer. In contrast, NFI-X1 fails
to activate the HPV-16 enhancer. Furthermore, overexpression of NFI-X1 in
epithelial cells down-regulates the HPV-16 enhancer. Our findings suggest that
the family of NFI transcription factors should not be viewed as constitutive
activators, but rather, that NFI-C and NFI-X have divergent functions after
binding in promoter or enhancer position. This property, combined with the
differential expression of NFI-X, can achieve cell-type specificity of NFI
dependent promoters and enhancers.

PMCID: PMC308376
PMID: 7937100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biopolymers. 1994 Sep;34(9):1175-86.

13C-labeled oligodeoxyribonucleotides: a solution study of a CCAAT-containing
sequence at the nuclear factor I recognition site of human adenovirus.

Wu J(1), Serianni AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Indiana
46556.

The solution behavior of the single-stranded CCAAT-containing octamer 1,
d(AGCCAATA), that comprises part of the nuclear factor I (NF-I) recognition site 
at the origin of replication of human adenovirus has been studied by nmr
spectroscopy at 500 and 600 MHz. Proton resonance assignments for 1 were aided by
selective 13C enrichment at C1' of A1 or A5. High-resolution 13C-1H heteronuclear
multiple-bond coherence spectra of the 13C-labeled oligomers permitted the
selective detection of furanosyl ring protons within each labeled residue due to 
short- and long-range 13C-1H couplings to the enriched C1'. The resulting
assignments provided firm starting points in the interpretation of double quantum
filtered correlated spectra, yielding information supplemented by total
correlated spectroscopy (TOCSY) and rotating frame nuclear Overhauser effect
spectroscopic data to completely assign the 1H-nmr spectrum of 1 and extract 3JHH
values for furanose conformational analysis. Several 13C-1H spin-coupling
constants within the 13C-enriched A1 or A5 residues were measured from cross-peak
shifts in TOCSY spectra, and their signs determined by inspection of the relative
orientations of these shifts. 1H-1H and 13C-1H spin-couplings both indicate a
preference (> 75%) for south (C2'-endo) conformations by the furanosyl rings of
1.

PMID: 7948731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Genomics. 1994 Jul 1;22(1):247-9.

Mapping of the murine nuclear factor I/X gene (Nfix) to mouse chromosome 8 C1-2
by FISH.

Scherthan H(1), Seisenberger C, Greulich K, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Abt. Humanbiologie und Humangenetik der Universität, Kaiserslautern, Germany.

PMID: 7959784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochem J. 1994 Jul 1;301 ( Pt 1):49-55.

Members of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 and
nuclear factor-1 families can differentially modulate the activities of the rat
alpha-fetoprotein promoter and enhancer.

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement, CNRS
UPR 1511, Meudon, France.

The promoter of the rat alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, which makes the expression 
of the developmentally regulated AFP gene specific to the liver, is a putative
target for transcription factors of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families. We have
evaluated the influence of these factors on the activity of the AFP promoter by
transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression vector plus 
a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar plasmid bearing
the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta and
D-binding protein (DBP) acted as trans-activators on the AFP promoter, whereas
liver inhibitory protein (LIP), a truncated form of C/EBP beta, was a potent
negative regulator of the promoter. C/EBP alpha also bound to and stimulated the 
activity of the AFP enhancer at -2.5 kb. Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to
be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in activating the AFP promoter. This effect was
specific, as it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter. HNF-1 beta, which is
produced earlier than HNF-1 alpha during liver development, would thus have the
greater influence on the AFP promoter in early development. Both HNF-1s allowed
expression of the AFP promoter in cells of nonhepatic origin. Overexpression of
NF-1 induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. This
strongly suggests that competition between NF-1 and HNF-1 for binding to their
overlapping binding sites on the AFP promoter is critical for modulating its
activity. Thus changing combinations of these trans-acting factors may tightly
modulate the AFP promoter activity in the course of liver development and
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1137141
PMID: 7518671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Gen Virol. 1994 Jun;75 ( Pt 6):1281-90.

Biochemical and mutational analysis of the polyomavirus core promoter:
involvement of nuclear factor-1 in early promoter function.

Shivakumar CV(1), Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Tyler 75710.

The polyomavirus enhancer is separated from the early RNA initiation sites by a
120 bp promoter region. To identify the core promoter elements, we introduced
base-substitution mutations within the potential elements in the vicinity of the 
RNA initiation site. Three of these mutants, two with mutations within a putative
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) binding site and the other within the TATA box, exhibited
reduced promoter activity by about threefold in the mouse NIH 3T3 cell line. The 
activity of the other three mutants was either little affected or remained
unchanged. Mobility shift assays using specific competitors and antibodies
against NF-1 demonstrated the binding of a protein of the NF-1 family at a site
adjacent to the TATA box, suggesting a role for NF-1 binding in early promoter
function. The effect of these mutations was also evaluated in undifferentiated
mouse embryonal carcinoma (F9) cells in the presence of an additional mutation
(F441) at nucleotide position 5233. This additional mutation creates a strong
binding site for a transcription factor, TEF-1, and helps the virus to grow in
this cell line. While the TATA box and the GC box mutants behaved qualitatively
in a similar fashion, the NF-1 motif now played a minor role in F9 cells. Western
blot experiments demonstrated low levels of NF-1 protein in this cell line. The
NF-1 motif partially overlaps a T-antigen binding motif and this motif is not
involved in T-antigen-mediated regulation of the early promoter. Our results
suggest that a protein of the NF-1 family binds to the core promoter and is
important for early transcription in vivo. We further demonstrate that
undifferentiated F9 cells contain a very low level of NF-1 and the F441 mutant
possibly follows a different mechanism for promoter function in these cells.

PMID: 8207394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Mol Biol. 1994 May 20;238(5):860-5.

The genes for transcription factor nuclear factor I give rise to corresponding
splice variants between vertebrate species.

Kruse U(1), Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III/Genetik Albert-Ludwigs Universität, Germany.

Nuclear Factor I (NFI) proteins are DNA binding proteins functioning as
transcription and replication factors. As part of a study of the diversity of the
Nuclear Factor I protein family, we isolated and sequenced seven NFI cDNA clones 
from a chicken promacrophage library. Five of these clones are derived from the
NFI-A gene, the other two from the NFI-C gene. Comparison of the deduced chicken 
NFI amino acid sequences with mammalian NFI sequences reveals that there are
corresponding vertebrate isoforms, indicating a strong conservation of NFI
structure during evolution. This finding leads to the prediction that more
mammalian isoforms will be discovered corresponding to the chicken NFI variants
reported here.

PMID: 8182757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Exp Med. 1994 May 1;179(5):1605-11.

YB-1 DNA-binding protein represses interferon gamma activation of class II major 
histocompatibility complex genes.

Ting JP(1), Painter A, Zeleznik-Le NJ, MacDonald G, Moore TM, Brown A, Schwartz
BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill 27599-7295.

Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) is the most potent inducer of class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes. This induction is uniquely mediated by
three DNA elements in the promoter region of class II MHC genes. One of these DNA
elements, Y, contains an inverted CCAAT box. Previously, we have screened a
lambda gt11 library for Y-binding proteins and identified the YB-1 gene. Here we 
provide evidence that YB-1 can repress the IFN-gamma induction of class II MHC
promoter as well as the Invariant chain (Ii) gene which also contains a Y element
in its promoter. This was demonstrated by cotransfecting a YB-1 expression vector
with promoter-reporter gene constructs. As an alternate approach, an efficient
transient transfection system was developed which resulted in a > 70%
transfection efficiency. Transfection of YB-1 by this procedure resulted in the
near abrogation of IFN-gamma induced HLA-DR antigen and mRNA expression. These
findings show the functional suppression of class II MHC gene induction by the
YB-1 protein.

PMCID: PMC2191494
PMID: 8163940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Mar 30;199(3):1428-35.

Involvement of a DNA binding protein, MDR-NF1/YB-1, in human MDR1 gene expression
by actinomycin D.

Asakuno K(1), Kohno K, Uchiumi T, Kubo T, Sato S, Isono M, Kuwano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Oita Medical University, Japan.

The human multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene is an SOS gene that responds to
environmental stress including various anticancer agents. The chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) gene was linked to various lengths of MDR1 promoter, and 
these constructs were integrated into the genome of human cancer KB cells. Using 
these cell lines, we previously demonstrated that various environmental stimuli
lead to an increased abundance of both CAT enzymatic activity and CAT mRNA in a
sequence dependent manner. We examined the molecular mechanism of this stress
response using actinomycin D, a potent RNA synthesis inhibitor. We found that CAT
activity was significantly increased more than 10 fold by actinomycin D itself
without comparable elevation of CAT mRNA. CAT induction was, however, lost in the
presence of a deletion from position -136 to -76. Gel mobility shift assays
showed that the specific DNA binding activity of the transacting protein,
MDR-NF1/YB-1, which binds to the inverted CCAAT box, was augmented in nuclear
extracts from the cells treated with actinomycin D. We also found that
actinomycin D increased the steady state levels of MDR-NF1/YB-1 mRNA, which
encodes the inverted CCAAT box binding protein. These results indicate that
MDR-NF1/YB-1 mediates the response of the MDR1 gene to environmental stress.

PMID: 7908518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Anticancer Res. 1994 Mar-Apr;14(2A):593-6.

Multiple NF-I-site binding factors associated with different cell-types of human 
lung carcinomas.

Wong YC(1), Bernal SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Fernando Valley Program, University of California,
Los Angeles.

Nuclear extracts from human lung adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma cells were
found to form two types of DNA-protein complexes with a consensus nuclear factor 
I (NF-I)-binding site. Three NF-I-site-binding cofactors (NCF90, NCFIIO and
NCF120) were found to be differentially expressed in these two cell-types of
human lung carcinomas. These data suggest that the NF-I-binding enhancer element 
with its differentially expressed NF-I cofactors may play an important role in
the differentiation of neoplastic human bronchial epithelium.

PMID: 8017865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Feb;130(2):210-5.

Transcriptional control and cell type specificity of HPV gene expression.

Bernard HU(1), Apt D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Papillomaviruses are of great medical interest as they are causally
associated with benign and malignant neoplasia of mucosal and cutaneous
epithelia. The viral genome can be viewed as a control unit that releases signals
in form of transforming proteins in infected epithelial cells. These proteins
create a molecular environment favorable for papillomavirus biology and an
expanded cell population for multiplication of the virus. On the other side, the 
genome receives signals through cellular transcription factors.
OBSERVATIONS: Cellular transcription factors help the virus to identify the
epithelial target cell, and they provide information about mitotic and
physiologic signals to the epithelium and its differentiation state. Present
research concentrates on the question how these distinct functions are brought
about by factors that are ubiquitous rather than cell-type specific, such as
NFI/CTF, TEF-1, AP-1, oct-1, and the progesterone receptor. Papillomaviruses have
the additional capability to generate positive and negative feedback loops of
gene expression through the virally encoded E2 proteins, a necessary tool to
achieve long-term persistence.
CONCLUSIONS: An intricate interplay between cellular and viral transcription
factors is a prerequisite for epithelial specificity, physiologic responses, and 
persistence of papillomavirus infections.

PMID: 8304760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1191-203.

Stably integrated mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat DNA requires the
octamer motifs for basal promoter activity.

Buetti E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges.

In the mouse mammary tumor virus promoter, a tandem of octamer motifs, recognized
by ubiquitous and tissue-restricted Oct transcription factors, is located
upstream of the TATA box and next to a binding site for the transcription factor 
nuclear factor I (NF-I). Their function was investigated with mutant long
terminal repeats under different transfection conditions in mouse Ltk- cells and 
quantitative S1 nuclease mapping of the transcripts. In stable transfectants,
which are most representative of the state of proviral DNA with respect to both
number of integrated DNA templates and chromatin organization, a long terminal
repeat mutant of both octamer sites showed an average 50-fold reduction of the
basal transcription level, while the dexamethasone-stimulated level was
unaffected. DNase I in vitro footprinting assays with L-cell nuclear protein
extracts showed that the mutant DNA was unable to bind octamer factors but had a 
normal footprint in the NF-I site. I conclude that mouse mammary tumor virus
employs the tandem octamer motifs of the viral promoter, recognized by the
ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1, for its basal transcriptional activity and
the NF-I binding site, as previously shown, for glucocorticoid-stimulated
transcription. A deletion mutant with only one octamer site showed a marked
base-level reduction at high copy number but little reduction at low copies of
integrated plasmids. The observed transcription levels may depend both on the
relative ratio of transcription factors to DNA templates and on the relative
affinity of binding sites, as determined by oligonucleotide competition
footprinting.

PMCID: PMC358475
PMID: 8289800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Diabetes. 1994 Feb;43(2):305-12.

An upstream element from the human insulin receptor gene promoter contains
binding sites for C/EBP beta and NF-1.

Webster NJ(1), Kong Y, Cameron KE, Resnik JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0673.

We have shown previously that a 500-bp region of the human insulin receptor
promoter (-0.3 to -1.8 kb) was able to stimulate transcription from a
heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in HepG2 hepatoma cells but not in HeLa
fibroblasts. Footprint analysis localized the transcription factor binding sites 
to a 36-bp region at -1420. In this paper, we analyze the factors that recognize 
this element and show that it contains binding sites for the CAAT/enhancer
binding protein C/EBP and nuclear factor 1 (NF-1). In addition we show that both 
C/EBP alpha and the C/EBP beta can transactivate the human insulin receptor
promoter in a dose-dependent manner.

PMID: 8288055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):32-41.

Nucleosome-mediated disruption of transcription factor-chromatin initiation
complexes at the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat in vivo.

Lee HL(1), Archer TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Western Ontario, London, 
Canada.

Glucocorticoid induction of mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) is short lived,
returning to base levels within 24 h despite the continued presence of hormone.
MMTV DNA sequences assembled as chromatin require hormone for binding by nuclear 
factor 1 (NF1) and octamer proteins (OCT). However, in the same cells, NF1 and
OCT factors are bound to transiently introduced DNA in the absence of hormone. In
contrast, recruitment of the TATA-binding protein and a novel DNA-binding
protein, which we have designated FDT, for factor downstream of the TATA-binding 
protein, is hormone dependent for both stable and transient templates.
Furthermore, transient DNA templates, but not nucleosomal templates, retain these
transcription factors over the course of 24 h. This finding suggests that MMTV
chromatin structure contributes to activation and cessation of transcription in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC358353
PMID: 8264599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Virol. 1994 Jan;68(1):561-5.

Involvement of transcription factor YB-1 in human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 
I basal gene expression.

Kashanchi F(1), Duvall JF, Dittmer J, Mireskandari A, Reid RL, Gitlin SD, Brady
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Sequences which control basal human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I)
transcription likely play an important role in initiation and maintenance of
virus replication. We previously identified and analyzed a 45-nucleotide sequence
(downstream regulatory element 1 [DRE 1]), +195 to +240, at the boundary of the
R/U5 region of the long terminal repeat which is required for HTLV-I basal
transcription. We identified a protein, p37, which specifically bound to DRE 1.
An affinity column fraction, containing p37, stimulated HTLV-I transcription
approximately 12-fold in vitro. We now report the identification of a cDNA clone 
(15B-7), from a Jurkat expression library, that binds specifically to the DRE 1
regulatory sequence. Binding of the cDNA fusion protein, similarly to the results
obtained with purified Jurkat protein, was decreased by introduction of
site-specific mutations in the DRE 1 regulatory sequence. In vitro transcription 
and translation of 15B-7 cDNA produced a fusion protein which bound specifically 
to the HTLV-I +195 to +240 oligonucleotide. The partial cDNA encodes a protein
which is homologous to the C-terminal 196 amino acids of the 36-kDa transcription
factor, YB-1. Cotransfection of a YB-1 expression plasmid increases HTLV-I basal 
transcription approximately 14-fold in Jurkat T lymphocytes. On the basis of the 
molecular weight, DNA-binding characteristics, and in vivo transactivation
activity, we suggest that the previously identified DRE 1-binding protein, p37,
is YB-1.

PMCID: PMC236322
PMID: 8254772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1993 Dec;47(1-6):1-10.

Chromatin structure modulates transcription factor binding to the mouse mammary
tumor virus (MMTV) promoter.

Truss M(1), Bartsch J, Hache RS, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Marburg, Germany.

The MMTV promoter contains a complex hormone responsive region (HRR) upstream of 
a binding site for the transcription factor nuclear factor I (NFI). Hormonal
induction of MMTV expression requires the integrity of both the HRR and the NFI
binding site. However, in vitro NFI acts as a basal transcription factor on the
MMTV promoter that does not cooperate but rather competes with the hormone
receptors in terms of binding to MMTV-DNA. Fragments that contain the HRR and the
NFI binding site have been reconstituted into mononucleosomes. Steroid hormone
receptors bind efficiently to these nucleosomes, NFI does not. Therefore it has
been postulated that the chromatin structure may be responsible for the inability
of NFI to bind to the chromosomally organized inactive MMTV promoter. In vivo
DNaseI and methidium-propyl-EDTA-Fe(II) (MPE) digestion pattern indicate the
presence of a nucleosome covering the HRR and the NFI binding site. Genomic
footprinting shows that in vivo the rotational setting of the MMTV promoter DNA
in this nucleosome is identical to that previously reported for reconstituted
nucleosomes in which the major grooves of the NFI half palindromes are facing
towards the histone octamer and appear not to be accessible to NFI. These results
indicate that MMTV promoter sequences are determining nucleosome positioning in
vivo and supports the concept that rotational positioning of DNA in this
nucleosome constitutively represses the MMTV promoter.

PMID: 8274422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Virology. 1993 Aug;195(2):500-10.

A cell-type-specific transcription enhancer of type 16 human papillomavirus (HPV 
16)-P97 promoter is defined with HPV-associated cellular events in human
epithelial cell lines.

Taniguchi A(1), Kikuchi K, Nagata K, Yasumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, Yokohama, Japan.

Expression of the early genes of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) is known to
be highly restricted to epithelial cells. This report describes the molecular
basis of HPV16 epitheliotropism at the transcriptional level. A series of 5'-end 
deletion mutants of the long control region (LCR) located upstream of the HPV16
early genes were tested in a transient expression assay using various human
epithelial and fibroblastic cell lines. The specific region termed the
cell-type-dependent regulatory element (CTRE) was found to function as an
enhancer in some of HPV-associated human epithelial cell lines, but not at all in
HPV-free human epithelial cell lines. No LCR-associated enhancer activity was
detectable in fibroblastic cell lines. The CTRE was mapped at a distinct region
upstream from the previously proposed proximal keratinocyte dependent enhancer
(KD). The CTRE augmented transcription initiated from the autologous P97 promoter
as well as from a heterologous promoter in a orientation-independent manner.
Within the CTRE, there are three copies of the consensus nuclear factor-1 (NF1)
binding site. Using CTRE containing mutations in each of the NF1-sites, it was
demonstrated that all of these NF1-sites were necessary for a full enhancer
activity in the HPV-associated human epithelial cell line. This suggests that the
CTRE plays a critical role in the cell-type specific expression of HPV16-early
gene at the level of transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 8393236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Virol. 1993 Aug;67(8):4455-63.

Nuclear factor I and epithelial cell-specific transcription of human
papillomavirus type 16.

Apt D(1), Chong T, Liu Y, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Papillomavirus Biology Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Kent
Ridge.

The transcription of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) is mediated by the
viral enhancer. Epithelial cell-specific activation is achieved by the
cooperative interaction of apparently ubiquitous transcriptional factors. One of 
them, nuclear factor I (NFI), binds seven sites within the HPV-16 enhancer. Point
mutations on enhancer fragments, which retain epithelial cell specificity, verify
the functional contribution of NFI. In band shift experiments, the epithelial
cell-derived NFI proteins CTF-1, CTF-2, and CTF-3 form a characteristic pattern
of heterodimeric complexes which are observed in all epithelial cells tested.
Divergence from this pattern in fibroblasts, liver cells, and lymphoid cells
correlates with the lack of HPV-16 enhancer activation. The HPV-16 enhancer can
be activated by CTF-1 in SL-2 cells, which lack NFI-like proteins. However,
exogenous CTF-1 fails to overcome the inactivity of the viral enhancer in
fibroblasts. Western immunoblot and supershift analysis shows that exogenously
introduced CTF-1 proteins form different heterodimer complexes with the given
subset of endogenous NFI proteins in epithelial or fibroblast cells. Polymerase
chain reaction analysis and cDNA library screens identified the endogenous
fibroblast type NFI as NFI-X, an NFI family member originally cloned from hamster
liver cells. The strict correlation between the activation or lack of activation 
of the HPV-16 enhancer and cell-specific subsets of NFI proteins argues for the
pivotal role of NFI binding sites in the epithelial cell-specific function of the
viral enhancer.

PMCID: PMC237828
PMID: 8392590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Hum Genet. 1993 Jul;91(6):535-7.

Localisation of the human nuclear factor I/X (NFI/X) gene to chromosome 19p13 and
detection of five other related loci at 1p21-22, 1q42-43, 5q15, 11p13 and 20q13
by FISH.

Seisenberger C(1), Winnacker EL, Scherthan H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, MPI für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a member of a family of dimeric DNA-binding proteins
that are involved both in the initiation of adenovirus DNA replication and in the
stimulation of transcriptional activation. We have used fluorescence in situ
hybridisation (FISH) to map one of four known genes encoding an NFI protein, the 
human NFI/X gene, to chromosome 19p1.3. Secondary sites of hybridisation observed
at 5p1.5, 1q4.2-4.4, 1p2.1-2.2, and 20p1.3 most likely are attributable to
partial sequence homologies with related NFI genes.

PMID: 8340106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4186-96.

Cloning and characterization of chicken YB-1: regulation of expression in the
liver.

Grant CE(1), Deeley RG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratories, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

A cDNA expression library constructed from day 9 embryonic liver was screened
with a previously identified protein binding site in the flanking region of the
liver-specific, estrogen-dependent avian apoVLDLII gene. Two of the clones
isolated were shown to encode the chicken homolog of the Y-box binding protein,
YB-1 (dbpb), which we have designated chkYB-1. This protein was originally
identified in avian extracts by virtue of its ability to bind to two reverse
CCAAT motifs in the Rous sarcoma virus enhancer. Since its identification,
additional nucleic acid binding properties have been ascribed to its homologs, or
closely related proteins, in other species. We have determined the sequence of
chkYB-1, investigated its ability to bind to sites known to be involved in
tissue-specific expression in the liver, and examined factors influencing its
hepatic expression. These studies have demonstrated that the level of chkYB-1
mRNA in the liver decreases steadily throughout embryogenesis and for several
weeks posthatching until adult levels are attained. We present several lines of
evidence that YB-1 expression in the liver is positively associated with DNA
synthesis or cell proliferation. Its binding characteristics indicate that the
protein can interact specifically with a number of binding sites for
liver-enriched or specific factors. In addition, although it is not particularly 
asymmetric in terms of base composition, we find a marked preference in binding
to the pyrimidine-rich strand of these sites regardless of the presence or
polarity of an intact CCAAT box. The increased levels of expression of YB-1
during proliferation combined with its binding characteristics suggest that it
may be involved in the reduced expression of liver-specific genes observed at
early stages of development or during liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC359968
PMID: 8321222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jun 25;268(18):13625-31.

Regulation of the alpha 1(I) collagen promoter via a transforming growth
factor-beta activation element.

Ritzenthaler JD(1), Goldstein RH, Fine A, Smith BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical Center, Massachusetts.

A transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activating element (TAE), with a
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1)-like sequence, was previously located 1.6 kilobases
upstream from the transcription start site in the alpha 1(I) collagen promoter
(Ritzenthaler, J. D., Goldstein, R. H., Fine, A., Lichtler, A., Rowe, D. W., and 
Smith, B. D. (1991) Biochem. J. 280, 157-162). Double-stranded TAE, but not NF-1 
consensus sequences, abrogated TGF-beta stimulation of co-transfected collagen
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs. Mutations in non-NF-1
binding sites, located by methylation interference, eliminated activity of the
TAE oligonucleotide. However, TAE sequences failed to bind in vitro expressed
NF-1 protein, to compete for NF-1-binding proteins, and to bind with protein
which reacts with antibodies to NF-1 family of proteins. Within the TAE there was
an activator protein 2 (AP-2) binding site. Although AP-2 protein bound to TAE,
antibodies to AP-2 did not react with nuclear protein-TAE complexes. TAE bound to
a 34,000-Da protein on Southwestern analysis. However, the UV-cross-linked
TAE-nuclear protein complex was 82,000 Da. Finally, a dose-response study
demonstrated that TGF-beta increased TAE nuclear binding proteins at lower doses 
with a different response curve than NF-1 nuclear binding proteins. Taken
together these data demonstrated that TGF-beta functions in human lung
fibroblasts to activate collagen transcription through TAE sites by protein
complexes independent of NF-1 or AP-2 protein.

PMID: 8514794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Neurochem. 1993 Jun;60(6):2010-7.

Binding at an NFI site is modulated by cyclic AMP-dependent activation of myelin 
basic protein gene expression.

Zhang X(1), Miskimins R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia.

Using stable cell lines containing a series of deletions of the myelin basic
protein (MBP) promoter directing the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 
gene in a peripheral neurinoma cell line, we have studied the sequences in the
MBP promoter needed for induction by cyclic AMP. Stimulation of expression from
the MBP promoter by cyclic AMP is not a rapid response. Expression begins after
24 h and reaches a maximum at approximately 72 h. The results from the stable
transformants indicate at least one region that appears to be essential to the
induction of transcription directed by the MBP promoter. The region that is
necessary for induction does not contain a consensus cyclic AMP response element.
A specific binding site involved in the induction by cyclic AMP was localized to 
an NFI binding site.

PMID: 7684065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 1993 May 15;268(14):10582-7.

Template activating factor I, a novel host factor required to stimulate the
adenovirus core DNA replication.

Matsumoto K(1), Nagata K, Ui M, Hanaoka F.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Physiology Laboratory, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Saitama, Japan.

The adenovirus (Ad) genome in virion exists in the form of the Ad core, which is 
a complex of Ad DNA and viral basic proteins. The Ad core supported only
initiation and limited elongation in DNA replication in a cell-free system which 
was developed for DNA replication of naked Ad DNA. We found that addition of a
cytoplasmic fraction from uninfected HeLa cells on the top of the system
stimulated Ad core DNA replication, although it had no effect on DNA replication 
of naked Ad DNA. The factor stimulating Ad core DNA replication, designated as
template activating factor I (TAF-I), was purified by successive steps of
ammonium sulfate precipitation, column chromatographies on phosphocellulose and
Q-Sepharose, and glycerol density gradient centrifugation. SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis of the purified fraction revealed the presence of proteins with
molecular masses of 41 and 39 kDa. TAF-I stimulated both initiation and
elongation in Ad core DNA replication. Judging from its behavior in purification 
steps, TAF-I could be acidic. These findings suggest that TAF-I stimulates Ad
core DNA replication by interaction with viral basic core proteins.

PMID: 8486711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 May 14;192(3):1424-31.

Phosphorylation of NF-I in vitro by cdc2 kinase.

Kawamura H(1), Nagata K, Masamune Y, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Nuclear factor I (NF-I) was purified to near homogeneity from Ehrlich ascites
tumor cells. Mouse NF-I consisted of two peptides with relative molecular masses 
of 53 and 55 kDa and bound to the authentic NF-I site of the adenovirus DNA with 
no significant affinity with the CCAAT box. The purified protein was efficiently 
phosphorylated in a reaction containing immunoprecipitates with an anti-cdc2
kinase antibody. This phosphorylation was abolished when a synthetic peptide
containing the consensus phosphorylation site by cdc2 kinase was added in excess 
to the reaction. These findings indicate that mouse NF-I is phosphorylated in
vitro by the cdc2 protein kinase.

PMID: 8507206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 May;13(5):3093-102.

Overexpression of Myc suppresses CCAAT transcription factor/nuclear factor
1-dependent promoters in vivo.

Yang BS(1), Gilbert JD, Freytag SO.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Program, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan
48202.

Overexpression of Myc in cells can suppress the transcription of specific genes. 
Because several of these genes have common transcriptional regulatory elements,
we investigated the possibility that this effect of Myc is mediated through a
specific transcription factor. In vitro DNA-binding assays detect only one form
of CCAAT transcription factor/nuclear factor 1 (CTF/NF-1) in quiescent 3T3-L1
cells. By contrast, quiescent 3T3-L1 cells that stably overexpress either c-Myc
or N-Myc contain at least three forms of CTF/NF-1. Biochemical characterization
of the various CTF/NF-1 forms showed that they have the same native molecular
weight but differ in charge density. The more negatively charged CTF/NF-1 forms
present in Myc-overexpressing cells are converted into that found in normal cells
by treatment with acid phosphatase, suggesting that they represent a more
phosphorylated form of the CTF/NF-1 protein. The various CTF/NF-1 forms have a
similar DNA-binding affinity. Transfection experiments demonstrated that
transcription from CTF/NF-1-dependent promoters is specifically suppressed in
cells that stably overexpress c-Myc. This effect requires CTF/NF-1 binding.
CTF/NF-1-dependent promoter activity is also suppressed in 3T3-L1 cells during
active growth (relative to the quiescent state). Interestingly, actively growing 
3T3-L1 cells contain forms of CTF/NF-1 similar to those in quiescent cells that
stably overexpress c-Myc. Thus, the CTF/NF-1 forms present in cells that express 
high amounts of c-Myc correlate with a lower transcription rate of
CTF/NF-1-dependent promoters in vivo. Our results provide a basis for the
suppression of specific gene transcription by c-Myc.

PMCID: PMC359702
PMID: 8474463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Thromb Res. 1993 May 1;70(3):269-73.

Revised DNA sequence of exon 1 and 5' flanking region of the human tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor gene.

Tyson DR(1), Kuppuswamy MN, Broze GJ Jr, Bajaj SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, MO 63104.

PMID: 8327992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Gene. 1993 Feb 28;124(2):223-30.

Isolation of the CCAAT transcription factor subunit EFIA cDNA and a potentially
functional EFIA processed pseudogene from Bos taurus: insights into the evolution
of the EFIA/dbpB/YB-1 gene family.

Ozer J(1), Chalkley R, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN 37232.

The genomic copy multiplicity of the CCAAT transcription complex component
enhancer factor I subunit A (EFIA) has been examined. When a mammalian genomic
Southern blot was hybridized to a rat EFIA cDNA, a complex pattern consisting of 
numerous related sequences was found in all the species examined, with Bos taurus
being the least complex. An EFIA#1 cDNA from Bos taurus was isolated from a
primary lung endothelial cell cDNA library by screening with the 1489-bp rat EFIA
cDNA. The deduced bovine EFIA#1 amino acid (aa) sequence is 98% identical to rat 
EFIA and 100% identical to human EFIA/DbpB/YB-1 family member DNA-binding protein
B (DbpB). In addition, a processed EFIA pseudogene from Bos taurus, designated
bovine psi EFIA#1, was obtained from a genomic library by screening with a rat
EFIA cDNA probe. The bovine psi EFIA#1 gene has an ORF which, if expressed, would
encode a 140-aa sequence, with aa 31-140 having 84% identity to bovine EFIA#1.
The genomic cloning data indicate that processed pseudogenes are partially
responsible for the complexity of the EFIA genomic Southern blots. The phenomenon
of 'repeat induced point mutation' (ripping) at bovine psi EFIA#1 gene CpG
dinucleotides occurs at a 6.5-fold higher frequency than expected from random
mutagenesis. Therefore, ripping is likely to be the mechanism by which the bovine
EFIA#1 pseudogene's ectopic recombination potential was inactivated.

PMID: 8444345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1993 Jan-Feb;27(1):81-91.

[In vivo identification of YB-1 protein, interacting with the enhancer of human
papillomavirus (HPV) type 18, using antibodies to a synthetic peptide].

[Article in Russian]

Spitkovskii DD, Roier GD, Mazurenko NN, Mikhaleva II, Prudchenko IA, Korbukh IA, 
Sukhova NM, Kiselev FL.

Enhancer sequences of human papilloma virus (HPV) type 18 were used for screening
of HeLa cells cDNA library in lambda gt11 using the protein binding method.
Clones with YB I gene homology sequences were isolated. This gene is coding the
protein which binds the regulatory region of Y gene of main histocompatibility
complex (HLA 11). The YB I transcripts were revealed in all tested samples of
cervical carcinomas. To analyze the protein the rabbit antibodies were produced
to synthetic peptide, which corresponds to the most hydrophilic region of the
protein. This antipeptide serum allowed to identify the nuclear 42K protein in
HeLa cells as well as in normal fibroblasts.

PMID: 8387154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Virol. 1993 Jan;67(1):572-6.

Human JC virus perfect palindromic nuclear factor 1-binding sequences important
for glial cell-specific expression in differentiating embryonal carcinoma cells.

Kumar KU(1), Pater A, Pater MM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, Canada.

The brain cell specificity of the human papovavirus JC virus was examined by
site-directed mutagenesis of the nuclear factor 1 (NF1) motifs within the viral
regulatory region. The NF1 motif sites, located within the 98-bp tandem repeats
that contain 6-bp perfect inverted palindromic sequences, were important for
glial cell-specific expression of JC virus in differentiated embryonal carcinoma 
cells in vivo. The NF1 site on the late side of the repeats was not important, a 
fact confirmed by in vitro transcription studies. These observations were
correlated with in vitro DNase I footprinting and mobility shift assays, which
demonstrated specific interactions of factors in glial cell nuclear extracts with
NF1 sites.

PMCID: PMC237397
PMID: 8380093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochimie. 1993;75(6):497-500.

Does histone H1 bind specifically to the nuclear factor I recognition sequence?

Yaneva JN(1), Zlatanova JS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia.

The issue of whether histone H1 possesses specificity of binding to certain
nucleotide sequences in DNA is of fundamental importance to the suggested role of
the linker histone in the regulation of gene transcription. The purpose of the
present study was to reinvestigate the specificity of binding of histone H1 to
the putative nuclear factor I (NFI) recognition sequence suggested by a previous 
report in the literature. The interaction of purified mouse liver histone H1 with
a synthetic oligonucleotide representing the natural NFI binding site from the
adenovirus 2 origin of replication cloned in pBR322 has been studied by filter
binding and a solid-phase procedure performed on nitrocellulose
filter-immobilized protein dots. No indication of specific interactions of the
lysine-rich histone H1 with the NFI recognition sequence was obtained.

PMID: 8364100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1993;39(8):727-37.

Multiple CCAAT binding proteins regulate the expression of the angiotensinogen
gene.

Zhao YY(1), Qasba P, Siddiqui MA, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
11203-2098.

Angiotensinogen is a serum glycoprotein which is primarily synthesized in the
liver and converted into the octapeptide hormone angiotensin-II in circulation.
Transient transfection studies have identified a cis-acting DNA element located
between 115 and 145 bp upstream from the transcriptional initiation site in the
promoter of the rat angiotensinogen gene which is involved in the regulation of
its transcription. This region of the promoter has sequence homology with
NF-1/CCAT, C/EBP, and CP1 binding sites. We show here by DNase-I footprint and
gel shift assay in presence of recombinant transcription factors and their
antibodies that NF-1/CAAT and C/EBP like transcription factors bind to this
region of the promoter. Our DNase footprint assay with recombinant NF-1/CAAT has 
also identified another NF-1 binding site between -180 and -190. Since our
previous studies have identified a NF-1 site in the proximal promoter region and 
two C/EBP binding sites in the distal promoter region of the angiotensinogen
gene, our data suggests that multiple CAAT binding factors regulate the
expression of the angiotensinogen gene in liver cells. In accordance with these
results, we show that cotransfection of mammalian expression vectors containing
NF-1/CAAT or C/EBP coding sequence increases the promoter activity of the
angiotensinogen gene in human hepatoma cells.

PMID: 7951412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Nov;12(11):5228-37.

Purified cofactors and histone H1 mediate transcriptional regulation by CTF/NF-I.

Dusserre Y(1), Mermod N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

The initiation of RNA polymerase II transcription is controlled by DNA
sequence-specific activator proteins, in combination with cofactor polypeptides
whose function is poorly understood. Transcriptional cofactors of the CTF-1
activator were purified on the basis of their affinity for the regulatory
protein. These purified cofactors were found to be required for CTF-1-regulated
transcription, and they counteracted squelching by an excess of activator in in
vitro reconstitution experiments. Interestingly, the cofactors possessed an
inhibitory activity for basal transcription, which was relieved by the further
addition of the activator. Histone H1 also contributes to the regulation of
transcription by CTF-1, whereby the activator prevents repression of the basal
transcription machinery by the histone. However, histone H1 could not replace the
cofactors for CTF-1-regulated transcription, indicating that they possess
distinct transcriptional properties. Furthermore, the purified cofactors were
found to be required, together with the activator, in order to antagonize the
histone-mediated repression of transcription. These results suggest that CTF-1
and its cofactors function by regulating the assembly of the basal transcription 
machinery onto the promoter when the latter is in competition with DNA-binding
inhibitory proteins such as histone H1.

PMCID: PMC360456
PMID: 1406693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Nov;12(11):4906-18.

A mammary cell-specific enhancer in mouse mammary tumor virus DNA is composed of 
multiple regulatory elements including binding sites for CTF/NFI and a novel
transcription factor, mammary cell-activating factor.

Mink S(1), Härtig E, Jennewein P, Doppler W, Cato AC.

Author information: 
(1)Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut für Genetik und Toxikologie,
Germany.

Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) is a milk-transmitted retrovirus involved in the
neoplastic transformation of mouse mammary gland cells. The expression of this
virus is regulated by mammary cell type-specific factors, steroid hormones, and
polypeptide growth factors. Sequences for mammary cell-specific expression are
located in an enhancer element in the extreme 5' end of the long terminal repeat 
region of this virus. This enhancer, when cloned in front of the herpes simplex
thymidine kinase promoter, endows the promoter with mammary cell-specific
response. Using functional and DNA-protein-binding studies with constructs
mutated in the MMTV long terminal repeat enhancer, we have identified two main
regulatory elements necessary for the mammary cell-specific response. These
elements consist of binding sites for a transcription factor in the family of
CTF/NFI proteins and the transcription factor mammary cell-activating factor
(MAF) that recognizes the sequence G Pu Pu G C/G A A G G/T. Combinations of
CTF/NFI- and MAF-binding sites or multiple copies of either one of these binding 
sites but not solitary binding sites mediate mammary cell-specific expression.
The functional activities of these two regulatory elements are enhanced by
another factor that binds to the core sequence ACAAAG. Interdigitated binding
sites for CTF/NFI, MAF, and/or the ACAAAG factor are also found in the 5'
upstream regions of genes encoding whey milk proteins from different species.
These findings suggest that mammary cell-specific regulation is achieved by a
concerted action of factors binding to multiple regulatory sites.

PMCID: PMC360423
PMID: 1328867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Virol. 1992 Oct;66(10):5788-96.

Mutations in two cysteine-histidine-rich clusters in adenovirus type 2 DNA
polymerase affect DNA binding.

Joung I(1), Engler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Alabama,
Birmingham 35294-0005.

Several point and linker insertion mutations in two Cys-His-rich regions of
adenovirus (Ad) DNA polymerase (Pol) gene have been expressed in recombinant
vaccinia virus. The resulting mutant enzymes were analyzed in vitro for their
effects on DNA synthesis activity, on Ad-specific initiation assays, on gel
shifts of Ad origin sequences, and on interactions with adenovirus preterminal
protein (pTP) and nuclear factor I (NFI). In general, mutants in downstream
Cys-His sequences had a pronounced effect in these assays. Mutants in the
upstream Cys-His region had a moderate effect on DNA synthesis and elongation but
failed to make dCMP-pTP initiation complexes and failed to make specific shifted 
complexes in a gel retardation assay. These mutants could still bind to pTP and
NFI in a coimmunoprecipitation experiment, suggesting that this upstream Cys-His 
region of Ad Pol is involved either in specific Ad DNA origin binding or in
nonspecific DNA binding. Changing residues within Cys doublets in the downstream 
Cys-His region had pronounced effects on many Ad Pol functions such as DNA
synthesis, DNA binding, and in vitro initiation; however, these mutants showed
little reduction in binding to pTP and NFI; mutants at other cysteines or
histidines within this region of Ad Pol did not appear to have an effect on
enzyme function. This observation suggests that the downstream Cys-His region of 
Ad Pol is important for DNA binding and might fold into a Zn finger motif.

PMCID: PMC241454
PMID: 1527843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1992 Oct;43(5):365-78.

Interplay of steroid hormone receptors and transcription factors on the mouse
mammary tumor virus promoter.

Truss M(1), Chalepakis G, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Marburg, Germany.

The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter, that responds to glucocorticoids
and progestins, contains a complex hormone response element (HRE) in the long
terminal repeat (LTR) region covered by a phased nucleosome. Hormone treatment
leads to alterations in chromatin structure that make the HRE region more
accessible to digestion by DNase I and permit binding of transcription factors,
including nuclear factor I (NFI), immediately downstream of the HRE. NFI acts as 
a basal transcription factor on the MMTV promoter in vitro but competes with the 
hormone receptors in terms of binding to free DNA. In uninduced chromatin, the
precise positioning of the DNA double helix on the surface of the histone octamer
precludes binding of NFI to its cognate sequence while still allowing recognition
of the HRE by the hormone receptors. We postulate that receptor binding to the
nucleosomally organized MMTV promoter disrupts the chromatin structure enabling
NFI binding and subsequent formation of a stable transcription complex. Whether
the receptor remains bound to DNA during induction or is displaced by NFI is not 
conclusively known, but our evidence supports a "hit and run" mechanism. NFI is
not the only factor involved in hormonally induced transcription of the MMTV
promoter. Two degenerated octamer motifs located immediately upstream of the TATA
box are recognized by the ubiquitous transcription factor OTF-1 (Oct-1, NFIII),
and are also important. In vitro, mutations in these motifs do not influence
basal transcription, but completely abolish the stimulatory effect of purified
progesterone receptor. Progesterone receptor bound to the HRE facilitates binding
of OTF-1 to the two octamer motifs. Thus, OTF-1 is a natural mediator of
progesterone induction of the MMTV promoter and acts through cooperation with the
hormone receptor for binding to DNA.

PMID: 1327070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jul 15;267(20):14204-11.

Adjacent nuclear factor-1 and activator protein binding sites in the enhancer of 
the neurotropic JC virus. A common characteristic of many brain-specific genes.

Amemiya K(1), Traub R, Durham L, Major EO.

Author information: 
(1)Igen, Inc., Rockville, Maryland 20852.

JC virus is a neurotropic virus that causes the demyelinating disease progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy in humans. In order to understand the neurotropic 
nature of this virus, we examined the binding of nuclear proteins to the viral
regulatory region. A close association of nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) and Jun protein
binding sites was found. These binding sites were either adjacent or overlapped
each other. Depending on the order of binding, there was some interference of
binding of the NF-1 protein by Jun even at a non-Jun binding site. This suggests 
that there may be a direct interaction between these proteins. Examination of the
regulatory region of a number of genes expressed in the central and peripheral
nervous systems revealed that many of these genes apparently have adjacent NF-1
and activator protein binding sites immediately upstream from the mRNA start
site. Since it had been demonstrated that nuclear proteins from brain and
non-brain cells could interact with these sites, it is probable that the NF-1-
and Jun-related proteins which interact at these sites are involved in the basal 
activity of these genes. It appears that adjacent binding sites for NF-1 and Jun 
immediately upstream from the mRNA start site may be a characteristic of many
genes expressed in the nervous system.

PMID: 1321139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. DNA Cell Biol. 1992 Jul-Aug;11(6):443-52.

NF-I/Sp1 switch elements regulate collagen alpha 1(I) gene expression.

Nehls MC(1), Grapilon ML, Brenner DA.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego.

The expression of type I collagen is regulated developmentally and tissue
specifically. Two sets of binding sites for nuclear factor I (NF-I) and Sp1
transcription factors arrayed as an imperfect tandem repeat are critical for high
activity of the murine alpha 1(I) collagen gene in NIH-3T3 fibroblasts and are
conserved in evolution. Gel retardation analysis combined with methylation
interference studies show that NF-I and Sp1 bind to overlapping sites in a
mutually exclusive manner. Cotransfection studies using Drosophila Schneider L2
cells, which lack both transcription factors, demonstrate that each factor alone 
trans-activates the gene, while cotransfection of both factors results in the
inhibition of the strong Sp1 trans-activation. In contrast, the herpes simplex
virus thymidine kinase promoter, which contains functionally independent NF-I and
Sp1 binding sites, is maximally transactivated by the cotransfection of both
factors. Because the two NF-I/Sp1 binding sites overlap, the ratio of the
activities of the two factors rather than their absolute concentrations determine
alpha 1(I) gene expression, characterizing these promoter sequences as
transcription factor switch elements.

PMID: 1524678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jun 25;267(18):12986-90.

Four conserved cysteine residues are required for the DNA binding activity of
nuclear factor I.

Novak A(1), Goyal N, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1993 Dec 5;268(34):26032.

The role of Cys residues in the site-specific DNA binding activity of the nuclear
factor I (NFI) family of proteins was assessed by chemical modification and
site-specific mutagenesis. Treatment with the thio-specific reagent
N-ethylmaleimide abolished site-specific DNA binding of all forms of NFI present 
in HeLa nuclear extracts. Preincubation of cell extracts with an oligonucleotide 
containing an NFI-binding site provided partial protection of NFI from
N-ethylmaleimide inactivation. Mutations were made in the cDNA encoding a
truncated form of the NFI-C/CAAT box transcription factor-1 protein, converting
each of the five Cys residues in the DNA-binding domain of the protein into Ser
residues. NFI-C proteins containing mutations in any of four conserved Cys
residues, expressed in Escherichia coli or in vitro, did not bind to DNA. NFI-C
with a mutation in a nonconserved Cys residue had normal DNA binding activity.
Both this active mutant and wild-type NFI-C protein were inactivated by
modification of their sulfhydryl residues with 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic
acid) (DTNB), and preincubation with an oligonucleotide containing an NFI-binding
site gave partial protection against inactivation. After modification with DTNB, 
DNA binding activity was partially restored by subsequent incubation with
dithiothreitol, indicating that inactivation of NFI by DTNB was reversible. These
studies indicate an essential role for free sulfhydryl residues in NFI-DNA
binding.

PMID: 1618796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 May 25;20(10):2533-40.

Two upstream elements activate transcription of a major histocompatibility
complex class I gene in vitro.

Driggers PH(1), Elenbaas BA, An JB, Lee IJ, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I genes exhibits
unique tissue and developmental specificity. In an effort to study molecular
mechanisms of MHC class I gene regulation, an in vitro transcription system has
been established. In B cell nuclear extracts a template DNA containing the mouse 
H-2Ld promoter sequence accurately directed RNA polymerase II-dependent
transcription of a G-free cassette. A conserved class I regulatory complex
previously shown to moderately enhance promoter activity in vivo enhanced
transcription in vitro by 2-3 fold. Much of this enhancement was accounted for by
a 40 bp fragment within the complex, which was capable of activating a basal
H-2Ld promoter in either orientation. Farther downstream, another element called 
site B was identified, which independently activated MHC class I transcription in
vitro by 2-4 fold. Site B bound a specific nuclear factor(s) through an NF-1
binding site but not through a neighboring CCAAT site. The functional
significance of site B in vivo was demonstrated in transfection experiments in
which site B enhanced MHC class I promoter activity to a degree comparable to
that seen in vitro. With the identification of the two upstream activators, MHC
class I genes may serve as a model to study roles of sequence-specific
DNA-binding proteins in transcription in vitro.

PMCID: PMC312389
PMID: 1598211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Virol. 1992 May;66(5):3140-50.

Nuclear factor I is specifically targeted to discrete subnuclear sites in
adenovirus type 2-infected cells.

Bosher J(1), Dawson A, Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of St. Andrews, Fife, 
Scotland.

During the S phase of the eukaryotic cell cycle and in virus-infected cells, DNA 
replication takes place at discrete sites in the nucleus, although it is not
clear how the proteins involved in the replicative process are directed to these 
sites. Nuclear factor I is a cellular, sequence-specific DNA-binding protein
utilized by adenovirus type 2 to facilitate the assembly of a nucleoprotein
complex at the viral origin of DNA replication. Immunofluorescence experiments
reveal that in uninfected cells, nuclear factor I is distributed evenly
throughout the nucleus. However, after a cell is infected with adenovirus type 2,
the distribution of nuclear factor I is dramatically altered, being colocalized
with the viral DNA-binding protein in a limited number of subnuclear sites which 
bromodeoxyuridine pulse-labeling experiments have identified as sites of viral
DNA replication. Experiments with adenovirus type 4, which does not require
nuclear factor I for viral DNA replication, indicate that although the adenovirus
type 4 DNA-binding protein is localized to discrete nuclear sites, this does not 
result in the redistribution of nuclear factor I. Localization of nuclear factor 
I to discrete subnuclear sites is therefore likely to represent a specific
targeting event that reflects the requirement for nuclear factor I in adenovirus 
type 2 DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC241077
PMID: 1560540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 25;267(12):8478-84.

Nuclear factor I (NF I) binds to an NF I-type site but not to the CCAAT site in
the human alpha-globin gene promoter.

Zorbas H(1), Rein T, Krause A, Hoffmann K, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Federal
Republic of Germany.

Methylation interference and missing contact analyses demonstrate that nuclear
factor I (NF I) recognizes an NF I-like site (5'-GGG(N)6GCCAG-3') within the
alpha-globin promoter rather than the adjacent CCAAT box. Consistent with this,
mutations within the CCAAT box do not alter significantly the affinity and
specificity of the interaction whereas elimination of the 5'-GGG-3' half-site of 
the recognition sequence reduces the DNA binding strength of NF I by 2 orders of 
magnitude down to the range of unspecific interaction. On the other hand, the
mutated alpha-globin promoter sequence that is no longer bound by NF I, although 
it retains an intact CCAAT box, interacts specifically with a protein component
from nuclear extracts of HeLa cells. From these results we conclude that NF I is 
not the factor that interacts with the CCAAT box and that the second half of the 
canonical 5'-TGG(N)6GCCAA-3' NF I binding site cannot be regarded as identical
with the CCAAT promoter element, as suggested previously.

PMID: 1569098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Apr;12(4):1846-55.

Transforming growth factor beta 1-responsive element: closely associated binding 
sites for USF and CCAAT-binding transcription factor-nuclear factor I in the type
1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene.

Riccio A(1), Pedone PV, Lund LR, Olesen T, Olsen HS, Andreasen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, University of Naples, Italy.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) is the name of a group of closely
related polypeptides characterized by a multiplicity of effects, including
regulation of extracellular proteolysis and turnover of the extracellular matrix.
Its cellular mechanism of action is largely unknown. TGF-beta 1 is a strong and
fast inducer of type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene transcription. We
have identified a TGF-beta 1-responsive element in the 5'-flanking region of the 
human type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor gene and shown that it is functional
both in its natural context and when fused to a heterologous nonresponsive
promoter. Footprinting and gel retardation experiments showed that two different 
nuclear factors, present in extracts from both TGF-beta 1-treated and nontreated 
cells, bind to adjacent sequences contained in the responsive unit. A palindromic
sequence binds a trans-acting factor(s) of the CCAAT-binding transcription
factor-nuclear factor I family. A partially overlapping dyad symmetry interacts
with a second protein that much evidence indicates to be USF. USF is a
transactivator belonging to the basic helix-loop-helix family of transcription
factors. Mutations which abolish the binding of either CCAAT-binding
transcription factor-nuclear factor I or USF result in reduction of
transcriptional activation upon exposure to TGF-beta 1, thus showing that both
elements of the unit are necessary for the TGF-beta 1 response. We discuss the
possible relationship of these findings to the complexity of the TGF-beta action.

PMCID: PMC369628
PMID: 1549130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Science. 1992 Mar 20;255(5051):1573-6.

Transcription factor loading on the MMTV promoter: a bimodal mechanism for
promoter activation.

Archer TK(1), Lefebvre P, Wolford RG, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Action and Oncogenesis Section, Laboratory of Molecular Virology,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Erratum in
    Science 1992 Apr 10;256(5054):161.

The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter attains a phased array of six
nucleosomes when introduced into rodent cells. This architecture excludes nuclear
factor 1/CCAAT transcription factor (NF1/CTF) from the promoter before
glucocorticoid treatment and hormone-dependent access of nucleolytic agents to
promoter DNA. In contrast, when the promoter was transiently introduced into
cells, NF1/CTF was bound constitutively and nucleolytic attack was
hormone-independent. Thus, induction at this promoter was a bimodal process
involving receptor-dependent remodeling of chromatin that allows NF1/CTF loading 
and direct receptor-mediated recruitment of additional transcription factors.

PMID: 1347958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Int J Biochem. 1992 Mar;24(3):455-64.

Interaction of a nuclear factor 1-like protein with a cAMP response
element-binding protein in rat liver.

Lu GH(1), Schlichter D, Wicks WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Tennessee, Knoxville 37996-0840.

1. The existence of both cAMP-responsive element binding factor and a nuclear
factor 1-like (NF-1-like) protein in nuclear extracts from liver of cAMP-treated 
rat has been revealed. 2. Binding of these proteins to a DNA fragment containing 
both elements was cooperative, and 50% binding was achieved with considerably
less protein than with a fragment bearing either element alone. 3. Cleavage of
the fragment between the two elements abolished the apparent cooperative
interaction. 4. Southwestern blot analysis showed that the NF-1-like protein has 
a molecular weight in the 28-30-kDa range. 5. The NF-1-like binding activity was 
very stable.

PMID: 1312956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Feb 25;20(4):797-803.

Tissue restricted expression and chromosomal localization of the YB-1 gene
encoding a 42 kD nuclear CCAAT binding protein.

Spitkovsky DD(1), Royer-Pokora B, Delius H, Kisseljov F, Jenkins NA, Gilbert DJ, 
Copeland NG, Royer HD.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, FRG.

YB-1 cDNA clones were isolated by binding site screening of a Hela expression
library using a human papillomavirus type 18 enhancer oligonucleotide. YB-1
belongs to a family of transcription factors which bind to recognition sequences 
containing a core CCAAT element. YB-1 bound to its single stranded recognition
sequence on the sense strand but not to the anti-sense strand. A synthetic
peptide antiserum derived from the predicted YB-1 amino acid sequence identified 
a 42 kD nuclear protein in immunoblots. A protein with the same size was detected
by binding site blotting experiments using the HPV18 enhancer oligonucleotide
which bound YB-1. YB-1 gene expression was restricted in tissues from a human 24 
week old fetus. High levels of YB-1 mRNA were present in heart, muscle, liver,
lung, adrenal gland and the brain, in contrast, low amounts of YB-1 mRNA were
found in thymus, kidney, bone marrow and spleen. In pancreas, bladder, stomach
and testis YB-1 mRNA could not be detected by Northern hybridization. Finally, we
have identified four YB-1 related loci in the mouse genome and have mapped these 
loci to four different mouse chromosomes by interspecific backcross analysis.

PMCID: PMC312020
PMID: 1542575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Feb 11;20(3):601-6.

Unusual DNA binding characteristics of an in vitro translation product of the
CCAAT binding protein mYB-1.

Gai XX(1), Lipson KE, Prystowsky MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104.

We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the murine CCAAT-binding protein mYB-1. The 
deduced amino acid sequence shows 95% identity with its presumed human homologue 
(hYB-1A) which was originally isolated as a protein that binds to the Y box of
MHC class II genes. In vitro translated mYB-1 binds to CCAAT boxes of the MHCIIE 
alpha, HSVTK and mouse PCNA promoters but not to alpha-globin or human thymidine 
kinase CCAAT boxes. Interestingly, complexes formed between the in vitro
translated protein and the various CCAAT boxes display the property of being
competed more efficiently with self competitor DNA, regardless of the CCAAT box
initially used as a probe. A similar phenomenon was observed in a cell extract of
Con-A stimulated murine splenocytes when the same competition assays were
performed. These results may reflect the generation of multiple forms of a
particular CCAAT-binding protein, such as mYB-1, that display distinct, yet
overlapping, DNA binding specificities.

PMCID: PMC310429
PMID: 1741293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. EMBO J. 1992 Feb;11(2):751-60.

Nuclear factor I enhances adenovirus DNA replication by increasing the stability 
of a preinitiation complex.

Mul YM(1), Van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) or its isolated DNA-binding domain (NFI-BD) enhances
initiation of adenovirus DNA replication up to 50-fold at low concentrations of
the precursor terminal protein-DNA polymerase (pTP-pol) complex. Both in solution
and when bound to DNA, NFI-BD can form a complex with pTP-pol. To investigate the
mechanism of enhancement by NFI, we determined the stability of a functional
preinitiation complex formed in vitro between pTP-pol and the origin. Challenge
experiments with a distinguishable template containing an identical origin
revealed that in the absence of NFI, this preinitiation complex was very
sensitive to competition for pTP-pol. Addition of NFI-BD increased the half-life 
of the complex at least 10-fold and led to the formation of a template-committed 
preinitiation complex. In agreement with this, binding of pTP-pol to origin DNA
in band-shift assays was enhanced by NFI. By DNase I footprinting we show that
the specificity of binding as well as induction of structural changes in origin
DNA by pTP-pol are increased by NFI. These results indicate that NFI, by binding 
and positioning pTP-pol, stabilizes the complex between pTP-pol and the core
origin, and thus enhances initiation of DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC556508
PMID: 1537346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6641.

Identification of a fourth nuclear factor I gene in chicken by cDNA cloning:
NFI-X.

Kruse U(1), Qian F, Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Freiburg, FRG.

PMCID: PMC329238
PMID: 1754401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6627-31.

Identification of a protein that interacts with the nuclear factor-1 (NF-1)
binding site in cells that do not express NF-1: comparison to NF-1, cellular
distribution, and effect on transcription.

McQuillan JJ(1), Rosen GD, Birkenmeier TM, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Cell Biology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110.

We examined expression of nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) in different cell lines.
Expression was low or undetectable in T and B lymphocyte cell lines, whereas
fibroblasts and other adherent cell lines generally had a relatively high level
of NF-1 mRNA. In cell lines that did not express NF-1, gel retardation assays,
nevertheless, indicated complexes between a protein or proteins and the NF-1
site. These complexes were less abundant than those formed with NF-1, they
migrated more slowly, and they appeared as single species instead of the multiple
species observed with NF-1. NF-1 site-binding proteins were compared in the
fibrosarcoma cell line HT-1080 (expressed the highest level of NF-1 in our study)
and the B cell line Raji (does not express NF-1). UV-crosslinking studies
indicated that the NF-1 site-binding proteins in both cell lines were similar in 
size. Proteolytic clipping band shift assays suggested that the Raji protein and 
NF-1 share structural similarity in their DNA binding domains, but are distinct
proteins. The NF-1 site mediated transcriptional stimulation in cell lines where 
NF-1 is expressed; however, this element did not affect transcription in cell
lines that do not express NF-1, suggesting that the NF-1 site-binding protein in 
these cells is functionally distinct from NF-1.

PMCID: PMC329233
PMID: 1754398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):23048-52.

Identification of regulatory sequences in the type 1 plasminogen activator
inhibitor gene responsive to transforming growth factor beta.

Keeton MR(1), Curriden SA, van Zonneveld AJ, Loskutoff DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Vascular Biology, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La Jolla,
California 92037.

Regulation of the human type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) promoter
by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF beta) was studied. An 800-base pair
fragment from the PAI-1 promoter and 5'-flanking region was fused to the firefly 
luciferase reporter gene and transfected into Hep3B human hepatoma cells.
Treatment of the cells with TGF beta induced luciferase activity by more than
50-fold. Transfection studies using constructs with 5' or 3' deletions through
this region revealed that two sequences were important in the TGF beta response. 
The first sequence was located in the proximal promoter (-49 to -87) and mediated
an 11-fold induction with TGF beta, while the second more distal region (-636 to 
-740) contained two sequences which together mediated a 50-fold or greater
response. Sequence comparison indicated that both of the responsive regions
contained sequences with high homology to the AP-1 consensus binding site.
Moreover, gel retardation analysis experiments demonstrated that both sequences
bound a common nuclear protein, and that an oligonucleotide containing a
consensus AP-1 sequence was able to compete for the binding of this common
protein. Thus, the response of the PAI-1 gene to TGF beta is mediated by at least
two separate regions, and both of these regions contain DNA sequences homologous 
to the AP-1 binding site.

PMID: 1744101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Gen Virol. 1991 Dec;72 ( Pt 12):2975-80.

The DNA-binding domain of nuclear factor I is sufficient to cooperate with the
adenovirus type 2 DNA-binding protein in viral DNA replication.

Bosher J(1), Leith IR, Temperley SM, Wells M, Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of St Andrews, Fife,
U.K.

Recombinant baculoviruses have been constructed which express the full-length
nuclear factor I (NFI) protein or a derivative of NFI that contains only the
DNA-binding domain of the protein in infected insect cells. Both proteins were
purified from insect cells infected with the respective baculoviruses and tested 
for their ability to cooperate with the adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) DNA-binding
protein during virus replication. DNase I protection experiments demonstrated
that the viral DNA-binding protein increased the affinity of both the full-length
NFI and the DNA-binding domain of NFI for their recognition site in the Ad2
origin of DNA replication. As a consequence, the NFI-dependent increase in the
efficiency of DNA replication observed upon addition of viral DNA-binding protein
was the same when the full-length or DNA-binding domain derivative of NFI was
added. Thus it appears that all of the activities associated with the ability of 
NFI to stimulate Ad2 DNA replication are located within the DNA-binding domain of
the protein.

PMID: 1765770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Sep 25;19(18):4915-20.

DNA binding properties of YB-1 and dbpA: binding to double-stranded,
single-stranded, and abasic site containing DNAs.

Hasegawa SL(1), Doetsch PW, Hamilton KK, Martin AM, Okenquist SA, Lenz J, Boss
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

A number of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins have been isolated by screening phage
expression libraries with DNA probes containing the binding site of the
DNA-binding protein. This methodology was employed here to isolate clones of the 
factor that interacts with the W box element of the human major
histocompatibility complex HLA-DQB gene. Surprisingly, several cDNA clones of
YB-1, a cDNA clone that was previously isolated with a CCAAT element-containing
sequence were found. Independently, the screening of phage expression libraries
with depurinated DNA resulted in the isolation of YB-1 and dbpA, a previously
isolated cDNA that has homology to YB-1. Additional characterization of YB-1
showed that it bound a wide variety of DNA sequences and suggested that the
binding of this protein is promiscuous. Furthermore, we show that both YB-1 and
dbpA bind to depurinated DNA better than undamaged DNA and that the extent of
specificity of binding is influenced by Mg2+. Due to the lack of sequence
specificity and high degree of binding to depurinated DNA, we suggest that these 
proteins might be involved in chromosome functions such as maintenance of
chromatin structure or DNA repair that do not require sequence-specific binding.

PMCID: PMC328789
PMID: 1923758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Aug;11(8):4065-73.

Transcription factors nuclear factor I and Sp1 interact with the murine collagen 
alpha 1 (I) promoter.

Nehls MC(1), Rippe RA, Veloz L, Brenner DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego.

The collagen alpha 1(I) promoter, which is efficiently transcribed in NIH 3T3
fibroblasts, contains four binding sites for trans-acting factors, as
demonstrated by DNase I protection assays (D. A. Brenner, R. A. Rippe, and L.
Veloz, Nucleic Acids Res. 17:6055-6064, 1989). This study characterizes the
DNA-binding proteins that interact with the two proximal footprinted regions,
both of which contain a reverse CCAAT box and a G + C-rich 12-bp direct repeat.
Analysis by DNase I protection assays, mobility shift assays, competition with
specific oligonucleotides, binding with recombinant proteins, and reactions with 
specific antisera showed that the transcriptional factors nuclear factor I (NF-I)
and Sp1 bind to these two footprinted regions. Because of overlapping binding
sites, NF-I binding and Sp1 binding appear to be mutually exclusive.
Overexpression of NF-I in cotransfection experiments with the alpha 1(I) promoter
in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts increased alpha 1(I) expression, while Sp1 overexpression 
reduced this effect, as well as basal promoter activity. The herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase promoter, which contains independent NF-I- and Sp1-binding
sites, was stimulated by both factors. Therefore, expression of the collagen
alpha 1(I) gene may depend on the relative activities of NF-I and Sp1.

PMCID: PMC361214
PMID: 2072909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Gen Virol. 1991 Aug;72 ( Pt 8):1935-42.

Proteins of the nuclear factor-1 family act as an activator of the late promoter 
in human polyomavirus BK in vitro.

Chakraborty T(1), Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center,
Tyler 75710.

The cis-acting elements for the early and late promoters, as well as the enhancer
in the prototype strains of human polyomavirus BK (BKV) are located within a 500 
bp intergenic region. We previously studied the specificity of protein binding in
this region in vitro and showed that the interaction of proteins of the nuclear
factor-1 (NF-1) family is crucial for early promoter activity. We have now
extended our study to the BKV late promoter. We show that the late promoter
activity in HeLa cell extracts is poor compared to the activity of the early
promoter. Using a high template to protein ratio, multiple start sites were
detected by primer extension analysis. DNase I protection experiments revealed
the presence of three NF-1 binding sites in the late side, in addition to those
identified previously in the 68 bp repeats and C element. Competition
transcription assays using binding sites for NF-1, AP-1, Sp-1 and a complete 68
bp repeat indicated that only the 68 bp repeat and the NF-1 binding site competed
significantly with the late promoter activity. A point mutation in the NF-1
binding site, which destroys the ability of the oligonucleotide to bind NF-1,
also impaired its capacity to compete with the late promoter. The ability of NF-1
to activate both the early and late promoters suggests that the proteins of this 
family act as a bidirectional transcriptional activator in this virus.

PMID: 1651986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO J. 1991 Jul;10(7):1793-802.

A tobacco bZip transcription activator (TAF-1) binds to a G-box-like motif
conserved in plant genes.

Oeda K(1), Salinas J, Chua NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York
10021-6399.

Tobacco nuclear extract contains a factor that binds specifically to the motif I 
sequence (5'-GTACGTGGCG-3') conserved among rice rab genes and cotton lea genes. 
We isolated from a tobacco cDNA expression library, a partial cDNA clone encoding
a truncated derivative of a protein designated as TAF-1. The truncated TAF-1 (Mr 
= 26,000) contains an acidic region at its N-terminus and a bZip motif at its
C-terminus. Using a panel of motif I mutants as probes, we showed that the
truncated TAF-1 and the tobacco nuclear factor for motif I have similar, it not
identical, binding specificities. In particular, both show high-affinity binding 
to the perfect palindrome 5'-GCCACGTGGC-3' which is also known as the G-box
motif. TAF-1 mRNA is highly expressed in root, but the level is at least 10 times
lower in stem and leaf. Consistent with this observation, we found that a motif I
tetramer, when fused to the -90 derivative of the CaMV 35S promoter, is inactive 
in leaf of transgenic tobacco. The activity, however, can be elevated by
transient expression of the truncated TAF-1. We conclude from these results that 
TAF-1 can bind to the G-box and related motifs and that it functions as a
transcription activator.

PMCID: PMC452853
PMID: 2050116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;11(6):2937-45.

Synergistic transcriptional activation by CTF/NF-I and the estrogen receptor
involves stabilized interactions with a limiting target factor.

Martinez E(1), Dusserre Y, Wahli W, Mermod N.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Bâtiment de Biologie, Université de Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Transcription initiation at eukaryotic protein-coding gene promoters is regulated
by a complex interplay of site-specific DNA-binding proteins acting
synergistically or antagonistically. Here, we have analyzed the mechanisms of
synergistic transcriptional activation between members of the CCAAT-binding
transcription factor/nuclear factor I (CTF/NF-I) family and the estrogen
receptor. By using cotransfection experiments with HeLa cells, we show that the
proline-rich transcriptional activation domain of CTF-1, when fused to the GAL4
DNA-binding domain, synergizes with each of the two estrogen receptor-activating 
regions. Cooperative DNA binding between the GAL4-CTF-1 fusion and the estrogen
receptor does not occur in vitro, and in vivo competition experiments demonstrate
that both activators can be specifically inhibited by the overexpression of a
proline-rich competitor, indicating that a common limiting factor is mediating
their transcriptional activation functions. Furthermore, the two activators
functioning synergistically are much more resistant to competition than either
factor alone, suggesting that synergism between CTF-1 and the estrogen receptor
is the result of a stronger tethering of the limiting target factor(s) to the two
promoter-bound activators.

PMCID: PMC360120
PMID: 2038313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;11(6):2946-51.

In vivo stimulation of a chimeric promoter by binding sites for nuclear factor I.

Knox JJ(1), Rebstein PJ, Manoukian A, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is composed of a family of site-specific DNA-binding
proteins which recognize a DNA-binding site with the consensus sequence
TGGC/A(N)5GCCAA. Binding sites for NFI have previously been shown to stimulate
mRNA synthesis in vitro when present upstream of the TATA box of the adenovirus
major late promoter (AdMLP). We have examined the effect of NFI-binding sites on 
transcription in vivo in transiently transfected HeLa and COS cells. An
NFI-binding site isolated from the human genome activated expression from the
minimal AdMLP in vivo in both the absence and presence of the simian virus 40
enhancer. A point mutation that decreased NFI binding affinity for the site in
vitro reduced expression to near the basal level of the AdMLP. Several
NFI-binding sites which differed in their spacer and flanking sequences were
tested for their ability to activate expression in vivo. The ability of these
sites to activate expression correlated with the strength of NFI binding in
vitro. An NFI-binding site stimulated expression equally well when placed from 33
to 65 bp upstream of the TATA box. However, expression dropped to basal levels
when the site was located from 71 to 77 bp upstream of the TATA box. These
studies indicate that an NFI-binding site in this chimeric promoter activates
expression in vivo only if located within a critical distance of the TATA box.

PMCID: PMC360121
PMID: 1903836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Gene. 1991 May 30;101(2):279-83.

Cis-regulatory elements that confer differential expression upon the rat gene
encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in kidney and liver.

Shoshani T(1), Benvenisty N, Trus M, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel.

The PCK gene, encoding cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, is
specifically expressed in gluconeogenic tissues, liver and kidney. Hence it
serves as a model of a class of single-copy genes whose transcription is
restricted to a few tissues, rather than a unique tissue. To begin delineating
the mechanisms that govern this pattern of expression, cis-regulatory elements of
PCK were examined using transient transfection assays in PCK-expressing kidney
and hepatoma cell lines. The analyses enabled us to identify a proximal element, 
between nucleotide (nt) positions -121 and -98, relative to the transcription
start point that is sufficient for specific expression in kidney cells, but is
just one of the elements required for expression in hepatoma cells. A distal
element (between nt -487 and -417), which is essential for hepatoma-specific
expression, is not needed in kidney cells. We suggest that the differential
regulation of PCK expression in the liver and kidney results from an interplay
between different cis-regulatory elements and trans-acting factors.

PMID: 2055492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 May 25;19(10):2721-8.

NF-I proteins from brain interact with the proenkephalin cAMP inducible enhancer.

Chu HM(1), Fischer WH, Osborne TF, Comb MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114.

A short region of the human proenkephalin promoter has been shown previously to
mediate transcriptional regulation in response to activation of the cAMP, TPA,
and Ca+ + dependent intracellular signalling pathways. Two adjacent DNA elements,
CRE-1 and CRE-2, are essential for this regulation although neither element alone
is sufficient for inducible expression. The CRE-2 element consists of overlapping
binding sites for the transcription factors AP-1 and AP-4. The CRE-1 element has 
been shown to interact with a DNA binding factor called ENKTF-1. Here we
characterize proteins from bovine brain which bind the CRE-1 element of the human
proenkephalin gene. Interactions between proteins binding the CRE-1 and CRE-2
elements are characterized in vitro using affinity purified DNA binding proteins.
We demonstrate that CRE-1 binding proteins from bovine brain consist of three
different polypeptides each belonging to the NF-I family of transcription
factors. Point mutation analysis of the contacts of these proteins with the CRE-1
element indicate that NF-I proteins contact the inducible enhancer at the
sequence CTGGCxxxxxxCCT which overlaps the CRE-1 element (underlined) defined by 
in vivo point mutation analysis. Cotransfection of one of the three NF-I proteins
purified from bovine brain, NF-I/Red1, together with a proenkephalin/bacterial
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) fusion gene repressed protein kinase A
or forskolin stimulated CAT expression.

PMCID: PMC328192
PMID: 1828294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Virology. 1991 May;182(1):298-308.

DNA replication of human polyomavirus JC is stimulated by NF-I in vivo.

Sock E(1), Wegner M, Grummt F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Using a combination of Bal31 deletion mutagenesis and site-directed mutagenesis, 
we analyzed the sequence requirements for the DNA replication of the human
neurotropic polyomavirus JC. In addition to defining the late side boundary of
the viral core origin we demonstrated that the viral enhancer stimulates
replication in vivo. Three regions within the viral enhancer increased the rate
of replication, with sequences directly adjacent to the late side of the core
origin exhibiting the strongest effect. These sequences interact with various
cellular proteins, among them NF-I. Point mutations within the NF-I site
abolished the stimulation of DNA replication concomitant with a strong reduction 
in NF-I binding. By contrast, point mutations which did not interfere with NF-I
binding did not influence the rate of replication in vivo. Stimulation of JCV DNA
replication could only be observed in vivo, but not in vitro, indicating a role
of NF-I in determining chromatin structure.

PMID: 1850908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Virol. 1991 Apr;65(4):1991-9.

Nuclear factor 1 activates the feline leukemia virus long terminal repeat but is 
posttranscriptionally down-regulated in leukemia cell lines.

Plumb M(1), Fulton R, Breimer L, Stewart M, Willison K, Neil JC.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, Scotland.

A recombinant feline leukemia virus (FeLV) proviral clone (T17T-22) with a long
terminal repeat (LTR) which differs from prototype FeLV by a point mutation
within a conserved nuclear factor 1 (NF1)-binding motif in the LTR enhancer
domain was found to be poorly expressed after DNA transfection. The NF1 point
mutation reduced in vitro protein binding as assessed by gel shift analysis and
reduced promoter activity significantly (2- to 10-fold). However, the degree of
promoter impairment due to the NF1 site mutation varied according to cell type
and was least severe in a feline leukemia cell line (T3) which had low levels of 
nuclear NF1 DNA-binding activity. Low NF1 DNA-binding activity was observed in
three FeLV-induced leukemia cell lines (T3, T17, and FL74) and in murine F9
embryonal carcinoma cells. While similar levels of NF1 gene mRNA transcripts were
detected in all cell lines, Western immunoblot analysis of F9, T17, and FL74 but 
not T3 nuclear extracts revealed very low levels of nuclear NF1 protein. These
results indicate that NF1 activity is down-regulated in FeLV-induced leukemia
cells by diverse posttranscriptional mechanisms. We suggest that NF1
down-regulation may be an important characteristic of target cells susceptible to
FeLV transformation in vivo and may provide the selective pressure which favors
duplication of the LTR core enhancer sequence in T-cell leukemogenic FeLV
variants.

PMCID: PMC240038
PMID: 1848314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 1991 Mar 25;266(9):5905-10.

Synergism between steroid response and promoter elements during cell-free
transcription.

Allan GF(1), Ing NH, Tsai SY, Srinivasan G, Weigel NL, Thompson EB, Tsai MJ,
O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

We have analyzed quantitatively the influence of distal promoter elements on
steroid-responsive gene expression in vitro. Functional synergism between
enhancer and distal promoter elements was examined using two model promoters, one
containing a natural promoter (mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat)
and one constructed artificially. Human glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expressed in
baculovirus induces transcription from a mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal 
repeat-containing DNA template. Transcription is diminished by oligonucleotides
containing a nuclear factor 1 (NF-1)-binding site or a
glucocorticoid/progesterone response element. Quantitative analysis indicates
that NF-1 and GR act synergistically during transcriptional activation. In
contrast, efficient activation by GR or purified chick progesterone receptor of a
glucocorticoid/progesterone response element-linked ovalbumin promoter does not
require interaction with the chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter (COUP) element
in the distal promoter. Lack of synergism is not related to enhancer strength,
since the glucocorticoid/progesterone response elements can be moved further from
the promoter or reduced to a single copy response element without increasing the 
dependence upon COUP. Strong synergism is restored following substitution of an
NF-1 distal promoter element for the COUP element in this construct. Our results 
suggest that synergism between steroid response and distal promoter elements is
dependent upon the identity of the promoter element rather than upon the inherent
strength of the enhancer element.

PMID: 2005127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. FEBS Lett. 1991 Mar 11;280(1):53-6.

The repression of the reverse-oriented transcription from the adenovirus terminus
by NFI in competition with TFIID.

Matsumoto K(1), Nagata K, Hanaoka F, Ui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Shizuoka,
Japan.

Nuclear factor I (NF) represses the transcription which is promoted by the cloned
adenovirus (Ad) type 5 DNA replication origin and is reverse-oriented with
respect to the direction of the replication. The mechanism of this repression by 
NFI was investigated. In the cell-free transcription system, the repression was
observed only when NFI was present during the formation of the transcription
initiation complex. From the results of DNase I protection experiments, it was
indicated that NFI bound to its binding site in the Ad replication origin
prevents TFIID from proper binding to the adjacent AT-rich region and
consequently represses the transcription.

PMID: 2009968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genes Dev. 1991 Mar;5(3):428-37.

Identification of a potent adipocyte-specific enhancer: involvement of an
NF-1-like factor.

Graves RA(1), Tontonoz P, Ross SR, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.

The molecular basis for adipocyte-specific gene expression is not known. We have 
demonstrated that while short (-168) segments of the 5'-flanking sequence of the 
adipocyte P2 gene containing AP-1- and C/EBP-binding sites can direct expression 
of a heterologous gene in cultured adipocytes, they cannot support
tissue-specific expression in a transgenic mouse. We have therefore analyzed
larger segments of the aP2 5'-flanking region by transfection into adipocytes and
have found an enhancer at -5.4 kb. This 500-bp enhancer directs expression of the
bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene in a
differentiation-dependent fashion when linked to its own minimal promoter or to
an enhancerless SV40 promoter. Moreover, this enhancer stimulates very strong and
highly specific expression from the CAT gene in the adipose tissues of transgenic
mice. A smaller fragment (190 bp) having enhancer activity in adipocytes was
defined and demonstrated to contain a binding site for an abundant nuclear
protein. This factor has the binding specificity and several other properties
characteristic of the nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) transcription/replication factor
family, and mutation of this NF-1-binding site greatly reduces the function of
the 500-bp enhancer. These results identify and characterize the first functional
enhancer with specificity for adipose cells and also demonstrate that a member(s)
of the NF-1 family is involved in adipocyte-specific gene expression.

PMID: 2001842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cell. 1991 Feb 8;64(3):565-72.

Ubiquitous transcription factor OTF-1 mediates induction of the MMTV promoter
through synergistic interaction with hormone receptors.

Brüggemeier U(1), Kalff M, Franke S, Scheidereit C, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Marburg, Federal Republic
Germany.

Steroid hormones induce transcription from the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
promoter by complex mechanisms requiring binding of the hormone receptors to the 
hormone responsive element (HRE) of the long terminal repeat region. Here we show
that the MMTV promoter contains two degenerated octamer motifs immediately
upstream of the TATA box that together bind OTF-1 (Oct-1, NFIII) with an affinity
similar to the octamer consensus. In transfection experiments, mutation of these 
octamer motifs interferes with the hormonal response of the MMTV promoter. In
vitro, these mutations do not influence basal transcription but completely
abolish the stimulatory effect of purified progesterone receptor. Progesterone
receptor and glucocorticoid receptor bound to the HRE facilitate binding of OTF-1
to the two octamer motifs. Thus, OTF-1 is a natural mediator of hormonal
induction of the MMTV promoter and acts through cooperation with the hormone
receptors for binding to DNA.

PMID: 1846780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 1990 Dec 25;265(36):22143-52.

Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone for the CCAAT transcription factor
EFIA reveals a novel structural motif.

Ozer J(1), Faber M, Chalkley R, Sealy L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

Enhancer factor I (EFI) is a trans-acting factor which binds to the Rous sarcoma 
virus long terminal repeat enhancer and promoter at two inverted CCAAT-box
motifs. We demonstrate that two forms of EFI DNA binding activity exist in
nuclear extracts of avian cells. One form requires two heterologous components
(EFIA)(EFIB) for high affinity, specific DNA binding activity, whereas a second
form is not dependent on EFIB for binding and may be composed solely of EFIA,
perhaps as a multimer. Both forms give rise to the same mobility shift in gel
retardation assays, but the two forms can be separated chromatographically under 
buffer conditions which stabilize the two DNA binding activities. A cDNA for EFIA
has been isolated from a rat liver cDNA expression library. The 1489-base pair
EFIA cDNA encodes a 322-amino acid protein which is nearly identical to two
previously described human DNA binding proteins. These are dbpB, a DNA binding
protein of unknown specificity which binds to the epidermal growth factor
receptor enhancer and c-erbB-2 gene promoter (Sakura, H., Maekawa, T., Imamoto,
F., Yasuda, K., and Ishii, S. (1988) Gene (Amst.) 73, 499-507), and YB-1, a
protein which recognizes the Y-box (inverted CCAAT motif) of the HLA-DR alpha
chain gene (Didier, D. K., Schiffenbauer, J., Woulfe, S. L., Zacheis, M., and
Schwartz, B. D. (1988) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 85, 7322-7326).
EFIA/dbpB/YB-1 share a highly conserved region of 100 amino acids with dbpA,
another protein identified by Sakura et al. (1988) which binds to the epidermal
growth factor receptor enhancer and c-erbB-2 gene promoter, and with two Xenopus 
CCAAT binding proteins, FRG Y1 and FRG Y2 (Tafuri, S. R., and Wolffe, A. P.
(1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., in press). This highly conserved domain
among all six proteins is presumed to represent or contain a DNA binding domain
for the CCAAT motif. In addition, we note that the EFIA/dbpB/YB-1 polypeptide
contains a novel arrangement of alternating clusters of positively and negatively
charged amino acids not yet reported for any trans-acting factor. The functional 
significance of this novel structural motif, which is also conserved in dbpA, FRG
Y1, and FRG Y2, will be discussed.

PMID: 1967130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. FEBS Lett. 1990 Dec 17;277(1-2):209-11.

Nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) binds to multiple sites within the transcriptional
enhancer of Moloney murine leukemia virus.

Reisman D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

The transcriptional enhancer of the Moloney Murine Leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV) is
comprised of a 75-bp direct repeat, each of which contains multiple binding sites
for transcription factors. The occupancy of these sites determines the tissue
specificity of expression and disease tropism of the virus. The identification of
proteins that bind to this enhancer is therefore required in order to understand 
the molecular basis of this viral-host interaction. Analysis of the nucleic acid 
sequence of the Mo-MuLV has identified 4 potential binding sites for the
transcription factor NF-1. Evidence is presented using DNAase I protection
analysis that NF-1 binds to these 4 sites within the enhancer. The potential role
of NF-1 binding in tissue specific expression of Mo-MuLV is discussed.

PMID: 2269357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Dec;87(24):9838-42.

Molecular cloning, functional expression, and chromosomal localization of mouse
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Kuo CJ(1), Conley PB, Hsieh CL, Francke U, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA
94305-5428.

The homeodomain-containing transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1) most likely plays an essential role during liver organogenesis by
transactivating a family of greater than 15 predominantly hepatic genes. We have 
isolated cDNA clones encoding mouse HNF-1 and expressed them in monkey COS cells 
and in the human T-cell line Jurkat, producing HNF-1 DNA-binding activity as well
as transactivation of reporter constructs containing multimerized HNF-1 binding
sites. In addition, the HNF-1 gene was assigned by somatic cell hybrids and
recombinant inbred strain mapping to mouse chromosome 5 near Bcd-1 and to human
chromosome 12 region q22-qter, revealing a homologous chromosome region in these 
two species. The presence of HNF-1 mRNA in multiple endodermal tissues (liver,
stomach, intestine) suggests that HNF-1 may constitute an early marker for
endodermal, rather than hepatocyte, differentiation. Further, that HNF-1
DNA-binding and transcriptional activity can be conferred by transfecting the
HNF-1 cDNA into several cell lines indicates that it is sufficient to activate
transcription in the context of ubiquitously expressed factors.

PMCID: PMC55269
PMID: 2263635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 1990 Nov 5;265(31):19065-70.

Isolation of complementary DNAs encoding a cerebellum-enriched nuclear factor I
family that activates transcription from the mouse myelin basic protein promoter.

Inoue T(1), Tamura T, Furuichi T, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Behavior and Neurobiology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.

A nuclear factor I (NFI) binding sequence in the myelin basic protein (MBP)
promoter is required for brain-specific transcription. In the present study, we
isolated multiple cDNAs encoding a family of NFI, NFI-B, from mouse brain cDNA
libraries. These clones contain unique nucleotide sequences at their 5', 3', or
middle portions, presumably as a result of alternative splicing. The entire
sequence of NFI-B suggests that NFI-B is a mouse counterpart of NFI-L, which was 
previously isolated from rat liver. NFI-B is highly enriched in the cerebellum,
in contrast with a ubiquitous NFI, CTF/NF-I. NFI-B proteins translated in vitro
could bind to the MBP NFI site. Furthermore, we demonstrated by transfection
experiments that NFI-B activated transcription from transfected MBP promoter in
neuronal/glial NG108-15 cells.

PMID: 1699939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. FEBS Lett. 1990 Oct 29;273(1-2):11-4.

The predicted molecular structure suggests that CTF/NF-I may function as a
histone acetylase.

Oikarinen J(1), Mannermaa RM.

Author information: 
(1)Collagen Research Unit, Biocenter, Oulu, Finland.

The primary structure of nuclear factor-I (CTF/NF-I), a eukaryotic regulatory
DNA-binding protein involved in both DNA replication and gene transcription, and 
the secondary structure predictable from it, are compared here with those of a
number of prokaryotic acetylases. Hydropathy and Chou-Fasman analyses reveal that
the polypeptide chain of CTF/NF-I is likely to fold to higher order structures
similar to those of the acetylases, and significant conservation of functionally 
important regions of the acetylases is observed in CTF/NF-I. It is therefore
suggested that CTF/NF-I may function as a histone acetylase.

PMID: 2226840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Oct;87(20):7878-82.

Estrogen receptor level determines sex-specific in vitro transcription from the
Xenopus vitellogenin promoter.

Corthésy B(1), Claret FX, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Insitut de Biologie Animale, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

Female-specific expression of the Xenopus laevis vitellogenin gene was
reconstituted in vitro by addition of recombinant vaccinia-virus-produced
estrogen receptor to nuclear extracts from male livers, in which this gene is
silent. Transcription enhancement was at least 30 times and was selectively
restricted to vitellogenin templates containing the estrogen-responsive unit.
Thus, in male hepatocytes, estrogen receptor is the limiting regulatory factor
that in the female liver controls efficient and accurate sex-specific expression 
of the vitellogenin gene. Furthermore, the Xenopus liver factor B, which is
essential in addition to the estrogen receptor for the activation of this gene,
was successfully replaced in the Xenopus extract by purified human nuclear factor
I, identifying factor B of Xenopus as a functional homolog of this
well-characterized human transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC54854
PMID: 2236004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Virol. 1990 Sep;64(9):4477-88.

Functional elements of the steroid hormone-responsive promoter of mouse mammary
tumor virus.

Toohey MG(1), Lee JW, Huang M, Peterson DO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station 77843.

Transcription from the promoter of mouse mammary tumor virus is subject to
induction by several classes of steroid hormones as well as to repression by a
negative regulatory element present in the long terminal repeats of proviral DNA.
In order to characterize the functional elements of the promoter that in some way
must respond to these regulatory signals, a number of promoter mutations were
constructed, including a set of linker-scanning mutations across the entire
promoter region. Analysis of these mutated promoters with a
transient-transfection assay defined at least three mutation-sensitive promoter
elements that are required for both basal and hormone-induced transcription. One 
mutation-sensitive region contains a TATA element located at approximately
position -30 with respect to the start of transcription. A second
mutation-sensitive region contains two 10-base-pair direct repeats located
between positions -60 and -38, within which are embedded three copies of
octamer-related sequences; complete disruption of this region of the promoter
leads to a more severe decrease in transcription than do any of the
linker-scanning mutations, suggesting that the repeated sequences may be at least
partially functionally redundant. Gel electrophoresis mobility shift assays were 
used to demonstrate specific binding of a nuclear protein to this region of the
promoter. A third mutation-sensitive region contains a binding site for nuclear
factor 1 (NF-1) located between positions -77 and -63. Site-directed mutations in
the NF-1-binding site which increase the apparent affinity of NF-1 for the
promoter in vitro do not decrease the hormone dependence of transcription,
suggesting that transcriptional activation mediated by steroid hormone-receptor
complexes cannot be explained by facilitation or stabilization of the interaction
of promoter sequences with NF-1 and consistent with the idea that binding of NF-1
is not rate determining in transcription from the mouse mammary tumor virus
promoter. None of the promoter mutations functionally separates basal from
glucocorticoid-induced transcription, suggesting that hormone induction does not 
make the promoter independent of any of the DNA-binding factors required for its 
basal activity.

PMCID: PMC247918
PMID: 2166825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Virol. 1990 Sep;64(9):4152-61.

Involvement of nuclear factor I-binding sites in control of Akv virus gene
expression.

Olsen HS(1), Lovmand S, Lovmand J, Jørgensen P, Kjeldgaard NO, Pedersen FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Plant Physiology, University of Aarhus,
Denmark.

The U3 region of Akv murine leukemia virus carries a 99-base-pair repeat that is 
associated with transcriptional enhancement in murine NIH 3T3 cells. Deletion
analysis points to a critical function of a region within the repeat unit related
to the recognition sequences for nuclear factor I proteins but distinct from the 
sites previously analyzed in related viruses. Nuclear proteins binding to the
critical site were detected in NIH 3T3 cells and in mouse livers. A protein
fraction binding to this site was purified from mouse livers by ion-exchange and 
DNA affinity chromatography and shown to have nuclear factor I properties.
Mutations that caused a partial or complete reduction of the in vitro binding
were introduced into an Akv long terminal repeat with one 99-base-pair repeat
copy driving a reporter gene, and the expression activities of the mutants in NIH
3T3 cells were found to correspond to their in vitro binding activities. This
correlation strongly supports the role of nuclear factor I proteins in Akv
expression. Residual expression activity was, however, detected in mutants devoid
of in vitro binding. This residual activity may relate to the presence of
additional sequences with homology to nuclear factor I binding sites both within 
and outside the repeat region. The ability of these sites to bind crude and
purified protein fractions with nuclear factor I activity was analyzed, and the
role of the sites within and outside the repeat region for control of gene
expression of Akv and related viruses is discussed.

PMCID: PMC247879
PMID: 2166811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Aug;4(8):1219-25.

Tissue-specific differences in the binding of nuclear proteins to a CCAAT motif
in the promoter of the androgen-regulated C3 gene.

Zhang YL(1), Parker MG, Bakker O.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai.

The expression of the gene for the C3 polypeptide is confined to the ventral
prostate of the male rat and is regulated by androgens. To study the mechanism of
this tissue-specific and hormone-dependent regulation we have used DNase-I
footprinting and band-shift assays to locate binding sites for nuclear proteins
isolated from different tissues. In this paper we present evidence that there are
tissue-specific differences in the nuclear proteins that are able to bind to a
CCAAT motif and a nuclear factor-I consensus that are present in the promoter of 
the rat C3 gene. Using competition assays and heat denaturation we show that the 
CAAT box/enhancer binding protein itself may be one of the transcription factors 
involved.

PMID: 2293026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Gen Virol. 1990 Aug;71 ( Pt 8):1829-33.

A new transcription element in the JC virus enhancer.

Tamura T(1), Aoyama A, Inoue T, Miura M, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Behaviour and Neurobiology, National Institute for Basic Biology, 
Okazaki, Japan.

The enhancer of JC virus restricts its gene expression to the brain. In a
previous study, we demonstrated an enhancer element, nuclear factor I (NFI)
motif, in the middle of the enhancer. Here, we demonstrate that the NFI motif is 
a tissue-specific element. We further present a new tissue-specific element, SacI
motif, just upstream from the NFI motif. These motifs showed transcriptional
enhancement both in vitro and in vivo and acted upon a heterologous adenovirus
major late promoter. DNase I footprint analyses demonstrated that the SacI motif 
bound to a brain nuclear factor, and that its binding region overlapped with the 
NFI motif. Gel shift experiments with the SacI motif revealed that the
populations of SacI motif factors in the brain and HeLa cell extracts were
different. Together with our previous findings about tissue-specific NFI-like
factor(s), cooperation of NFI motif and SacI motif factors may be required for
the strong brain specificity of the viral gene expression.

PMID: 2167938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. EMBO J. 1990 Jul;9(7):2233-9.

Nuclear factor I acts as a transcription factor on the MMTV promoter but competes
with steroid hormone receptors for DNA binding.

Brüggemeier U(1), Rogge L, Winnacker EL, Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps Universität,
Marburg, FRG.

Several steroid hormones induce transcription of the mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) promoter, through an interaction of their respective receptors with the
hormone responsive elements (HREs) in the long terminal repeat (LTR) region. The 
molecular mechanism underlying transcriptional activation is not known, but
binding of nuclear factor I (NFI) to a site adjacent to the HRE appears to be
required for efficient transcription of the MMTV promoter. In JEG-3
choriocarcinoma cells the MMTV promoter is transcribed inefficiently, even after 
transfection of the receptor cDNA and treatment with glucocorticoids or
progestins. These cells contain low levels of NFI as cotransfection of NFI cDNA
enhances MMTV transcription and this effect is inhibited by mutation of the NFI
binding site. In DNA binding experiments with purified NFI from pig liver, the
glucocorticoid and progesterone receptors do not co-operate but rather compete
with NFI for binding to their respective sites on the LTR. Similar results are
obtained with a functional recombinant NFI synthesized in vitro. Competition for 
DNA binding is probably due to steric hindrance as the DNase I footprints of the 
hormone receptors and NFI do overlap. These results suggest that, though NFI acts
as a transcription factor on the MMTV promoter, transcriptional activation does
not take place through a direct facilitation of DNA binding of NFI by steroid
hormone receptors.

PMCID: PMC551947
PMID: 2162764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 1990 May 15;265(14):8176-82.

An NF1-related vitellogenin activator element mediates transcription from the
estrogen-regulated Xenopus laevis vitellogenin promoter.

Chang TC(1), Shapiro DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

We have used a homologous transfection system employing cell lines derived from
Xenopus hepatocytes and fibroblasts and cloned Xenopus estrogen receptor to
identify a DNA sequence essential for efficient transcription of the powerful
estrogen-regulated Xenopus laevis vitellogenin B1 promoter. Although deletion of 
the CAAT box, the conserved nematode box, and several other sequences had little 
effect on vitellogenin promoter activity, deletion or mutation of a short
sequence related to the NF1 transcription activator reduced estrogen-dependent
transcription 10-20-fold in both cell lines. The activity of the vitellogenin
activator (VA) element, which is located at positions -48 to -41, is strongly
position dependent. Insertion of even five copies of the VA element at -445 does 
not restore activity to a VA deletion, while insertion of a single VA element at 
-62 largely restores promoter activity. The VA element is not liver-specific,
since VA deletions, mutations, and insertions elicited similar effects on
vitellogenin promoter activity in the cell lines derived from hepatocytes and
fibroblasts. Gel mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from the Xenopus
hepatocyte cell line demonstrate the presence of a protein which binds with high 
affinity and specificity to the VA sequence. The NF1 consensus sequence, but not 
a functional AP1 consensus sequence, which actually exhibits higher homology to
the VA element than the NF1 sequence, competes for binding to the VA element. In 
transfections using simplified promoters in which single copies of the VA region 
or NF1 sequence are linked to a TATA box, the VA region, which does not contain a
palindrome, is 2.4-fold more active than the consensus NF1 palindrome. The
VA-binding protein therefore appears to be related to, but not identical to, the 
NF1 transcription activator.

PMID: 2335521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 1990 May 15;265(14):8237-42.

Interaction of host cell proteins with the human T-cell leukemia virus type I
transcriptional control region. II. A comprehensive map of protein-binding sites 
facilitates construction of a simple chimeric promoter responsive to the viral
tax2 gene product.

Nyborg JK(1), Matthews MA, Yucel J, Walls L, Golde WT, Dynan WS, Wachsman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
80309.

We present a map describing the binding of cellular proteins to a 300-base pair
(bp) region of the human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) long terminal
repeat. The map accounts for nearly all of the DNase I protection reported in a
previous study using crude nuclear extracts. Notable features include a complex
arrangement of overlapping binding sites encompassing the 21-bp repeat elements
(see accompanying paper) as well as binding sites for the transcription factors
Sp1 and NF-I that significantly deviate from the previously defined consensus
recognition sequences. Based on the binding results, we constructed simple
chimeric promoters containing 21-bp repeat elements, Sp1-, and nuclear factor
I-binding sites upstream of a TATA box. Transient transfection experiments show
that these promoters are expressed in T-cells and are regulated by the viral tax2
gene product. Deletion of the Sp1 and nuclear factor I sites abolishes
tax-induction, suggesting that one or both of these proteins play a role in
mediating the tax-responsiveness conferred by the 21-bp repeat element.

PMID: 2186038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 May 11;18(9):2607-16.

Chicken NFI/TGGCA proteins are encoded by at least three independent genes:
NFI-A, NFI-B and NFI-C with homologues in mammalian genomes.

Rupp RA(1), Kruse U, Multhaup G, Göbel U, Beyreuther K, Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg, FRG.

Chicken TGGCA proteins belong to the ubiquitous, eukaryotic family of NFI-like
nuclear proteins, which share an identical DNA binding specificity. They are
involved in viral and cellular aspects of transcriptional regulation and they are
capable of stimulating Adenovirus initiation of replication. Using
microsequencing data from peptides of isolated proteins and PCR supported
cloning, we have derived four cDNAs for NFI/TGGCA proteins, which are encoded by 
three separate chicken genes. Sequence alignments of NFI proteins from chicken
and various mammalian species provide evidence for a common genetic equipment
among higher eukaryotes, in which several related genes, employing each
differential RNA splicing generate an unexpectedly large family of diverse NFI
proteins. The extensive similarity of the amino acid sequence throughout the
complete coding regions between products of the same gene type in different
species indicates a uniform selection pressure on all protein parts, also on
those outside the DNA-binding domain.

PMCID: PMC330743
PMID: 2339052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. New Biol. 1990 May;2(5):450-63.

Transcriptional activation of the human papillomavirus-16 P97 promoter by an
88-nucleotide enhancer containing distinct cell-dependent and AP-1-responsive
modules.

Cripe TP(1), Alderborn A, Anderson RD, Parkkinen S, Bergman P, Haugen TH,
Pettersson U, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Iowa City,
IA.

The P97 promoter upstream of the oncogenic early genes of human papillomavirus
(HPV)-16 is active in keratinocytes and in cervical carcinoma cells due to a 5'
keratinocyte-dependent cis enhancer. In this study, we have mapped the main
enhancer activity to an 88-nucleotide (nt) fragment composed of multiple cis
elements. A 63-nt promoter-proximal enhancer core was sufficient for P97
activation in a human keratinocytic cell line, HaCaT, and in cervical carcinoma
cells. Although the enhancer functioned poorly in hepatoma cells or in
fibroblasts, nuclear extracts from different cells protected similar cis elements
from DNase I digestion. Two protected half-palindromic NF-I/CTF sites within the 
63-nt core were necessary for its function; one represents a "cytokeratin
element" (CK), a previously described 8-nt sequence shared with cytokeratin gene 
promoters. Both sites formed complexes of the same apparent size and relative
binding affinity with NF-I/CTF-like factor(s) present in all cells tested.
Although cell-dependent P97 activation could be determined by similar, yet
distinct NF-I/CTF-like proteins, adjacent cis elements in the enhancer core were 
also required for function, and may thus interact with additional transcription
factors. A 25-nt distal module with two AP-1 sites increased enhancer activity
and cooperated with cis elements of the proximal core. Each AP-1 site as well as 
a third AP-1 site near the promoter bound c-Jun and Jun/Fos in vitro, and was
activated by c-Jun and c-Fos in transfections. In addition to cell type-dependent
activation, HPV-16 P97 transcription may therefore respond to growth factors and 
oncogene products via the AP-1 pathway.

PMID: 1963084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Mar 16;167(2):648-53.

Regulation of brain-specific transcription of the mouse myelin basic protein
gene: function of the NFI-binding site in the distal promoter.

Aoyama A(1), Tamura TA, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Behavior and Neurobiology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.

We investigated brain-specific transcription elements in the distal region (-253 
to -54) of the mouse myelin basic protein (MBP) promoter by in vitro
transcription using mouse brain nuclear extracts. Using deletion and base
substitution mutants, we identified one tissue-specific transcription element at 
the downstream core of the NFI-site between -115 and -111. Foot-printing assay
demonstrated that three transcription factors bind around this element;
NFI-related (-130 to -111), M1 (-110 to -97) and Sp1 (-92 to -84). NFI-related
factor(s) in brain extracts consisted of a characteristic population which was
different from that in other tissues. Methylation interference experiments
revealed that this factor(s) interacted with the NFI-downstream core in a
brain-specific manner. We suggest the existence of a brain-specific NFI-related
factor(s).

PMID: 1690988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):1041-8.

Analysis of multiple forms of nuclear factor I in human and murine cell lines.

Goyal N(1), Knox J, Gronostajski RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Canada.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a group of related site-specific DNA-binding proteins
that function in adenovirus DNA replication and cellular RNA metabolism. We have 
measured both the levels and forms of NFI that interact with a well-characterized
26-base-pair NFI-binding site. Five different NFI-DNA complexes were seen in HeLa
nuclear extracts by using a gel mobility shift (GMS) assay. In addition, at least
six forms of NFI were shown to cross-link directly to DNA by using a UV
cross-linking assay. The distinct GMS complexes detected were composed of
different subspecies of NFI polypeptides as assayed by UV cross-linking.
Different murine cell lines possessed varying levels and forms of NFI binding
activity, as judged by nitrocellulose filter binding and GMS assays. The growth
state of NIH 3T3 cells affected both the types of NFI-DNA complexes seen in a GMS
assay and the forms of the protein detected by UV cross-linking.

PMCID: PMC360962
PMID: 2304457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Feb 11;18(3):465-70.

Transcriptional activation of human papillomavirus 16 by nuclear factor I, AP1,
steroid receptors and a possibly novel transcription factor, PVF: a model for the
composition of genital papillomavirus enhancers.

Chong T(1), Chan WK, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore,
Kent Ridge.

Human papillomavirus 16 (HPV-16), which is involved in genital carcinogenesis,
contains an enhancer of transcription that is activated by cellular factors
rather than by the viral E2 proteins. The activity resides on a 232 bp segment
with 5 binding sites for nuclear factor 1 (NF1), 2 for AP1, and 1 for steroid
receptors. Deletions and point mutations show that the constitutive enhancer and 
the steroid response depend on NF1 sites located 5' or 3' of a 65 bp fragment
with AP1 sites that by itself shows little activity. Enhancement through a
fragment with AP1 and NF1 sites is strongly reduced by mutation of the AP1 sites,
or by mutation of the sequence AGGCACATAT. Sequence comparison and footprint
analysis make it likely that this sequence binds a novel transcription factor
which we call PVF. Fragments with one or several binding sites only for NF1, or
AP1, or PVF exhibit little enhancement by themselves, suggesting the functional
dependence of the HPV-16 enhancer on the cooperation of these factors. A
comparison of our findings with the genomes and transcription factor binding
sites of HPV-6, 11, 18, 31 and 33 lead us to propose a model of the composition
of enhancers of genital papillomaviruses.

PMCID: PMC333449
PMID: 2155400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. EMBO J. 1990 Feb;9(2):559-66.

Amino-terminal domain of NF1 binds to DNA as a dimer and activates adenovirus DNA
replication.

Gounari F(1), De Francesco R, Schmitt J, van der Vliet P, Cortese R, Stunnenberg 
H.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, FRG.

NF1 is a DNA-binding protein involved in initiation of adenovirus DNA replication
as well as in modulating the rate of transcription initiation of genes containing
the sequence TGGCA. We show here that recombinant NF1 expressed via vaccinia
virus is transported into the nucleus and binds to its cognate sequences with the
same specificity as NF1 purified from HeLa cells. Furthermore, the recombinant
NF1 forms oligomers in solution and binds as a dimer to palindromic as well as
half-site sequences. NF1 expressed via vaccinia virus stimulates the initiation
of adenovirus replication in vitro. The N-terminal 240 amino acids of the protein
are sufficient for full DNA-binding activity as well as stimulation of adenovirus
replication. By analysis of several NF1 mutants translated in vitro, we also
define the minimal DNA-binding domain and localize the region responsible for DNA
binding on the N-terminal and for oligomerization on the C-terminal side of this 
domain.

PMCID: PMC551701
PMID: 2303041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1990 Jan 30;1048(1):85-92.

Nuclear factor I stimulates transcription of the adenovirus 12 E1A gene in a
cell-free system.

Koikeda S(1), Ibuki R, Sawada Y, Nagata K, Shibata H, Masamune Y, Nakanishi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa, Japan.

Binding to the cis-acting region of NF-I-like protein and/or NF-III-like protein 
was previously suggested to be responsible for the preferential stimulation of
transcription from distal start-site of the adenovirus 12 E1A gene in a cell-free
system. In this study, nuclear extracts of Ehrlich ascites tumor cells depleted
of NF-I-like protein were found to lose activity to stimulate the E1A gene
transcription. This activity was recovered when NF-I purified from HeLa cells
with no contamination of NF-III was supplemented. It is thus evident that NF-I is
involved in stimulating distal transcription of the adenovirus 12 E1A gene.
Moreover, activities for both stimulating the E1A gene transcription and binding 
to a region recognized by NF-I did not apparently exist in nuclear extracts of a 
cell line expressing the adenovirus 12 E1A gene. These results suggest that
transcription of the adenovirus 12 E1A gene may possibly be autoregulated at
least in part through modulation of the activity of NF-I.

PMID: 1688713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jan 11;18(1):57-64.

Nuclear factor-I and activator protein-2 bind in a mutually exclusive way to
overlapping promoter sequences and trans-activate the human growth hormone gene.

Courtois SJ(1), Lafontaine DA, Lemaigre FP, Durviaux SM, Rousseau GG.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School,
Brussels, Belgium.

Transcription of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene and its regulation are
controlled by trans-acting factors that bind to hGH gene promoter sequences.
Several DNase I footprints have been described within 500 bp of this promoter,
one of which (-289 to -267) has not yet been ascribed to a defined factor. By
DNase I footprinting, gel mobility shift, and methylation interference assays
with extracts from HeLa cells and GH-producing pituitary tumor (GC) cells, we
show that this factor belongs to the NF-I family. When NF-I was competed out of
the cell extracts, the trans-acting factor AP-2 bound to the same site as NF-I.
AP-2 was present not only in HeLa cells, but also in GC cells albeit at a much
lower concentration. Consistent with the mutually exclusive binding of NF-I and
AP-2, their methylation interference patterns included four guanine residues that
were crucial for binding of both NF-I and AP-2. Cell-free transcription from the 
hGH gene promoter showed that these two factors can transactivate this gene.

PMCID: PMC330203
PMID: 2308836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Virol. 1990 Jan;64(1):379-86.

Adenovirus DNA-binding protein forms a multimeric protein complex with
double-stranded DNA and enhances binding of nuclear factor I.

Stuiver MH(1), van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The 72-kilodalton adenovirus DNA-binding protein (DBP) binds to single-stranded
DNA as well as to RNA and double-stranded DNA and is essential for the
replication of viral DNA. We investigated the binding of DBP to double-stranded
DNA by gel retardation analysis. By using a 114-base-pair DNA fragment, five or
six different complexes were observed by gel retardation. The mobility of these
complexes is dependent on the DBP concentration, suggesting that the complexes
arise by sequential binding of DBP molecules to the DNA. In contrast to binding
to single-stranded DNA, the binding of DBP to double-stranded DNA appears to be
noncooperative. DBP binds to linear DNA as well as to circular DNA, while linear 
DNA containing the adenovirus terminal protein was also recognized. No
specificity for adenovirus origin sequences was observed. To study whether the
binding of DBP could influence initiation of DNA replication, we analyzed the
effect of DBP on the binding of nuclear factor I (NFI) and NFIII, two
sequence-specific origin-recognizing proteins that enhance initiation. At
subsaturating levels of NFI, DBP increases the rate of binding of NFI
considerably, while no effect was seen on NFIII. This stimulation of NFI binding 
is specific for DBP and was not observed with another protein (NFIV), which forms
a similar DNA-multimeric protein complex. In agreement with enhanced NFI binding,
DBP stimulates initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro especially
strongly at subsaturating NFI concentrations. We explain our results by assuming 
that DBP forms a complex with origin DNA that promotes formation of an
alternative DNA structure, thereby facilitating the binding of NFI as well as the
initiation of DNA replication via NFI.

PMCID: PMC249112
PMID: 2293667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1990;154:75-100.

Regulation and tissue-specific expression of human cytomegalovirus.

Nelson JA(1), Gnann JW Jr, Ghazal P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La Jolla, CA
92037.

PMID: 2161326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1990;315(4):997-1000.

[The identification of the binding sites of nuclear factor I in the region of the
bovine beta-casein gene].

[Article in Russian]

Kabishev AA, Klenova EM, Gribanovskii VA, Gorodetskii SI.

PMID: 2097142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Immunogenetics. 1990;32(2):117-28.

The X boxes from promoters of HLA class II B genes at different loci do not
complete for nuclear protein-specific binding.

Turco E(1), Manfras BJ, Ge L, Rudert WA, Trucco M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital, PA 15213.

Expression of HLA class II genes is coordinately regulated by cis-acting elements
present in their promoter regions immediately upstream from the 5' end of their
transcription start sites. Trans-acting factors from the nuclear proteins of the 
cell are able to positively or negatively regulate transcription of these genes
by binding to highly conserved sequences, called boxes. After cloning the
promoter regions of all the transcribed class II B genes present in the cell line
Priess, we were able to identify certain protein-box complexes and to determine
the affinity of these proteins for their respective boxes by comparing promoter
boxes of each gene to those of the other genes. Different nuclear proteins seemed
to bind to the X boxes of the different class II B genes tested. In the case of
the Y box-protein complexes, the various Y boxes competed with similar
affinities. The protein(s) which specifically bound to the DRB1-CCAAT box also
bound to DPB1-CCAAT box, but completely failed to bind the homologous box from
DQB1. Further, CCAAT box-specific protein(s) did not bind to the Y box of the
same gene, excluding the possibility that these proteins just recognize the
reverse CCAAT box (ATTGG) present within Y.

PMID: 1975797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Gen Virol. 1989 Dec;70 ( Pt 12):3235-48.

Adenovirus subviral particles and cores can support limited DNA replication.

Leith IR(1), Hay RT, Russell WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of St Andrews, Fife,
U.K.

Adenovirus type 2 cores can function effectively as templates in an in vitro
replication system. Viral DNA replication assays using cores as templates do not 
differ in their requirements to the well characterized assays using DNA-complex
templates, i.e. there is a dependence on terminal protein precursor (pTP), DNA
polymerase and DNA binding protein and the assay is greatly stimulated by certain
host transcription factors. The products of initiation and limited elongation are
easily distinguishable and, in the system described, there is specific
proteolysis of the pTP adducts as a function of the adenovirus-coded protease,
present in the nuclear extracts from infected cells, or the core templates.
Substitution of Mn2+ ions for Mg2+ ions in the replication assay has a dramatic
effect on the nature of the replication events, in most cases resulting in the
stimulation of initiation without elongation. Similar results can be achieved by 
utilizing subviral particles as templates, obtained by dialysis of purified
adenovirus in a hypotonic buffer at pH 6.4. Restriction enzyme analysis of the
replicated products confirmed that DNA synthesis proceeds from the adenovirus
termini using both the core and subviral templates. By adding an ATP-regenerating
system elongation can be further stimulated, particularly in the case of the
subviral templates. Quantification of nucleotide incorporation into the
appropriate restriction fragments indicates that for the subviral templates
replication can proceed for at least 2000 to 3000 bases from either terminus.
These results suggest that the adenovirus genome is packaged in the virion in a
conformation readily available for at least the initial replication events. Such 
a conformation might also be appropriate for early transcription.

PMID: 2607337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Dec;9(12):5548-62.

A nuclear factor I-like activity and a liver-specific repressor govern
estrogen-regulated in vitro transcription from the Xenopus laevis vitellogenin B1
promoter.

Corthésy B(1), Cardinaux JR, Claret FX, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

A hormone-controlled in vitro transcription system derived from Xenopus liver
nuclear extracts was exploited to identify novel cis-acting elements within the
vitellogenin gene B1 promoter region. In addition to the already well-documented 
estrogen-responsive element (ERE), two elements were found within the 140 base
pairs upstream of the transcription initiation site. One of them, a negative
regulatory element, is responsible for the lack of promoter activity in the
absence of the hormone and, as demonstrated by DNA-binding assays, interacts with
a liver-specific transcription factor. The second is required in association with
the estrogen-responsive element to mediate hormonal induction and is recognized
by the Xenopus liver homolog of nuclear factor I.

PMCID: PMC363725
PMID: 2586526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Nov 15;164(3):1212-9.

Nuclear factor I represses the reverse-oriented transcription from the adenovirus
type 5 DNA terminus.

Matsumoto K(1), Nagata K, Yamanaka K, Hanaoka F, Ui M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The promoter activity of a cloned inverted terminal repeat (ITR) of human
adenovirus (Ad) type 5 was found to be oriented in the opposite direction with
respect to that of DNA replication in a cell-free transcription system using HeLa
nuclear extracts. The major transcript was initiated outside the Ad sequence
about 30 nucleotides downstream from the putative TATA-box located between
nucleotide positions 9-18 of Ad 5 left terminus. Competitive transcription
experiments using double-stranded oligonucleotides and isolated nuclear factor I 
revealed that nuclear factor I and its cognate binding site located upstream of
the putative TATA-box are involved in negative regulation of the transcription
from ITR promoter.

PMID: 2480114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Oct 11;17(19):7735-48.

Hydroxyl radical footprints reveal novel structural features around the NF I
binding site in adenovirus DNA.

Zorbas H(1), Rogge L, Meisterernst M, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität München, FRG.

We have identified a number of as yet unknown structural abnormalities of the NF 
I-DNA binding site within the inverted terminal repetition of adenovirus DNA by
probing it with a hydroxyl radical footprinting technique. NF I binding alters
the accessibility of the deoxyribose moieties to hydroxyl radicals both at the 3'
and at the 5' side of the recognition sequence 5'-TGG(N)6GCCAA-3'. A smooth bend 
at the 5' side of the binding sequence is already present in naked linear DNA and
it is further enhanced by protein binding. This could be demonstrated not only by
hydroxyl radical footprinting but also by studying the temperature dependent
mobility during gel electrophoresis of DNA fragments carrying the NF I binding
site at circularly permutated positions. We propose that the bent conformation at
this site is responsible for facilitating protein/DNA interactions.

PMCID: PMC334881
PMID: 2552414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochemistry. 1989 Oct 3;28(20):8191-200.

Structural and functional organization of a porcine gene coding for nuclear
factor I.

Meisterernst M(1), Rogge L, Foeckler R, Karaghiosoff M, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität München, FRG.

This paper describes the structure of a 70-kb porcine gene for nuclear factor I, 
including its promoter region, comprising a total of 11 exons. Different mRNAs
that we have isolated as cDNAs from both porcine liver and human HeLa cells
presumably are generated from this gene by differential splicing events. One cDNA
species from porcine liver that lacks exon 9 carries coding information for a
protein of 439 amino acids. The in vitro translated protein displays all the
properties of an NFI-like protein with high affinity toward the sequence element 
TGG(N)6GCCAA, as shown by gel shift analysis, and no or little affinity toward
CCAAT box containing sequences. Cotranslation experiments with full-length and
truncated variants of the protein demonstrate that it binds as a dimer to its
cognate DNA recognition sequence. Its DNA-binding domain which is retained in all
cDNA clones was mapped by deletion analysis to the 250 N-terminal amino acids of 
the protein. No structural homologies are observed between this protein and other
known DNA-binding proteins; instead, the protein contains a novel alpha-helical
sequence motif consisting of several lysine residues spaced at intervals of seven
amino acids which we have termed the "lysine helix". The C-terminal portion of
the protein derived from full-length cDNAs encodes a short amino acid sequence
which is identical with the heptapeptide repeat CT7 observed in the C-terminal
domain of the largest subunits of yeast and mouse RNA polymerase II. This region 
is removed by differential splicing in some of the NFI/CTF cDNAs and thus may be 
of functional significance.

PMID: 2513876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mol Biol. 1989 Sep 20;209(2):205-19.

Proteins binding to the liver-specific pyruvate kinase gene promoter. A unique
combination of known factors.

Vaulont S(1), Puzenat N, Levrat F, Cognet M, Kahn A, Raymondjean M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches en Génétique et Pathologie Moléculaires, INSERM U. 129 CHU
Cochin, Paris, France.

A 183 base-pair fragment of the liver-specific promoter of the L-type puruvate
kinase (L-PK) gene has been shown by transfection assay to be sufficient to
confer a tissue-specific expression to a reporter gene. The proteins binding in
vitro to this fragment have been investigated by a combination of DNase I
footprinting, gel retardation of synthetic oligonucleotides and ultraviolet
cross-linking. Four proteins from liver nuclear extracts bind to the investigated
fragment. They were called, from 3' to 5', L1 to L4 binding factors. The L1 site 
(nucleotides -95 to -66 with respect to the cap site) binds hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF1), a liver-specific protein. The L2 site (nucleotides -114 to -97) 
binds the ubiquitous nuclear factor 1 (NF1), or a related factor. The L3 site
(nucleotides -144 to -126) binds liver factor A1 (LF-A1), another liver-specific 
protein. Finally, the L4 site (nucleotides -168 to -145) binds major late
transcription factor (MLTF/USF/UEF), an ubiquitous protein. Each of these
proteins has been detected in other liver-specific promoters, but their
combination is unique to the liver-specific promoter of the L-PK gene.

PMID: 2585483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1989 Sep-Oct;23(5):1400-15.

[Specific interaction of a nuclear protein factor from the CTF/NF-I family with 2
different promoter regions of the rat tyrosine aminotransferase gene].

[Article in Russian]

Klenova EM, Adler VV, Gribanovskii VA, Gorodetskii SI, Bogdanova NN, Lobanenkov
VV.

Using gel-retardation and DNase I footprinting assays, we have analysed
sequence-specific DNA-protein interactions within proximal promoter fragment
(from -2 to -210 bp relative to the transcription start) of the rat tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) gene. Two distinct DNase I protection regions flanked at
either boundary by sites of DNase I hypersensitivity were observed with the
rat-liver nuclear extracts. The internal sequence of the region I non-coding
strand, (-155)TGGGCCACCTTCCAAT(-170), is highly homologous to the NF-I consensus 
sequence TGG(N)6-7TGCCAA and also shares a CCAAT-box; the region II noncoding
strand sequence includes asymmetrically positioned (-37)AGCCAAT(-43) recognition 
motif. Since there have been a number of reports about multiple DNA-binding
factors that recognize CCAAT homologies, both regions were likely to interact
with either a single or distinct factors. Here we show that both region I and II 
of the TAT gene promoter are binding to the same factor related to the human
CTF/NF-I. The evidence for that is based on competition experiments using the DNA
fragment containing a synthetic consensus sequence for the NF-I recognition site 
and on the indistinguishable chromatographic properties of the activity
specifically binding to each of three DNA fragments containing NF-I consensus,
region I and region II sequences.

PMID: 2575210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Sep;9(9):3821-8.

Identification of HeLa cell nuclear factors that bind to and activate the early
promoter of human polyomavirus BK in vitro.

Chakraborty T(1), Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Center, Tyler
75710.

Human polyomavirus BK (BKV), an oncogenic DNA virus, differs from other
papovaviruses in the organization of the regulatory region and in tissue tropism 
for kidney cells. The noncoding regulatory region of the viral genome in
prototype strains includes three 68-base-pair (bp) repeats, each containing a
number of potential regulatory elements. Some of these signals are unique to
human papovaviruses, and others are homologous to those identified in many viral 
and cellular genes. We evaluated the contribution of individual 68-bp repeats to 
the initiation of transcription from the early promoter in a HeLa cell extract
and identified cis-acting elements to which human cellular factors bind to
activate transcription. The early promoter with only one copy of the 68-bp repeat
could accurately initiate transcription in vitro, but additional copies were
required for its stimulation. DNA-binding assays and DNase I protection
experiments identified six domains in the regulatory region protected by human
cellular factors. Two of these footprints were located within the proximal and
distal 68-bp repeats, and one was located at the late side of the repeats. These 
footprints were centered over a TGGA(N)5-6GCCA core and were produced by a
protein of the nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) family. This protein is either identical
or similar to that which binds to the high-affinity site at the origin of
adenovirus DNA replication. Three other domains, two at the junctions of the
68-bp repeats and one in the late side of the repeats, were partially protected
by proteins with AP-1- and Sp-1-like activities. Transcription initiation from
the early promoter was drastically reduced when a complete 68-bp repeat or the
NF-1 binding site was used as a competitor in the in vitro assay. However, a
point mutation within the NF-1 binding site, which reduced NF-1 binding in vitro 
to a level comparable to that of nonspecific DNA, also eliminated its ability to 
compete with early transcription. The murine homolog of the AP-1 binding site had
a modest effect on in vitro transcription. Our results suggest that, among the
multiple HeLa cell nuclear factors, NF-1 acts as a major activator of the early
promoter in vitro.

PMCID: PMC362443
PMID: 2550803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 1989 Aug 25;264(24):14361-8.

Interaction of nuclear factors with multiple sites in the somatic cytochrome c
promoter. Characterization of upstream NRF-1, ATF, and intron Sp1 recognition
sequences.

Evans MJ(1), Scarpulla RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The rat somatic cytochrome c promoter is resolved into a mosaic of cis-acting
upstream and intron elements required for maximal activity. Mutations in each
diminished cytochrome c promoter activity and eliminated the specific binding of 
cognate nuclear factors. Among these is the recognition sequence for a nuclear
factor designated NRF-1 (nuclear respiratory factor 1) also found in the upstream
regions of several other nuclear genes whose products function in the
mitochondria. The NRF-1 site was tightly coupled to a second functionally
independent element (region I), and together these sites constitute a major
determinant of cytochrome c expression. In addition to these novel sequence
elements, the promoter also contained recognition sites for the common
transcriptional activators ATF and Sp1. A potent promoter element within the
first intron consisted of two adjacent Sp1 binding sites. Point mutations in the 
first site eliminated the promoter activity of the element as well as Sp1 binding
to both sites. An ATF recognition sequence in the upstream promoter was identical
to an authentic cyclic AMP (cAMP) responsive element in stimulating promoter
activity and in conferring a cAMP response upon a heterologous promoter. These
promoter elements and their cognate nuclear factors likely contribute to the
housekeeping function of cytochrome c and to the coordinate modulation of
respiratory gene expression according to cellular energy demands.

PMID: 2547796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Jul 14;162(1):427-34.

Homology of nuclear factor I with the protein kinase family.

Mannermaa RM(1), Oikarinen J.

Author information: 
(1)Collagen Research Unit, University of Oulu, Finland.

It is observed that a putative DNA binding domain in nuclear factor I (NF I)
which is a eukaryotic sequence-specific DNA binding protein participating in both
regulation of DNA replication and transcription displays sequence homology with
catalytic domains in various protein kinases. In addition, hydropathy analysis
reveals that the NF I polypeptide chain is likely to fold into similar secondary 
and tertiary structures to those of the protein kinases. Although it is not known
whether NF I functions as a protein kinase in addition to recognizing a specific 
sequence on DNA, it is concluded that some of the eukaryotic DNA binding proteins
and protein kinases may belong to a gene family, various members of which are
evolutionarily related and responsible for the regulation of metabolism in
diverse compartments of the cell. The present finding also suggests that a number
of kinases may to varying extents be capable of direct interaction with DNA.

PMID: 2751661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Jun 12;17(11):4061-75.

Mutant analysis of protein interactions with a nuclear factor I binding site in
the SL3-3 virus enhancer.

Nilsson P(1), Hallberg B, Thornell A, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Umeå, Sweden.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is shown to be of importance for the activity of the
enhancer element of a T-cell leukemogenic murine retrovirus, SL3-3, and for the
regulation of this element by glucocorticoid. Each nucleotide of the binding site
of the NFI proteins was mutated, and the effects of the mutations were
quantitated with an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Mutations in the
inverted repeat of the binding site have symmetric effects which strongly support
the notion that NFI proteins preferentially bind to dyad symmetry sites. Such
binding sites were shown to be more than 100 fold stronger than the corresponding
single binding sites. We find dyad symmetry sequences which are much stronger NFI
binding sites than NFI sites identified in different genes and also stronger than
previously proposed consensus binding sequences for NFI.

PMCID: PMC317919
PMID: 2544855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. EMBO J. 1989 Jun;8(6):1841-8.

Co-operative interactions between NFI and the adenovirus DNA binding protein at
the adenovirus origin of replication.

Cleat PH(1), Hay RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of St Andrews, Fife,
UK.

The DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions proposed for the stability of
nucleoprotein complexes at the origin of replication in prokaryotes are also
thought to impart regulatory precision in eukaryotic DNA replication. This type
of specificity can be observed, for example, during adenovirus DNA replication
where efficient initiation requires that nuclear factor I (NFI) binds to the
origin of DNA replication. Addition of purified NFI stimulates the initiation of 
adenovirus DNA replication in vitro in a reaction that is dependent on the
concentration of the adenovirus DNA binding protein (DBP). However, the molecular
basis for the synergistic action of NFI and DBP during replication is at present 
unknown. We report here that DBP increases the affinity of NFI for its binding
site in the replication origin. DBP did not, however, increase the affinity of
another eukaryotic sequence-specific DNA binding protein, EBP1, for its
recognition site. Other single-stranded DNA binding proteins could not substitute
for DBP in increasing NFI affinity for its binding site. In addition, DBP was
found to alter the binding kinetics of NFI, both by increasing the rate of
association and decreasing the rate of dissociation of NFI with the DNA template.
The co-operativity between NFI and DBP was also demonstrated on another DNA
template, a human NFI site (FIB2), suggesting that this interaction is of general
occurrence and not restricted to the adenovirus origin of replication.

PMCID: PMC401031
PMID: 2767055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 May 30;161(1):8-15.

An enhancer in the c-mos locus binds a nuclear factor 1-like protein.

van der Hoorn FA(1), Nordeen SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver
80262.

We recently identified a DNA sequence element located in the rat c-mos
protooncogene which fulfills operational criteria for enhancers, increasing
transcription from a heterologous promoter in fibroblasts over large distances
and in an orientation-independent manner. Here we report that three mouse nuclear
proteins bind to the enhancer. Several lines of evidence indicate that one is a
Nuclear Factor 1 like activity. Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of the NF-1 
binding site destroys binding of the protein, but leaves enhancer activity
unaffected. Tumor growth factor-beta, which was shown to exert a stimulatory
effect on the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter via its NF-1 binding site, has no
effect on the activity of the enhancer. Thus, the NF-1 binding site of the c-mos 
enhancer is not essential for its activity in fibroblasts.

PMID: 2730670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 May 11;17(9):3519-33.

Clusters of nuclear factor I binding sites identify enhancers of several
papillomaviruses but alone are not sufficient for enhancer function.

Gloss B(1), Yeo-Gloss M, Meisterenst M, Rogge L, Winnacker EL, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore,
Kent Ridge, Republic of Singapore.

The long control region (LCR) of human papillomaviruses (HPV) encompasses 5-12%
of the viral genome and contains an intricate network of cis responsive elements.
In the LCR of seven unrelated HPV-types, namely HPV-1, 6, 8, 11, 16, 18 and 33,
we have identified clusters of 4 to 7 5-TTGGC-3 motifs suggesting nuclear factor 
I (NFI) binding sites. We randomly selected 20 (out of a total of 38) of these
motifs and showed that pure NFI from porcine liver protects virtually the same
nucleotides as a factor present in crude HeLa nuclear extracts. The footprints
obtained with HeLa extracts in the LCR of HPV-16 are eliminated in competition
experiments by an oligonucleotide representing the palindromic adenovirus NFI
binding site. Restriction fragments from the genome of HPV-11, 16 and 18, which
contain this cluster of NFI binding sites associated with binding sites of
unrelated transcription factors, function as transcriptional enhancers. In
contrast, a fragment from HPV-8 exhibiting exclusively NFI binding sites, or
polymerized NFI sites from HPV-16, are functionally inactive. NFI seems to be
necessary but not sufficient for HPV enhancer activation.

PMCID: PMC317793
PMID: 2542901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Apr 25;17(8):3065-78.

Dual function of a nuclear factor I binding site in MMTV transcription
regulation.

Buetti E(1), Kühnel B, Diggelmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges.

Using linker-scanning mutagenesis we had previously identified four elements
within the MMTV LTR which are necessary for transcriptional stimulation by
glucocorticoid hormones. Two of them overlapped with regions to which the
glucocorticoid receptor binds in vitro. The third element contained a NF-I
binding site, and the fourth the TATA box. Here we show that mutations that
abolish in vitro binding of NF-I had a negative effect also on the basal activity
of the MMTV promoter of LTR-containing plasmids stably integrated in Ltk-
fibroblasts. The analysis of double mutants altered in the NF-I plus either one
of the receptor binding elements further demonstrated that the NF-I site
functionally cooperated with the proximal (-120) element, which alone was
extremely inefficient in stimulation. The stronger distal (-181/-172) element was
independent of NF-I and showed functional cooperativity with the proximal
hormone-binding element.

PMCID: PMC317714
PMID: 2542892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 1989 Apr 25;264(12):7025-32.

Interaction of a nuclear factor-1-like protein with the regulatory region of the 
human polyomavirus JC virus.

Amemiya K(1), Traub R, Durham L, Major EO.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Branch, National Institute of Neurological and
Communicative Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We have initiated a study to identify host proteins which interact with the
regulatory region of the human polyomavirus JC (JCV), which is associated with
the demyelinating disease, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. We
examined the interaction of nuclear proteins prepared from different cell lines
with the JCV regulatory region by DNA binding gel retardation assays. Binding was
detected with nuclear extracts prepared from human fetal glial cells, glioma
cells, and HeLa cells. Little or no binding was detected with nuclear extracts
prepared from human embryonic kidney cells. Competitive binding assays suggest
that the nuclear factor(s) which interacted with the JCV regulatory region was
different from those which interacted with the regulatory region of the closely
related polyomavirus SV40. We found three areas in the JCV regulatory region
protected from DNase I digestion: site A, located just upstream from the TATA
sequence in the first 98-base pair (bp) repeat; site B, located upstream from the
TATA sequence in the second 98-bp repeat; and site C, located just following the 
second 98-bp repeat. There were some differences in the ability of the nuclear
factor(s) from the two brain cell lines and HeLa cells to completely protect the 
nucleotides within the footprint region. The results from the DNase I protective 
studies and competitive DNA binding studies with specific oligonucleotides,
suggest that nuclear factor-1 or a nuclear factor-1-like factor is interacting
with all three sites in the JCV regulatory region. In addition, the results
suggest that the nuclear factor which interacts with the JCV regulatory region
from human brain cell lines is different from the factor found in HeLa cells.

PMID: 2540170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genes Dev. 1989 Apr;3(4):527-36.

Nuclear factor E2F mediates basic transcription and trans-activation by E1a of
the human MYC promoter.

Thalmeier K(1), Synovzik H, Mertz R, Winnacker EL, Lipp M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, FRG.

Transcription from one of the two initiation sites, P1 and P2, of the dual human 
MYC promoter seems to be essential in all proliferating cells. To identify
proteins and target structures for MYC regulation, a DNA region was analyzed that
is critical for P2 promoter activity. Here, we show that a nuclear factor binds
to a DNA element within P2, which is conserved perfectly between mouse and man
and displays a striking homology to the E1a-inducible E2 promoter of adenovirus
type 5 (Ad5). We demonstrate that the same transcription factor, defined recently
as E2F, which plays an essential role in the activation of adenovirus early
promoters and enhancers, also interacts as a dominant nuclear factor with the MYC
promoter. The presence of an intact E2F binding site is required for basic
expression and for trans-activation of the P2 promoter by E1a proteins. The human
MYC promoter is the first cellular target described for E2F. The results suggest 
that expression of MYC might be regulated via modulation of E2F by cellular
'E1a-like' factors.

PMID: 2721961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Mar;86(6):1781-5.

Purification and analysis of RNA polymerase II transcription factors by using
wheat germ agglutinin affinity chromatography.

Jackson SP(1), Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
California, Berkeley 94720.

We recently found that many RNA polymerase II transcription factors are modified 
with N-acetylglucosamine residues. These sugar moieties confer upon transcription
factors an ability to bind the lectin wheat germ agglutinin. We have taken
advantage of this interaction to devise a purification procedure for the "GC-box"
binding transcription factor Sp1. Crude nuclear extracts are first subjected to
wheat germ agglutinin affinity chromatography and then subjected to
sequence-specific DNA affinity chromatography. The Sp1 protein purified by this
procedure is at least 95% pure, and the overall recovery is greater than 80%. In 
addition to yielding larger quantities of Sp1 than conventional schemes, the new 
purification procedure is also simpler and more rapid. We show that wheat germ
agglutinin affinity chromatography can also be used to purify the glycosylated
forms of the CCAAT-binding transcription factor. Thus, wheat germ agglutinin
affinity chromatography may aid the purification of other transcription factors
that bear N-acetylglucosamine residues. Furthermore, the ability to separate
glycosylated forms of transcription factors from their unglycosylated
counterparts by wheat germ agglutinin affinity chromatography should facilitate
investigations into the role of N-acetylglucosamine residues in the functioning
of transcription factor proteins.

PMCID: PMC286788
PMID: 2648381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 1989 Feb 5;264(4):2164-74.

Histone H1 binds to the putative nuclear factor I recognition sequence in the
mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter.

Ristiniemi J(1), Oikarinen J.

Author information: 
(1)Collagen Research Unit and Biocenter, University of Oulu, Finland.

It has previously been demonstrated that nuclear factor I (NF I) or a related
protein binds to a region between -315 and -295 from the start of transcription
in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen gene promoter. In the present work we have
purified this factor to homogeneity from rat liver. DNA sequence-specific
proteins were isolated from nuclear extracts using heparin-agarose affinity
chromatography and two successive chromatographies on a recognition site affinity
matrix. Approximately 160 micrograms of the DNA binding proteins was obtained
from 100 g of rat liver. More than 1700-fold purification over the nuclear
extract and 58% recovery of the DNA binding activity was achieved. The purified
preparation contained five to six protein components ranging in molecular weight 
from 30,000 to 35,000, as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. It was demonstrated using DNase I footprint analysis that the
factor binds to the putative NF I binding site in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen
promoter. It has a dissociation constant of 7 nM for a short DNA fragment
containing this binding site, while a constant of 0.45 nM was obtained for a
similar-sized fragment containing the nuclear NF I consensus binding sequence.
The purified factor is identical to histone H1 in several respects. They share
similar amino acid compositions and they give similar V8-protease and
N-bromosuccinimide peptides. In addition, antibodies raised to bovine histone H1 
recognize the purified factor and interfere with its binding to DNA. Methylation 
interference and preparative gel shift assay show that histone H1 binds to the
specific sequence from the preparation of the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter
binding factor. It is thus evident from the present results, that histone H1
binds to the NF I recognition sequence in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter.

PMID: 2914899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Immunol. 1989 Feb 1;142(3):1015-21.

Site-specific mutagenesis of the class I regulatory element the Q10 gene allows
expression in non-liver tissues.

Handy DE(1), Burke PA, Ozato K, Coligan JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Branch, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Classical transplantation Ag are found on nearly all cells, whereas Ag encoded by
the genes of the Qa/Tla region have a restricted tissue distribution. To
investigate the cause of these different patterns of expression, we have compared
the regulatory regions of Q10, a Qa region gene that is expressed only in liver, 
with those of H-2Ld. Gel retardation analysis shows that the nuclear factor (rI) 
that binds to the inverted repeat (TGGGGATTCCCCA) of the class I regulatory
element (CRE) present in H-2Ld and other classical class I genes does not bind to
the equivalent region of the Q10 gene. However, the Q10 CRE binds another nuclear
factor (rII) that binds to the H-2Ld CRE. The sequence of the Q10 CRE differs
from the sequence present in classical class I genes by three nucleotides, two of
these changes are within the inverted repeat sequence (TGaGGAcTCCCCA) and disrupt
the region of dyad symmetry. We have used site-specific in vitro mutagenesis to
individually change these two nucleotides and have investigated the ability of
this region to promote transcription with and without these substitutions. A
change of either base restores transcriptional activity in chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase assays and allows for binding of the rI nuclear factor. These results
suggest that the failure of the Q10 CRE to bind the rI nuclear factor may play a 
role in preventing Q10 expression in tissues other than the liver and fetal yolk 
sac. Thus, the dichotomy between the widespread tissue expression of classical
class I genes and the restricted tissue expression of class I genes of the Qa/Tla
region may be due in part to differences in the cis acting regulatory sequences
that interact with trans-acting nuclear factors to direct transcription.

PMID: 2913151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Mol Biol. 1989 Jan 20;205(2):387-96.

Nuclear factor I can functionally replace transcription factor Sp1 in a U2 small 
nuclear RNA gene enhancer.

Janson L(1), Weller P, Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center, Sweden.

Polymerase II transcription of a human gene for the small nuclear RNA U2 is
dependent on two different promoter elements: a TATA-equivalent proximal sequence
element and a distal enhancer element, which has been shown to contain Sp1- and
octamer-binding sites. We have investigated the functional interplay between
these transcription factor-binding sites of the enhancer, following transfection 
of U2 maxigene constructions into HeLa cells. There is a functional non-additive 
co-operation between the octamer-binding factor and Sp1, which is not dependent
on the evolutionally conserved steric arrangement of these binding sites. We
demonstrate that the conserved Sp1-binding site of the U2 enhancer can be fully
substituted by a nuclear factor I (NFI) binding site, and that the
octamer-binding factor functions in stimulating transcription in conjunction with
either Sp1 or NFI. Since the octamer-binding factor is most probably the same
protein as nuclear factor III (NFIII), the results imply that the NFI/NFIII
complex, involved in adenovirus DNA replication, also can function as an
efficient activator of transcription.

PMID: 2926813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1989;306(4):995-8.

[In vitro formation of multimers of specific DNA-protein complexes with nuclear
factor I (NF I)].

[Article in Russian]

Klenova EM, Adler VV, Lobanenkov VV.

PMID: 2570685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1988 Dec 20;951(2-3):411-8.

Purification methods for the sequence-specific DNA-binding protein nuclear factor
I (NFI)--generation of protein sequence information.

Gander I(1), Foeckler R, Rogge L, Meisterernst M, Schneider R, Mertz R,
Lottspeich F, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie der Universität München, F.R.G.

The paper describes a potent purification method, preparative gel retention, for 
the purification of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins. This procedure
exploits the sequence-specific DNA-binding affinity of such proteins for their
enrichment, comparable to recognition site DNA affinity chromatography. The
method was employed to obtain a pure preparation of nuclear factor I (NFI) from
porcine liver from which sequences of partial peptides could be obtained.
Oligonucleotide probes derived from these amino-acid sequences were used to
identify genomic and cDNA clones of NFI.

PMID: 3207762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1988 Dec 15;157(2):419-25.

Enhancer of human polyoma JC virus contains nuclear factor I-binding sequences;
analysis using mouse brain nuclear extracts.

Tamura T(1), Inoue T, Nagata K, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Behavior and Neurobiology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.

Neurotrophic human JC virus carries a 98 bp duplicate enhancer responsible for
tissue-specific gene expression. DNase I footprinting studies using mouse brain
nuclear extracts revealed weak (pseudo NFI motif) and strong (NFI motif) nuclear 
factor I-binding sequences just upstream (at 229) and in the middle (at 156 and
58) of the enhancer, respectively. In vitro transcription driven in brain
extracts demonstrated that the NFI motif is a possible transcription control
element. Together with previous observations (Khalili, K., Rappaport, J. and
Khoury, G. (1988) EMBO J. 7, 1205-1210 (20], the NFI motif is suggested to play
an important role in early gene expression of JCV.

PMID: 2849429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Dec;85(23):8963-7.

Multiple genes encode nuclear factor 1-like proteins that bind to the promoter
for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase.

Gil G(1), Smith JR, Goldstein JL, Slaughter CA, Orth K, Brown MS, Osborne TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235.

DNA-binding proteins of the nuclear factor 1 (NF1) family recognize sequences
containing TGG. Two of these proteins, termed reductase promoter factor (RPF)
proteins A and B, bind to the promoter for hamster
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase, a negatively regulated enzyme in
cholesterol biosynthesis. In the current study, we determined the sequences of
peptides derived from hamster RPF proteins A and B and used this information to
isolate a cDNA, designated pNF1/Red1, that encodes RPF protein B. The peptide
sequence of RPF protein A, the other reductase-related protein, suggests that it 
is the hamster equivalent of NF1/L, which was previously cloned from rat liver.
We also isolated a hamster cDNA for an additional member of the NF1 family,
designated NF1/X. Thus, the hamster genome contains at least three genes for
NF1-like proteins. It is likely to contain a fourth gene, corresponding to
NF1/CTF, which was previously cloned from the human. The NH2-terminal sequences
of all four NF1-like proteins (NF1/Red1, NF1/L, NF1/X, and NF1/CTF), which are
virtually identical, contain the DNA-binding domain that recognizes TGG.
Functional diversity may arise from differences in the COOH-terminal sequences.
We hypothesize that the COOH-terminal domain interacts with adjacent DNA-binding 
proteins, thereby stabilizing the binding of a particular NF1-like protein to a
particular promoter. This protein-protein interaction confers specificity to a
class of proteins whose DNA-recognition sequence is widespread in the genome.
Sterols may repress transcription of the reductase gene by disrupting this
protein-protein interaction.

PMCID: PMC282633
PMID: 3194401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Nov 25;16(22):10657-68.

The Xenopus laevis ribosomal gene promoter contains a binding site for nuclear
factor-1.

Walker P(1), Reeder RH.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Sciences Division, Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98102.

Nuclear Factor I (NF1) is a DNA binding protein that is known to function in the 
replication of Adeno virus and also binds to many promoters recognized by RNA
polymerase II. We have found that there is also an NF1 binding site within the
ribosomal gene promoter from Xenopus laevis as well as in several other promoters
recognized by RNA polymerase I. The function of a binding site for a polymerase
II transcription factor within a promoter recognized by polymerase I is not
known. However, its presence suggests interesting regulatory possibilities.

PMCID: PMC338931
PMID: 3205719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Biochem. 1988 Nov 15;177(3):505-11.

TGGCA protein is present in erythroid nuclei and binds within the
nuclease-hypersensitive sites 5' of the chicken beta H- and beta A-globin genes.

Rupp RA(1), Nicolas RH, Borgmeyer U, Lobanenkov VV, Plumb MA, Sippel AE, Goodwin 
GH.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

The developmentally regulated 5'-flanking DNase-I-hypersensitive site of the
chicken beta H-globin gene in nuclei contains a subregion which is resistant to
DNase I and which disappears when nuclei are extracted with 0.3 M NaCl,
suggesting that there are salt-extractable proteins bound to sequences within
this region. The 0.3 M NaCl extract contains two proteins which bind in vitro to 
these sequences. One of the binding sequences has an inverted repeat very similar
to that bound by TGGCA protein. Partially purified TGGCA protein from chicken
liver binds to this sequence in vitro giving exactly the same footprint as that
obtained with erythroid nuclear proteins. Similarly TGGCA protein binds to an
inverted repeat with the beta A-globin 5'-hypersensitive site giving a footprint 
identical to that obtained with erythroid nuclear protein extracts. From
competition footprinting experiments and the electrophoretic mobility of the
protein-DNA complex, it is concluded that the erythroid proteins previously
described as binding to the beta H- and beta A-globin inverted repeats within the
5'-flanking hypersensitive sites both belong to the TGGCA protein family.

PMID: 3197715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(21):7937-41.

Purified hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 interacts with a family of
hepatocyte-specific promoters.

Courtois G(1), Baumhueter S, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305.

During development cell types arise through the activation or repression of
classes of specific genes. One hypothesis is that this phenomenon is realized by 
tissue-specific factors playing a role at the transcription level. Recently we
have described a liver-specific nuclear protein, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1,
that appears to be involved in the transcription of the fibrinogen and alpha
1-antitrypsin genes. In this report we describe the purification of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 and demonstrate that it interacts with essential promoter
regions of many liver-specific genes, including albumin, alpha-fetoprotein, and
transthyretin. This finding suggests that hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 could be
one factor necessary for establishing the liver phenotype. We also show that this
protein binds to the promoter of the surface-antigen gene of the hepatitis B
virus, a virus characterized by a high degree of hepatotropism.

PMCID: PMC282328
PMID: 2460858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Oct;85(19):7322-6.

Characterization of the cDNA encoding a protein binding to the major
histocompatibility complex class II Y box.

Didier DK(1), Schiffenbauer J, Woulfe SL, Zacheis M, Schwartz BD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Laboratories, Saint Louis, MO.

The expression of HLA class II genes is regulated by a series of cis-acting
elements and trans-acting factors. Several cis-acting elements have been
identified and have been termed the Z box, X box, Y box, octamer, and "TATA" box.
The Y box contains an inverted CCAAT box. By probing a phage lambda gt11 library 
with double-stranded oligonucleotides, we have directly isolated a cDNA encoding 
a Y box-binding protein designated YB-1. YB-1 binding has an absolute requirement
for the CCAAT box and relative specificity for the Y box. It has a Mr of 35,414, 
contains 18% basic residues, and contains putative nuclear localization signals. 
An inverse correlation of YB-1 and HLA-DR beta chain mRNA levels suggests that
YB-1 is a negative regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC282178
PMID: 3174636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. EMBO J. 1988 Oct;7(10):3115-23.

Purification of a NF1-like DNA-binding protein from rat liver and cloning of the 
corresponding cDNA.

Paonessa G(1), Gounari F, Frank R, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, FRG.

NF1-like proteins play a role in transcription of liver-specific genes. A
DNA-binding protein, recognizing half of the canonical NF1 binding site (TGGCA)
present on the human albumin and retinol-binding protein genes, has been purified
from rat liver. Several peptides deriving from a tryptic digest of the purified
protein were sequenced and the sequence was used to synthesize specific
oligonucleotides. Two overlapping cDNA clones were obtained from a rat-liver cDNA
library; their sequence reveals an open reading frame coding for 505 amino acids,
including all the peptides sequenced from the purified protein. The DNA-binding
domain, most likely located within the first 250 amino acids, is highly
homologous to the sequence of CTF/NF1 purified from HeLa cells. Northern analysis
reveals several mRNA species present in different combinations in various rat
tissues.

PMCID: PMC454701
PMID: 3053160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 1988 Sep 25;263(27):13909-15.

Point mutations and small substitution mutations in three different upstream
elements inhibit the activity of the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter.

Karsenty G(1), Golumbek P, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas System Cancer Center,
M.D. Anderson Hospital and Tumor Institute, Houston 77030.

Point mutations and small substitution mutations were introduced in three
different promoter segments of the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen gene that are
binding sites for specific DNA-binding proteins. The first of these promoter
elements contains a CCAAT motif between -80 and -84 and binds a novel factor
consisting of two different components which are both needed for DNA binding
(Hatamochi, A., Golumbek, P.T., Van Schaftingen, E., and de Crombrugghe, B.
(1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 5940-5947). Four different point mutations in the
CCAAT motif, which strongly inhibit binding of this heterodimeric CCAAT-binding
factor, decrease the activity of the promoter at least 8-fold when assayed by DNA
transfection of NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. The second cis-acting element is located
around -250. Two mutations in this element, one a 3-base pair (bp), another a
4-bp substitution mutation, decrease the activity of the promoter in DNA
transfection experiments by about 8- and 12-fold, respectively. The third element
is located between -315 and -295 and binds nuclear factor 1 (NF1). Both 1- and
2-bp mutations which strongly inhibit binding of NF1 to this site decrease the
activity of the promoter 8-10-fold in DNA transfection assays whereas another
mutation in this site shows less inhibition in the activity of the promoter.
Transfer of this NF1-binding site 5' to the SV40 early promoter increases the
activity of this promoter more than 10-fold. These results indicate that the
integrity of each of these three cis-acting elements is required for optimal
activity of the alpha 2(I) collagen promoter and suggest a model whereby the
factors which bind to these sequences cooperate in the formation of a
transcription initiation complex.

PMID: 3417682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1988 Sep;33(11):1774-83.

[Eukaryotic sequence specific DNA binding proteins involved in replication and
transcription].

[Article in Japanese]

Nagata K.

PMID: 3241879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Virol. 1988 Sep;62(9):3388-98.

Binding of cellular proteins to the regulatory region of BK virus DNA.

Markowitz RB(1), Dynan WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
80309-0215.

The human papovavirus BK has a noncoding regulatory region located between the
divergently transcribed early and late coding regions. Many strains of BK virus
(BKV) have direct DNA sequence repeats in the regulatory region, although the
number and extent of these repeats varies widely between independent isolates.
Until recently, little was known about the individual functional elements within 
the BKV regulatory region, and the biological significance of the variable repeat
structure has been unclear. To characterize the interaction between sequences in 
the BKV regulatory region and host cell transcription factors, we have carried
out DNase I footprinting and competitive binding experiments on three strains of 
BKV, including one strain that does not contain direct sequence repeats. We have 
used relatively crude fractions from HeLa cell nuclear extracts, as well as DNA
affinity-purified preparations of proteins. Our results demonstrate that
BK(Dunlop), BK(WW), and BK(MM) each contain multiple binding sites for a factor, 
NF-BK, that is a member of the nuclear factor 1 family of transcription factors. 
We predict the presence of three to eight binding sites for NF-BK in the other
strains of BKV for which a DNA sequence is available. This suggests that the
binding of this protein is likely to be required for biological activity of the
virus. In addition to NF-BK sites, BK(WW) and BK(MM) each contain a single
binding site for transcription factor Sp1, and BK(Dunlop) contains two binding
sites for transcription factor AP-1. The AP-1 sites in BK(Dunlop) span the
junction of adjacent direct repeats, suggesting that repeat formation may be an
important mechanism for de novo formation of binding sites not present in a
parental strain.

PMCID: PMC253462
PMID: 2841492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. FEBS Lett. 1988 Aug 15;236(1):27-32.

Isolation and characterization of the porcine nuclear factor I (NFI) gene.

Meisterernst M(1), Rogge L, Donath C, Gander I, Lottspeich F, Mertz R, Dobner T, 
Föckler R, Stelzer G, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie der Universität München, FRG.

This study describes the isolation of a major portion of the gene for nuclear
factor I (NFI) including its 5'-flanking region with transcriptional start sites.
We screened a porcine liver, genomic DNA library in phage EMBL3A with synthetic
oligonucleotides derived from tryptic and cyanogen-bromide peptide sequences
obtained from purified NFI protein. The NFI gene is present as a single copy in
porcine DNA.

PMID: 2841167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 5;263(22):10865-71.

A liver-specific factor and nuclear factor I bind to the rat alpha-fetoprotein
promoter.

Jose-Estanyol M(1), Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Proteins putatively involved in the transcriptional control of rat
(alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene expression in the liver were identified by
analyzing the in vitro binding of proteins from nuclear extracts of fetal and
adult rat livers to the cloned rat AFP promoter region (-197 to +48) using a
combination of gel shift and DNase I footprinting assays. Three stable and
specific high affinity complexes (I, II, and III) were detected by gel shift
analysis of fetal rat liver extracts. Complex II was specific to extracts from
fetal liver while the two others (I and III) were also formed with extracts from 
adult liver. Complex I was highly liver-specific since it was not detected with
extracts of kidney, spleen, and brain. DNase I and gel shift competition
experiments using a synthetic oligonucleotide indicated that it is formed upon
binding of a liver-specific factor to region -65 to -46 of the rat AFP promoter. 
This region, perfectly conserved in the rat, mouse, and man, had been previously 
shown to be crucial for liver-specific expression of the mouse AFP gene. The
binding of this liver-specific factor to this DNA region may thus represent a key
step in the specificity of expression of AFP gene in liver. Gel shift and DNase I
footprinting competition experiments showed that complex III was formed by
binding of the widely distributed nuclear factor I to the rat AFP promoter in the
region -125 to -100. It is potentially significant that, in extracts from fetal
liver, nuclear factor is also involved with another binding factor in the
formation of the stage-specific complex II.

PMID: 2455718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 1988 Jul 15;263(20):9801-8.

Initiation of adenovirus DNA replication. I. Mechanism of action of a host
protein required for replication of adenovirus DNA templates devoid of the
terminal protein.

Kenny MK(1), Balogh LA, Hurwitz J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York 10021.

The in vitro replication of adenovirus (Ad) DNA covalently attached to the 55-kDa
terminal protein requires at least five proteins including the 80-kDa preterminal
protein, the Ad DNA polymerase, the Ad DNA binding protein, nuclear factor I, and
topoisomerase I. The replication of Ad DNA templates devoid of the terminal
protein requires an additional protein, designated factor pL, which has been
purified from uninfected HeLa cell nuclei (Guggenheimer, R. A., Nagata, K.,
Kenny, M., and Hurwitz, J. (1984) J. Biol. Chem. 259, 7815-7825). Factor pL has
been found to contain an intrinsic 5'----3' exonuclease activity. When Ad DNA
templates lacking the terminal protein were pretreated with factor pL, the
requirement for factor pL in the replication reaction was abolished. Synthetic
partially duplex oligonucleotide templates containing Ad origin sequences were
constructed in order to determine the structure of the DNA molecules that are
active in the absence of factor pL. These experiments indicated that factor pL
degrades the 5'-end of the nontemplate (displaced) strand of the Ad origin
thereby creating a single-stranded region at the 3'-end of the template strand.
Such DNAs are competent for initiation of Ad DNA replication in the absence of
factor pL but remain dependent on nuclear factor 1.

PMID: 2838479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1988 Jul-Aug;22(4):869-91.

[Chromatin proteins specifically interacting with certain DNA sequences. Nuclear 
factor I].

[Article in Russian]

Lobanenkov VV.

A comprehensive survey of the data on the nuclear factor I (NF-I) published by
the end of 1987 is given. Among all the known DNA-binding chromosomal protein
factors which are capable of specific interaction with certain nucleotide
sequences, NF-I compels a particular attention as the first example of a
conservative multifunctional factor being involved in the assembly of
nuclease-hypersensitive chromatin structure within regulatory regions of active
genes, in the trans-activation of RNA polymerase II transcription, and also in
the replication of the adenoviral genome and presumably in the replication of
some other DNAs including the cellular one.

PMID: 3054503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 1988 Jun 15;263(17):8485-90.

A far upstream ovalbumin enhancer binds nuclear factor-1-like factor.

Bradshaw MS(1), Tsai MJ, O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Band-shifting and DNase I footprinting analyses detected a specific DNA binding
protein extracted from oviduct nuclei that binds to the ovalbumin gene 5'
sequence between -1094 and -1125. This "-1100" fragment, when inserted upstream
of the SV40 or ovalbumin promoters fused to a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene, enhances chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity 5-10-fold
following transfection into CV1 cells. The sequence to which the oviduct factor
binds contains a nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) half-site (GCCAA). An oligonucleotide
matching the sequence of the adenovirus NF-1 binding site competed for binding to
the -1100 footprinted region with a higher affinity than an oligonucleotide for
the -1100 region itself. Similarly, the -1100 region oligonucleotide also
competes for binding of the factor to the NF-1 oligonucleotide. These data
suggest that the oviduct factor which binds to the -1100 region is an NF-1-like
protein that serves as a steroid hormone-independent enhancer of the ovalbumin
gene transcription.

PMID: 3372538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 May 25;16(10):4419-35.

A quantitative analysis of nuclear factor I/DNA interactions.

Meisterernst M(1), Gander I, Rogge L, Winnacker EL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Universität München, FRG.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) was purified to homogeneity from porcine liver by
DNA-affinity chromatography and displays a single band with a molecular weight of
36 kDa in SDS-polyacrylamide gels. The purified protein was used to determine
absolute equilibrium binding constants by gel retardation techniques for a
variety of DNA fragments with genuine or mutated NFI binding sites and a number
of DNA fragments derived from various eukaryotic promoters carrying the CCAAT-box
as a half-site for NFI binding. We present a model which allows prediction of the
functional significance of mutated NFI binding-sites from sequence data. The data
suggest that the single molecular species of NFI from porcine liver may not be
able to recognize and activate the -CCAAT- promoter element in vivo without
additional interactions, e.g. with other proteins.

PMCID: PMC336639
PMID: 3380685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncogene. 1988 Apr;2(4):359-66.

Initial characterization of a potential transcriptional enhancer for the human
c-K-ras gene.

Jordano J(1), Perucho M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794.

The nucleotide sequence of the 5' end distal region of the human c-K-ras gene
promoter was determined. This region, coincident with a variable DNAse I
hypersensitive site in native chromatin, contains sequence similarities with
known enhancers. A 400 bp MstII DNA fragment of this region stimulated in cis the
correctly initiated transcription of the human beta-globin gene in transfected
Hela cells. The stimulation of beta-globin transcription (5-6 fold) was dependent
on the distance and orientation of the c-K-ras sequences and on the presence of
the CCAAT and CACCC elements in the beta-globin promoter. Interaction of nuclear 
factors with these c-K-ras sequences was analysed by DNAase I footprinting assays
using Hela nuclear extracts. A protein binding to these sequences was identified 
as nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) by DNAase I competition footprinting experiments.
However, disruption of the c-K-ras NF-1 binding site by insertion mutagenesis had
no effect on the transcriptional activity of the c-K-ras element.

PMID: 3283654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Mar 25;16(5):2087-98.

Stimulation of transcription in vitro by binding sites for nuclear factor I.

Gronostajski RM(1), Knox J, Berry D, Miyamoto NG.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, University of Toronto, Canada.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a site-specific DNA binding protein required for the
replication of adenovirus DNA in vitro and in vivo. We have examined the effect
of natural and synthetic binding sites for NFI (FIB sites) on RNA synthesis in
HeLa whole cell extracts. The natural binding site used is the 26bp FIB-2 site
previously isolated from the human genome. When present upstream of the TATA box 
of the adenovirus major late promoter, the FIB-2 site stimulates RNA synthesis 3 
to 5-fold. This stimulation occurs with either orientation of the FIB-2 site. A
point mutation in FIB-2 that decreases NFI binding at least 100-fold reduces, but
does not completely abolish, the stimulation of transcription. A number of
synthetic binding sites for NFI were tested for the ability to increase RNA
synthesis. The strongest binding sites stimulated transcription the most, while
the weakest sites had the least effect. These studies strongly suggest a role for
NFI and cellular FIB sites in the control of RNA synthesis.

PMCID: PMC338201
PMID: 3357767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell. 1988 Feb 12;52(3):405-14.

A nuclear factor 1 binding site mediates the transcriptional activation of a type
I collagen promoter by transforming growth factor-beta.

Rossi P(1), Karsenty G, Roberts AB, Roche NS, Sporn MB, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) increases the steady-state RNA levels 
of several fibroblast extracellular matrix proteins. Using DNA transfection, we
show that TGF-beta stimulates the activity of the mouse alpha 2(l) collagen
promoter 5- to 10-fold in mouse NIH 3T3 and rat osteosarcoma cells. Deletion
analysis indicates that a segment of this promoter between -350 and -300,
overlapping a nuclear factor 1 (NF1) binding site, is needed for TGF-beta
stimulation. A 3 bp substitution mutation abolishing NF1 binding to this site
inhibits TGF-beta activation. Insertion of this NF1 binding site 5' to the SV40
early promoter makes the promoter TGF-beta inducible, but the 3 bp substitution
does not. Similarly, when the NF1 binding site at the replication origin of
adenovirus 2 and 5 is inserted 5' to the SV40 promoter, the promoter responds to 
TGF-beta. Therefore an NF1 binding site mediates the transcriptional activation
of the mouse alpha 2(l) collagen promoter by TGF-beta.

PMID: 2830985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1988;301(5):1248-50.

[The effect of cytosine methylation in TTGGA(N5)TCCAA sequence of 5'-flanking
region if the chicken betaH-globin gene on the interaction with TGGCA-binding
protein in vitro].

[Article in Russian]

Lobanenkov VV.

PMID: 3229304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Microbiol Immunol. 1988;32(7):741-7.

Upstream region of hepatitis B virus S gene responsible for transcriptional
stimulation by dexamethasone.

Masuda M(1), Lee G, Yuasa T, Yoshikura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

Transcriptional regulation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen (HBs Ag)
gene was studied in human hepatoma-derived cell lines. Treatment with
dexamethasone (Dex; 1 microM) induced an increase in the smaller HBs-mRNA
initiated within Pre-S region encoding S and Pre-S2 proteins, but not the larger 
HBs-mRNA initiated in the further upstream encoding Pre-S1 protein. The
Bg1II-MstII fragment (map position 2425-3201) in the upstream of the S gene was
used as a transcriptional promoter of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
gene. The CAT activity brought about by this construct in the transient assay was
elevated by 5-fold in the presence of Dex. Deletion analysis localized the
sequence required for the full response to Dex within a 590-base pair fragment in
the upstream of the transcriptional initiation site of the smaller HBs-mRNA. And 
this fragment contained the binding site for the nuclear factor I (NF-I), which
might have some role in Dex-dependent transcriptional stimulation.

PMID: 2848182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Med Hypotheses. 1988 Jan;25(1):27-9.

Nuclear factor 1 (NF-1) binding sites in the genomes of human oncoviruses: a
hypothetic role for reintegrated cellular origins of replication in malignant
transformation.

Minarovits J(1), Segesdi J, Kovacs Z, Földes I.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiological Research Group, National Institute of Hygiene, Budapest,
Hungary.

We have found that genomes of human T cell leukemia-lymphoma virus type I
(HTLV-I), BK virus (BKV), and a hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA sequence integrated
into DNA of a hepatoma-derived cell line contain binding sites for nuclear factor
1 (NF-1), a cellular protein which binds to adenoviral and putative cellular
origins of DNA replication. We suggest that cellular origins of DNA replication
acquired by oncoviruses may play a role in malignant transformation after
reintegration into the cellular genome by providing new targets for cellular
factors initiating DNA replication and by perturbing the temporal order of
replication.

PMID: 2830475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cell. 1987 Dec 24;51(6):963-73.

The interplay of DNA-binding proteins on the promoter of the mouse albumin gene.

Lichtsteiner S(1), Wuarin J, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

The promoter of the mouse albumin gene contains at least six binding sites for
specific DNA-binding proteins (A to F). Four of these sites (A, D, E, and F) can 
be occupied by transcription factors that are considerably enriched in liver
nuclei, as compared to spleen or brain nuclei. These factors consist of a
heat-stable protein that fills sites A, D, and F, and a member of a family of
nuclear factor I (NF-I) related proteins that occupies site E. Site C binds a
protein that is equally abundant in liver, brain, and spleen nuclei. Occupancy of
this site and the binding of the heat-stable factor to the immediately adjacent
site D appear to be mutually exclusive. However, both of these competing binding 
sites are required for maximal in vitro transcription.

PMID: 3690666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Dec 10;15(23):9707-26.

Chicken liver TGGCA protein purified by preparative mobility shift
electrophoresis (PMSE) shows a 36.8 to 29.8 kd microheterogeneity.

Rupp RA(1), Sippel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, FRG.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 1988 Feb 25;16(4):1654.

The TGGCA protein, the chicken homologue of HeLa cell NF-I, was purified to
homogeneity from liver tissue by a procedure which includes preparative mobility 
shift electrophoresis (PMSE) as the final step. PMSE was here adjusted for the
isolation of the TGGCA protein, but can be used as a general method to
characterize the protein moiety of specific DNA-binding proteins. The TGGCA
protein is a family of 6 protein species, which show minor differences in
molecular weight from 36.8kd to 29.8kd. This microheterogeneity differs from the 
size distribution reported for HeLa cell NF-I polypeptides. All species of the
TGGCA protein bind identically to a synthetic DNA-binding site and appear to be
highly related in primary structure. We discuss the possible functional
importance of this microheterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC306526
PMID: 3122180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Sep 25;15(18):7223-34.

Incorporation of 5-bromodeoxycytidine in the adenovirus 2 replication origin
interferes with nuclear factor 1 binding.

de Vries E(1), Bloemers SM, van der Vliet PC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, State University of Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

We have studied the binding of nuclear factor 1 (NFI), a human sequence-specific 
DNA-binding protein, to a DNA fragment substituted in vitro with
5-bromodeoxycytidine (5-BrdC). Even at low substitution grades binding of NFI to 
its recognition sequence was considerably lower than with the unsubstituted
control fragment. We developed a procedure to cleave substituted DNA specifically
at a BrdC residue and searched for contacts between NFI and 5-BrdC residues by an
interference assay. Surprisingly, no specific contacts were found in or near the 
recognition sequence. It appeared instead that interference was inversely related
to the distance of a 5-BrdC residue from the NFI binding site. Models to explain 
these results, including a possible sliding mechanism, are discussed.

PMCID: PMC306244
PMID: 3658692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 1987 Aug 15;262(23):11064-70.

Separate binding sites for nuclear factor 1 and a CCAAT DNA binding factor in the
mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter.

Oikarinen J, Hatamochi A, de Crombrugghe B.

A factor present in nuclear extracts of NIH-3T3 fibroblasts was identified which 
binds to a region between -315 and -295 with respect to the start of
transcription in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter. This factor was assayed 
using three different DNA binding assays. Evidence that this factor is nuclear
factor 1 or a related protein is based on competition experiments using fragments
of another promoter that contains a nuclear factor 1 binding site as well as a
fragment containing a consensus sequence for nuclear factor 1 binding sites. The 
nucleotide sequence of the binding site in the alpha 2(I) promoter. TCGN5GCCAA,
presents similarities to the sequence published previously as a consensus
recognition sequence for nuclear factor 1. Methylation interference experiments
indicate that the factor interacts at least with two successive G residues in the
major groove complementary to the two successive C residues in the GCCAA motif.
This factor is different from a factor that binds to a CCAAT element between -84 
and -80 in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen promoter. This was shown by competition 
experiments using both crude NIH-3T3 fibroblast nuclear extracts and a partially 
purified CCAAT binding factor. These results suggest that in the alpha 2(I)
collagen promoter nuclear factor 1 and a CCAAT binding factor bind to separate
sites, despite analogies in their recognition sequences.

PMID: 3038906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Jul 24;15(14):5545-59.

Site-specific DNA binding of nuclear factor I: effect of the spacer region.

Gronostajski RM.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a site-specific DNA binding protein required for the
replication of adenovirus type 2 DNA in vitro and in vivo. To study sequence
requirements for the interaction of NFI with DNA, we have measured the binding of
the protein to a variety of synthetic sites. Binding sites for NFI (FIB sites)
were previously shown to contain a consensus sequence composed of 2 motifs, TGG
(Motif 1), and GCCAA (Motif 2), separated by a 6 or 7bp spacer region. To assess 
conserved sequences in the spacer region and flanking sequences which affect NFI 
binding, we have isolated clones from oligonucleotide libraries that contain the 
two motifs flanked by 3 degenerate nucleotides and separated by degenerate spacer
regions of 6 or 7 nucleotides. With a 6bp spacer region, a strong bias exists for
a C or A residue in the first position of the spacer. Sites with a 7bp spacer
region contain a G and C or A residue at the first and second positions,
respectively, of the spacer, but also possess conserved residues at other
positions of the site.

PMCID: PMC306006
PMID: 3039460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. EMBO J. 1987 May;6(5):1355-60.

Interaction of the TGGCA-binding protein with upstream sequences is required for 
efficient transcription of mouse mammary tumor virus.

Miksicek R, Borgmeyer U, Nowock J.

A high-affinity binding site for the TGGCA-binding protein, also known as nuclear
factor I, has previously been shown to reside within the mouse mammary tumor
virus (MMTV) long terminal repeat. We have introduced mutations into this binding
site to test the importance of this ubiquitous nuclear protein in MMTV
transcription. Mutations which abolish the binding of the TGGCA protein in vitro 
are shown to impair strongly glucocorticoid-induced transcription from this
promoter in vivo. These data demonstrate that the TGGCA-binding protein is a
multifunctional DNA-binding protein, capable of serving a transcriptional role in
the case of MMTV, in addition to its known involvement in the replication of
adenovirus.

PMCID: PMC553940
PMID: 3038519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nature. 1987 Apr 23-29;326(6115):740-1.

Regulation of transcription. Are some controlling factors more equal than others?

Short NJ.

PMID: 3033509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. EMBO J. 1987 Jan;6(1):161-8.

Contactpoint analysis of the HeLa nuclear factor I recognition site reveals
symmetrical binding at one side of the DNA helix.

de Vries E, van Driel W, van den Heuvel SJ, van der Vliet PC.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) is a HeLa sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that is
required for initiation of adenovirus (Ad) DNA replication and may be involved in
the expression of several cellular genes. The interaction between NFI and its
binding site on the Ad2 origin has been studied. Methylation interference and
protection, u.v. irradiation of 5-BrdU substituted DNA and ethylation
interference revealed major groove contacts with G and T, and phosphate backbone 
contacts. Computer stereographics show that the contacts are located in two
blocks showing dyad symmetry to each other and 22 out of 23 contacts are
accessible from one side of the helix. Inversion of the NFI binding site did not 
change the NFI dependent stimulation of Ad2 DNA replication in a reconstituted
system. All data are compatible with NFI binding as a dimer at one side of the
DNA helix.

PMCID: PMC553372
PMID: 3034574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Nov 25;14(22):9117-32.

Analysis of nuclear factor I binding to DNA using degenerate oligonucleotides.

Gronostajski RM.

Nuclear factor I (NFI) binds tightly to DNA containing the consensus sequence
TGG(N)6-7GCCAA. To study the role of the spacing between the TGG and GCCAA
motifs, oligonucleotides homologous to the NFI binding site FIB-2 were
synthesized and used for binding assays in vitro. The wild-type site (FIB-2.6)
has a 6bp spacer region and binds tightly to NFI. When the size of this spacer
was altered by +/- 1 or 2bp the binding to NFI was abolished. To further assess
the role of the spacer and bases flanking the motifs, two oligonucleotide
libraries were synthesized. Each member of these libraries had intact TGG and
GCCAA motifs, but the sequence of the spacer and the 3bp next to each motif was
degenerate. The library with a 6bp spacer bound to NFI to 40-50% the level of
FIB-2.6. The library with a 7bp spacer bound to NFI to only 4% the level of
FIB-2.6 and some of this binding was weaker than that of FIB-2.6 DNA. This novel 
use of degenerate DNA libraries has shown that: 1) the structural requirements
for FIB sites with a 7bp spacer are more stringent than for sites with a 6bp
spacer and 2) a limited number of DNA structural features can prevent the binding
of NFI to sites with intact motifs and a 6bp spacer region.

PMCID: PMC311933
PMID: 3786147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. EMBO J. 1986 Aug;5(8):1967-71.

High affinity binding site for nuclear factor I next to the hepatitis B virus S
gene promoter.

Shaul Y, Ben-Levy R, De-Medina T.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antigen (HBsAG) is encoded by the S gene
under the regulation of a promoter in the pre-S1 region. The S gene promoter does
not contain a 'TATA' box-like sequence, but there is a sequence resembling, in
part, the late promoter of Simian virus 40 (SV40). In an attempt to study the
regulation of the S gene promoter we looked for cellular proteins which bind to
this region. We report here that a nuclear protein is tightly bound to the HBV
genome at a position approximately 190 bases upstream from the S gene promoter.
Evidence is provided to show that (a) this nuclear protein is the nuclear factor 
I (NF-I) that was previously found to be bound to the inverted terminal repeat of
the adenovirus (Ad) DNA and to enhance Ad DNA replication in vitro and (b) this
NF-I binding site is required for optimal activity of the S gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC1167065
PMID: 3463507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. EMBO J. 1986 Jun;5(6):1367-71.

Nuclear factor 1 interacts with five DNA elements in the promoter region of the
human cytomegalovirus major immediate early gene.

Hennighausen L, Fleckenstein B.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a ubiquitous pathogen of the herpesvirus group,
has a linear double-stranded DNA genome of 235 kb. The expression of its major
immediate early gene (IE1) is entirely dependent on host factors, presumably
proteins binding to DNA elements in the regulatory regions of the gene. We have
identified four high-affinity binding sites for nuclear factor 1 (NF1) in the
promoter upstream region of IE1 gene between nucleotides -780 and -610, and an
additional, even stronger, binding site in the first intron near nucleotide +350.
NF1 activity is found in a wide range of species and binds to the sequence 5'
TGGC/ANNNNNGCCAA3' on double-stranded DNA, protecting approximately 25 bp from
DNase I digestion; its functional importance has been found first in the
necessity for adenovirus DNA replication, where it may be important in mediating 
the binding of other proteins. The regulatory significance of NF1 recognition
elements within other genes is unknown. The NF1 binding sites in the HCMV IE1
gene coincide with regions that had been shown to be sensitive to DNase I in the 
active gene but not sensitive in the silent gene; there was, however, no NF1
binding in the strong and constitutively DNase I-hypersensitive transcription
enhancer of the IE1 gene. This suggests that the specific protein--DNA
interaction described is important in the regulated control of the IE1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1166949
PMID: 3015602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1986 Mar 5;261(7):3339-46.

Reconstruction of adenovirus replication origins with a human nuclear factor I
binding site.

Adhya S, Shneidman PS, Hurwitz J.

Nuclear factor I is a host-coded DNA-binding protein that stimulates initiation
of adenovirus DNA replication. To understand the mechanism of action of nuclear
factor I, we have constructed, by recombinant DNA techniques, origins of
replication in which the adenovirus type 5 nuclear factor I binding site (FIB
site) has been replaced by a FIB site isolated from human genomic DNA
(Gronostajski, R. M., Nagata, K., and Hurwitz, J. (1984) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 81, 4013-4017). Assays of such recombinants for initiation and
elongation in vitro showed that nuclear factor I was active only when the FIB
site was relatively close to the DNA terminus, i.e. the FIB site was centered at 
nucleotides 30-36 from the end of the DNA. Nuclear factor I was active in either 
orientation within this distance range. The presence of one or two additional FIB
sites in the downstream region had no effect. The implications of these results
for the mechanism of nuclear factor I action are discussed.

PMID: 3005289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Nucleic Acids Res. 1986 Feb 11;14(3):1303-17.

A sensitive and rapid gel retention assay for nuclear factor I and other
DNA-binding proteins in crude nuclear extracts.

Schneider R, Gander I, Müller U, Mertz R, Winnacker EL.

The paper describes a rapid and sensitive assay for DNA binding proteins which
interact with specific and defined binding sites. It exploits the observation
that complexes of proteins and small synthetic DNA fragments (40 bp) containing
the protein/DNA binding site can enter native polyacrylamide gels and remain
stably associated during electrophoresis under non-denaturing conditions. The
assay was applied to nuclear factor I, to its identification and purification
from porcine liver, to an analysis of its binding site on adenovirus type 5 DNA
and to an exploration of other potential binding sites for DNA binding proteins
within the inverted terminal repetition of adenovirus DNA. The extreme
sensitivity of the assay which surpasses that of conventional footprint assays by
at least two orders of magnitude permitted the identification of nuclear factor
I-like activities in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

PMCID: PMC339505
PMID: 3513122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. EMBO J. 1986 Feb;5(2):381-6.

Functional homology between the sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins nuclear
factor I from HeLa cells and the TGGCA protein from chicken liver.

Leegwater PA, van der Vliet PC, Rupp RA, Nowock J, Sippel AE.

Nuclear factor I from HeLa cells, a protein with enhancing function in adenovirus
DNA replication, and the chicken TGGCA protein are specific DNA-binding proteins 
that were first detected by independent methods and that appeared to have similar
DNA sequence specificity. To test whether they are homologous proteins from
different species we have compared (i) their DNA binding properties and (ii)
their function in reconstituted adenovirus DNA replication systems. Using
deletion and substitution mutants derived from the DNA binding site on the
adenovirus 2 inverted terminal repeat, it was found that the two proteins protect
the same 24-nucleotide region of both strands against DNase I digestion and that 
they have identical minimal recognition sequences of 15 bp containing dyad
symmetry. Like nuclear factor I, the TGGCA protein enhances the initiation
reaction of adenovirus 2 DNA replication in vitro in a DNA recognition
site-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC1166743
PMID: 3709517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 1986 Jan 25;261(3):1398-408.

Purification of nuclear factor I by DNA recognition site affinity chromatography.

Rosenfeld PJ, Kelly TJ.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1986 Jul 25;261(21):10015.

Nuclear factor I (NF-I) is a cellular protein that enhances the initiation of
adenovirus DNA replication in vitro. The enhancement of initiation correlates
with the ability of NF-I to bind a specific nucleotide sequence within the viral 
origin of replication. We have developed a method for the purification of NF-I
which is based upon the high affinity interaction between the protein and its
recognition site. This approach may be generally applicable to the purification
of other site-specific DNA binding proteins. The essential feature of the method 
is a two-step column chromatographic procedure in which proteins are first
fractionated on an affinity matrix consisting of nonspecific (Escherichia coli)
DNA and then on a matrix that is highly enriched in the specific DNA sequence
that is recognized by NF-I. During the first step NF-I coelutes with proteins
that have similar general affinity for DNA. During the second step NF-I elutes at
a much higher ionic strength than the contaminating nonspecific DNA binding
proteins. The DNA recognition site affinity matrix used in the second step is
prepared from a plasmid (pKB67-88) that contains 88 copies of the NF-I binding
site. This plasmid was constructed by means of a novel cloning strategy that
generates concatenated NF-I binding sites arranged exclusively in a direct head
to tail configuration. Using this purification scheme, we have obtained a
2400-fold purification of NF-I from crude HeLa nuclear extract with a 57%
recovery of specific DNA binding activity. Throughout the purification procedure 
NF-I retained the ability to enhance the efficiency of initiation of adenovirus
DNA replication in vitro. Electrophoresis of the purified fraction on sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels revealed a population of related polypeptides
that ranged in apparent molecular weight from 66,000 to 52,000. The native
molecular weight of NF-I deduced from gel filtration and glycerol sedimentation
studies is 55,000 and the frictional ratio is 1.3. These results suggest that
NF-I exists as a globular monomer in solution.

PMID: 3003068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. CRC Crit Rev Biochem. 1986;21(1):1-26.

Structure of transcriptionally active chromatin.

Yaniv M, Cereghini S.

Transcriptionally active or potentially active genes can be distinguished by
several criteria from inactive sequences. Active genes show both an increased
general sensitivity to endonucleases like DNase I or micrococcal nuclease and the
presence of nuclease hypersensitive sites. Frequently, the nuclease
hypersensitive sites are present just upstream of the transcription initiation
site covering sequences that are crucial for the promoter function. Viral or
cellular transcription enhancer elements are also associated with DNase I
hypersensitive sites. At least for the SV40 enhancer, it was shown by
electronmicroscopic studies that the DNase I hypersensitive DNA segment is
excluded from nucleosomes. It is highly plausible that the binding of regulatory 
proteins to enhancer or promoter sequences is responsible for the exclusion of
these DNA segments from nucleosomes and for the formation of nuclease
hypersensitive sites. We speculate that the binding of such proteins may switch
on a change in the conformation and/or the protein composition of a chromatin
segment or domain containing one to several genes. Biochemical analysis of
fractionated nucleosome particles or of active and inactive chromatin fractions
have revealed differences in the composition as well as in the degree of
modification of histones in these two subfractions of the chromosome. However,
until present it is impossible to define unambiguously what are the crucial
structural elements that distinguish between particles present on active and
inactive chromatin.

PMID: 3015490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Mol Biol. 1985 Nov 5;186(1):129-36.

Origin of adenovirus DNA replication. Role of the nuclear factor I binding site
in vivo.

Hay RT.

An assay is described that detects in vivo a single round of initiation and DNA
synthesis directed by a linear molecule containing an exposed single copy of an
adenovirus (Ad) origin of replication. This and a previously described assay,
which measures multiple rounds of DNA replication, were used to identify DNA
sequences within the Ad2 and Ad4 origins of replication that are important for
ori function. Linear DNA molecules containing sequences from the Ad2 or Ad4
genome termini were cotransfected with homologous and heterologous helper virus, 
and net amounts of DNA synthesis were compared. Linear molecules containing the
Ad4 inverted terminal repeats were replicated 20-fold better in the presence of
the homologous helper, whereas both Ad2 and Ad4 inverted terminal repeats were
utilized efficiently by Ad4. DNA sequence analysis of the Ad2 ori and the
corresponding region in Ad4 indicated that, although there are only ten variant
base-pairs, eight are located within the Ad2 DNA sequence recognized by the
cellular protein nuclear factor I. This protein is required to achieve the
maximal rate of Ad2 DNA replication in vitro, and these differences therefore
identify DNA sequences that are crucial to Ad2 ori function. The Ad4 ITR does not
contain a functional nuclear factor I binding site, and deletion analysis has
demonstrated that this region of the Ad4 genome is not required for ori function.
In contrast to Ad2, the DNA sequences required for the initiation of Ad4 DNA
replication were shown to reside entirely within the terminal 18 base-pairs of
the Ad4 inverted terminal repeat.

PMID: 4078897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1985 Oct;30(11):1187-206.

[Eukaryotic DNA replication factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Nagata K.

PMID: 3909230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Jul 11;13(13):4935-52.

Adenovirus DNA replication in vitro: site-directed mutagenesis of the nuclear
factor I binding site of the Ad2 origin.

de Vries E, van Driel W, Tromp M, van Boom J, van der Vliet PC.

The template requirements for efficient adenovirus DNA replication were studied
in vitro in a reconstituted system with cloned DNA fragments, containing the Ad2 
origin region, as templates. Replication is enhanced by nuclear factor I, a
cellular protein that binds specifically to the Ad2 origin. This stimulation is
shown to be strongly dependent on the concentration of the adenovirus DNA binding
protein. Using synthetic oligonucleotides we have constructed plasmids with base 
substitutions in the nuclear factor I binding region. Footprint analysis and
competition filter binding studies show that two of the three small blocks of
conserved nucleotides in this region are involved in the binding of nuclear
factor I. The binding affinity can be influenced by the base composition of the
degenerate region just outside these two blocks. In vitro initiation and DNA
chain elongation experiments with the mutants demonstrate that binding of nuclear
factor I to the Ad2 origin is necessary for stimulation. However, binding alone
is not always sufficient since a mutation which only slightly disturbs binding is
strongly impaired in stimulation of DNA replication by nuclear factor I.

PMCID: PMC321836
PMID: 4040630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. EMBO J. 1985 Jun;4(6):1515-21.

Recognition site of nuclear factor I, a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein
from HeLa cells that stimulates adenovirus DNA replication.

Leegwater PA, van Driel W, van der Vliet PC.

Nuclear factor I is a 47-kd protein, isolated from nuclei of HeLa cells, that
binds specifically to the inverted terminal repeat of the adenovirus (Ad) DNA and
enhances Ad DNA replication in vitro. We have studied the DNA sequence
specificity of nuclear factor I binding using cloned terminal fragments of the
Ad2 genome and a set of deletion mutants. Binding of nuclear factor I protects
nucleotides 19-42 of Ad2 DNA against DNase I digestion. Filter binding assays
show that deletion of the first 23 nucleotides does not impair binding while a
deletion of 24 nucleotides reduces binding severely. However, binding studies on 
Ad12 DNA indicate that nucleotide 24 can be mutated. Fragments containing the
first 40 bp are bound normally while the first 38 bp are insufficient to sustain 
binding. Taken together, these results indicate that the minimal recognition site
of nuclear factor I contains 15 or 16 nucleotides, located from nucleotide 25 to 
nucleotide 39 or 40 of the Ad2 DNA. This site contains two of the four conserved 
nucleotide sequences in this region. Sequences flanking the minimal recognition
site may reduce the binding affinity of nuclear factor I. In accordance with
these binding studies, DNA replication of a fragment that carries the sequence of
the terminal 40 nucleotides of Ad2 at one molecular end is enhanced by nuclear
factor I in an in vitro replication system.

PMCID: PMC554376
PMID: 4040852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 1985 Mar 25;13(6):2045-61.

The TGGCA protein binds to the MMTV-LTR, the adenovirus origin of replication,
and the BK virus enhancer.

Nowock J, Borgmeyer U, Püschel AW, Rupp RA, Sippel AE.

TGGCA-binding proteins are nuclear proteins with high affinity for
double-stranded DNA homologous to the prototype recognition sequence
5'YTGGCANNNTGCCAR 3'. Their ubiquitous tissue distribution in higher vertebrates 
characterizes them as a class of highly conserved proteins which may exert a
basic function. To obtain clues to this function, specific binding sites were
mapped on three viral genomes. Recognition sites were identified in the enhancer 
region of the BK virus, in the LTR of the mouse mammary tumor virus, and in the
origin of replication of adenovirus 12. The TGGCA-binding protein from HeLa cells
appears to be identical to nuclear factor I described by others, which stimulates
initiation of adenovirus DNA replication in vitro. However, data from MMTV, BKV, 
and from cellular genes suggest that this specific protein-DNA interaction may
also be involved in the control of gene activity.

PMCID: PMC341134
PMID: 2987840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nature. 1985 Mar 21-27;314(6008):289-92.

High-affinity binding site for a specific nuclear protein in the human IgM gene.

Hennighausen L, Siebenlist U, Danner D, Leder P, Rawlins D, Rosenfeld P, Kelly T 
Jr.

Proteins binding to specific regions of DNA with high affinity frequently govern 
or regulate reactions at the gene level. We have identified a high-affinity
binding site in the immunoglobulin mu gene that binds a specific nuclear protein,
and have now characterized it fully using nuclear factor 1 (NF-1), a protein
purified from the nuclei of HeLa cells and required for the in vitro replication 
of adenovirus (Ad) DNA. NF-1 protects a 25-base pair (bp) double-stranded segment
of DNA which shares a consensus sequence, 5' TGGA/CNNNNNGCCAA 3', with similar
binding sites in the Ad-5 terminal repeat and the human c-myc gene. Although this
site differs from the enhancer region, a biological function is suggested by the 
fact that it is DNase I hypersensitive in immunoglobulin-producing lymphoblastoid
cells. The binding site for the NF-1 protein in the mu gene, by analogy with the 
site in the Ad-5 terminal repeat, may represent one component of a cellular
origin of replication; alternatively, it may be responsible for the activation of
the chromatin in this region.

PMID: 3920528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1984 Jul;81(13):4013-7.

Isolation of human DNA sequences that bind to nuclear factor I, a host protein
involved in adenovirus DNA replication.

Gronostajski RM, Nagata K, Hurwitz J.

Nuclear factor I is a 47,000-dalton protein isolated from human HeLa cells that
is required for the in vitro replication of adenovirus DNA. This protein was
previously shown to bind specifically to nucleotides 17-48 of the left-hand
terminus of cloned adenovirus serotype 5 DNA. An in vitro assay for DNA sequences
that compete with adenovirus DNA for the binding of nuclear factor I has been
developed. With this assay, we have shown specific binding of human DNA sequences
to nuclear factor I. Using the DNA binding activity of nuclear factor I, we have 
isolated and cloned segments of human DNA that bind tightly to this protein. One 
nuclear factor I binding site is present about every 100,000 base pairs in the
HeLa cell genome. The binding of these DNA molecules to nuclear factor I
resembles the binding of cloned adenovirus DNA to the protein and is resistant to
high ionic strength. The isolation of DNA sequences from HeLa cells that bind
specifically to nuclear factor I suggests that this protein interacts with host
DNA in vivo.

PMCID: PMC345358
PMID: 6588377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


