
1. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Oct;8(5):643-52. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000690. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

ZBTB17 (MIZ1) Is Important for the Cardiac Stress Response and a Novel Candidate 
Gene for Cardiomyopathy and Heart Failure.

Buyandelger B, Mansfield C, Kostin S, Choi O, Roberts AM, Ware JS, Mazzarotto F, 
Pesce F, Buchan R, Isaacson RL, Vouffo J, Gunkel S, Knöll G, McSweeney SJ, Wei H,
Perrot A, Pfeiffer C, Toliat MR, Ilieva K, Krysztofinska E, López-Olañeta MM,
Gómez-Salinero JM, Schmidt A, Ng KE, Teucher N, Chen J, Teichmann M, Eilers M,
Haverkamp W, Regitz-Zagrosek V, Hasenfuss G, Braun T, Pennell DJ, Gould I, Barton
PJ, Lara-Pezzi E, Schäfer S, Hübner N, Felkin LE, O'Regan DP, Brand T, Milting H,
Nürnberg P, Schneider MD, Prasad S, Petretto E, Knöll R.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in sarcomeric and cytoskeletal proteins are a major cause
of hereditary cardiomyopathies, but our knowledge remains incomplete as to how
the genetic defects execute their effects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used cysteine and glycine-rich protein 3, a known
cardiomyopathy gene, in a yeast 2-hybrid screen and identified zinc-finger and
BTB domain-containing protein 17 (ZBTB17) as a novel interacting partner. ZBTB17 
is a transcription factor that contains the peak association signal (rs10927875) 
at the replicated 1p36 cardiomyopathy locus. ZBTB17 expression protected cardiac 
myocytes from apoptosis in vitro and in a mouse model with cardiac
myocyte-specific deletion of Zbtb17, which develops cardiomyopathy and fibrosis
after biomechanical stress. ZBTB17 also regulated cardiac myocyte hypertrophy in 
vitro and in vivo in a calcineurin-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: We revealed new functions for ZBTB17 in the heart, a transcription
factor that may play a role as a novel cardiomyopathy gene.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26175529  [PubMed - in process]


2. EMBO J. 2015 Jun 3;34(11):1554-71. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490467. Epub 2015 Apr
20.

Repression of SRF target genes is critical for Myc-dependent apoptosis of
epithelial cells.

Wiese KE(1), Haikala HM(2), von Eyss B(1), Wolf E(1), Esnault C(3), Rosenwald
A(4), Treisman R(3), Klefström J(2), Eilers M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Theodor Boveri Institute University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. 
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Cancer Cell Circuitry Laboratory, Translational Cancer
Biology Research Program and Institute of Biomedicine Biomedicum Helsinki
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Cancer Research UK London Research 
Institute Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories Transcription Laboratory, London, UK.
(4)Institute of Pathology University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Comprehensive
Cancer Center Mainfranken University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (5)Biocenter
Theodor Boveri Institute University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Comprehensive 
Cancer Center Mainfranken University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
martin.eilers@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Oncogenic levels of Myc expression sensitize cells to multiple apoptotic stimuli,
and this protects long-lived organisms from cancer development. How cells
discriminate physiological from supraphysiological levels of Myc is largely
unknown. Here, we show that induction of apoptosis by Myc in breast epithelial
cells requires association of Myc with Miz1. Gene expression and ChIP-Sequencing 
experiments show that high levels of Myc invade target sites that lack consensus 
E-boxes in a complex with Miz1 and repress transcription. Myc/Miz1-repressed
genes encode proteins involved in cell adhesion and migration and include several
integrins. Promoters of repressed genes are enriched for binding sites of the
serum-response factor (SRF). Restoring SRF activity antagonizes Myc repression of
SRF target genes, attenuates Myc-induced apoptosis, and reverts a Myc-dependent
decrease in Akt phosphorylation and activity, a well-characterized suppressor of 
Myc-induced apoptosis. We propose that high levels of Myc engage Miz1 in
repressive DNA binding complexes and suppress an SRF-dependent transcriptional
program that supports survival of epithelial cells.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4474530 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 25896507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem J. 2015 Mar 15;466(3):499-509. doi: 10.1042/BJ20141143.

Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein 1 positively regulates Wnt signalling by
protecting Dishevelled from Dapper1-mediated degradation.

Huang Y(1), Wang P(1), Chen H(1), Ding Y(1), Chen YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)*The State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology,
Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China.

Wnt signalling regulates embryonic development and tissue homoeostasis by
modulating cell proliferation, differentiation and migration. Dapper1 (Dpr1) has 
been shown to be an important key negative regulator of Wnt signalling by
promoting Dishevelled (Dvl) degradation. In the present study, we found that
Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein 1 (MIZ1) interacts with Dpr1 and this
interaction attenuates the ability of Dpr1 to induce Dvl2 degradation, thus
enhancing Wnt signalling. Mechanistically, MIZ1 is translocated from the nucleus 
to the cytoplasm upon Wnt3a stimulation or overexpression of Dpr1 and Dvl2,
disrupting the interaction between Dpr1 and Dvl2. Furthermore, MIZ1 can promote
the proliferation of breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells through Wnt
signalling and reverse the anti-proliferative effect of Dpr1 on colorectal cancer
Caco-2. Together, our findings establish a novel layer of Wnt signalling
regulation via the MIZ1-Dpr1-Dvl axis.

PMID: 25558878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 Dec 1;70(Pt 12):1591-6. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14023449. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Structures of heterodimeric POZ domains of Miz1/BCL6 and Miz1/NAC1.

Stead MA(1), Wright SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, England.

The POZ domain is an evolutionarily conserved protein-protein interaction domain 
that is found in approximately 40 mammalian transcription factors. POZ domains
mediate both homodimerization and the heteromeric interactions of different
POZ-domain transcription factors with each other. Miz1 is a POZ-domain
transcription factor that regulates cell-cycle arrest and DNA-damage responses.
The activities of Miz1 are altered by its interaction with the POZ-domain
transcriptional repressors BCL6 and NAC1, and these interactions have been
implicated in tumourigenesis in B-cell lymphomas and in ovarian serous carcinomas
that overexpress BCL6 and NAC1, respectively. A strategy for the purification of 
tethered POZ domains that form forced heterodimers is described, and crystal
structures of the heterodimeric POZ domains of Miz1/BCL6 and of Miz1/NAC1 are
reported. These structures will be relevant for the design of therapeutics that
target POZ-domain interaction interfaces.

PMID: 25484205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Trends Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;25(4):241-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2014.10.006. Epub 2014
Dec 1.

Taming of the beast: shaping Myc-dependent amplification.

Wolf E(1), Lin CY(2), Eilers M(3), Levens DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. (2)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: Charles_lin@dfci.harvard.edu. (3)Theodor
Boveri Institute, Biocenter, and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address:
martin.eilers@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de. (4)Laboratory of Pathology, 10 Center 
Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA. Electronic address: levens@helix.nih.gov.

Myc deregulation is a hallmark oncogenic event where overexpression of the
transcription factor gives rise to numerous tumorigenic phenotypes. The complex
consequences of Myc deregulation have prevented clear mechanistic interpretations
of its function. A synthesis of recent experimental observations offers a
consensus on the direct transcriptional function of Myc: when overexpressed, Myc 
broadly engages the established euchromatic cis-regulatory landscape of the cell,
where the factor generally amplifies transcription. The level of Myc binding at
target genes and the transcriptional output are differentially modulated by
additional regulators, including Miz1. Targeting Myc oncogenic activity will
require an understanding of whether amplification promotes tumorigenesis and the 
consequences of amplification in tumors adapted to oncogenic Myc.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4380620
PMID: 25475704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Sep 24;6(12):1525-41. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201403927.

Tumor cell-specific inhibition of MYC function using small molecule inhibitors of
the HUWE1 ubiquitin ligase.

Peter S(1), Bultinck J(2), Myant K(3), Jaenicke LA(1), Walz S(1), Müller J(4),
Gmachl M(5), Treu M(5), Boehmelt G(5), Ade CP(1), Schmitz W(1), Wiegering A(6),
Otto C(6), Popov N(7), Sansom O(3), Kraut N(5), Eilers M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany. (2)Cytokine Receptor Lab, Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium. (3)CRUK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, UK. (4)Department of
Molecular Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)Department Lead Discovery, Boehringer Ingelheim RCV GmbH & Co KG, Vienna,
Austria. (6)Department of General, Visceral, Vascular and Paediatric Surgery,
University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (7)Theodor Boveri Institute,
Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Comprehensive Cancer Center 
Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (8)Theodor Boveri
Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany Comprehensive
Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
martin.eilers@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de.

Comment in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Dec;6(12):1509-11.

Deregulated expression of MYC is a driver of colorectal carcinogenesis,
necessitating novel strategies to inhibit MYC function. The ubiquitin ligase
HUWE1 (HECTH9, ARF-BP1, MULE) associates with both MYC and the MYC-associated
protein MIZ1. We show here that HUWE1 is required for growth of colorectal cancer
cells in culture and in orthotopic xenograft models. Using high-throughput
screening, we identify small molecule inhibitors of HUWE1, which inhibit
MYC-dependent transactivation in colorectal cancer cells, but not in stem and
normal colon epithelial cells. Inhibition of HUWE1 stabilizes MIZ1. MIZ1 globally
accumulates on MYC target genes and contributes to repression of MYC-activated
target genes upon HUWE1 inhibition. Our data show that transcriptional activation
by MYC in colon cancer cells requires the continuous degradation of MIZ1 and
identify a novel principle that allows for inhibition of MYC function in tumor
cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4287973
PMID: 25253726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11447-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku857. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Two ZNF509 (ZBTB49) isoforms induce cell-cycle arrest by activating transcription
of p21/CDKN1A and RB upon exposure to genotoxic stress.

Jeon BN(1), Kim MK(1), Yoon JH(1), Kim MY(1), An H(1), Noh HJ(1), Choi WI(1), Koh
DI(1), Hur MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Plus Project 
for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, 50-1, Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Plus Project 
for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, 50-1, Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea
mwhur2@yuhs.ac.

ZNF509 is unique among POK family proteins in that four isoforms are generated by
alternative splicing. Short ZNF509 (ZNF509S1, -S2 and -S3) isoforms contain one
or two out of the seven zinc-fingers contained in long ZNF509 (ZNF509L). Here, we
investigated the functions of ZNF509 isoforms in response to DNA damage, showing 
isoforms to be induced by p53. Intriguingly, to inhibit proliferation of HCT116
and HEK293 cells, we found that ZNF509L activates p21/CDKN1A transcription, while
ZNF509S1 induces RB. ZNF509L binds to the p21/CDKN1A promoter either alone or by 
interacting with MIZ-1 to recruit the co-activator p300 to activate p21/CDKN1A
transcription. In contrast, ZNF509S1 binds to the distal RB promoter to interact 
and interfere with the MIZF repressor, resulting in derepression and
transcription of RB. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that ZNF509 is highly 
expressed in normal epithelial cells, but was completely repressed in tumor
tissues of the colon, lung and skin, indicating a possible role as a tumor
suppressor.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4191422
PMID: 25245946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Sep;42(15):9700-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku697. Epub 2014
Aug 4.

Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 3A protein regulates CDKN2B transcription via 
interaction with MIZ-1.

Bazot Q(1), Deschamps T(1), Tafforeau L(2), Siouda M(3), Leblanc P(4),
Harth-Hertle ML(5), Rabourdin-Combe C(2), Lotteau V(2), Kempkes B(5), Tommasino
M(3), Gruffat H(1), Manet E(6).

Author information: 
(1)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Oncogenic Herpesviruses 
team, Université de Lyon, Lyon 69364, France Université Lyon 1, Centre
International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Lyon 69364, France CIRI,
International Center for Infectiology Research, Cell Biology of Viral Infections 
team, Université de Lyon, Lyon 69364, France INSERM, U1111, Lyon 69364, France
CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon 69364, France. (2)Université Lyon 1, Centre International de 
Recherche en Infectiologie, Lyon 69364, France CIRI, International Center for
Infectiology Research, Cell Biology of Viral Infections team, Université de Lyon,
Lyon 69364, France INSERM, U1111, Lyon 69364, France CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon 69364,
France Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon 69364, France. (3)International
Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon 69372, France.
(4)CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon 69364, France CNRS UMR5239, Laboratoire de Biologie de la 
Cellule, Lyon 69364, France. (5)Department of Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Center
Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.
(6)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Oncogenic Herpesviruses 
team, Université de Lyon, Lyon 69364, France Université Lyon 1, Centre
International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Lyon 69364, France CIRI,
International Center for Infectiology Research, Cell Biology of Viral Infections 
team, Université de Lyon, Lyon 69364, France INSERM, U1111, Lyon 69364, France
CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon 69364, France evelyne.manet@ens-lyon.fr.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 3 family of protein is critical for 
the EBV-induced primary B-cell growth transformation process. Using a yeast
two-hybrid screen we identified 22 novel cellular partners of the EBNA3s. Most
importantly, among the newly identified partners, five are known to play direct
and important roles in transcriptional regulation. Of these, the Myc-interacting 
zinc finger protein-1 (MIZ-1) is a transcription factor initially characterized
as a binding partner of MYC. MIZ-1 activates the transcription of a number of
target genes including the cell cycle inhibitor CDKN2B. Focusing on the
EBNA3A/MIZ-1 interaction we demonstrate that binding occurs in EBV-infected cells
expressing both proteins at endogenous physiological levels and that in the
presence of EBNA3A, a significant fraction of MIZ-1 translocates from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus. Moreover, we show that a trimeric complex composed of a
MIZ-1 recognition DNA element, MIZ-1 and EBNA3A can be formed, and that
interaction of MIZ-1 with nucleophosmin (NPM), one of its coactivator, is
prevented by EBNA3A. Finally, we show that, in the presence of EBNA3A, expression
of the MIZ-1 target gene, CDKN2B, is downregulated and repressive H3K27 marks are
established on its promoter region suggesting that EBNA3A directly counteracts
the growth inhibitory action of MIZ-1.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4150796
PMID: 25092922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nature. 2014 Jul 24;511(7510):483-7. doi: 10.1038/nature13473. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Activation and repression by oncogenic MYC shape tumour-specific gene expression 
profiles.

Walz S(1), Lorenzin F(1), Morton J(2), Wiese KE(3), von Eyss B(3), Herold S(3),
Rycak L(4), Dumay-Odelot H(5), Karim S(2), Bartkuhn M(6), Roels F(7), Wüstefeld
T(8), Fischer M(7), Teichmann M(5), Zender L(9), Wei CL(10), Sansom O(2), Wolf
E(11), Eilers M(12).

Author information: 
(1)1] Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland,
97074 Würzburg, Germany [2]. (2)CRUK Beatson Institute, Garscube Estate,
Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK. (3)Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter,
University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. (4)Institute for
Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Emil-Mannkopff-Str.2, 35033 Marburg, 
Germany. (5)University of Bordeaux, IECB, ARNA laboratory, Equipe Labellisée
Contre le Cancer, 33600 Pessac, France. (6)Institute for Genetics,
Justus-Liebig-University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 58, 35390 Giessen, Germany.
(7)University Children's Hospital of Cologne, and Cologne Center for Molecular
Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Kerpener Str. 62, 50924 Cologne, Germany.
(8)University Hospital Tübingen, Division of Translational Gastrointestinal
Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine I, Otfried-Mueller-Strasse 10, 72076
Tübingen, Germany. (9)1] University Hospital Tübingen, Division of Translational 
Gastrointestinal Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine I,
Otfried-Mueller-Strasse 10, 72076 Tübingen, Germany [2] Translational
Gastrointestinal Oncology Group within the German Center for Translational Cancer
Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69121 Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)DOE Joint Genome Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, California
94598, USA. (11)1] Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg,
Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany [2] Rudolf Virchow Center/DFG Research Center
for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str.2,
97080 Würzburg, Germany [3]. (12)1] Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter,
University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany [2] Comprehensive
Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 6, 97080 
Würzburg, Germany [3].

Erratum in
    Nature. 2014 Dec 18;516(7531):440.

Comment in
    Nature. 2014 Jul 24;511(7510):417-8.

In mammalian cells, the MYC oncoprotein binds to thousands of promoters. During
mitogenic stimulation of primary lymphocytes, MYC promotes an increase in the
expression of virtually all genes. In contrast, MYC-driven tumour cells differ
from normal cells in the expression of specific sets of up- and downregulated
genes that have considerable prognostic value. To understand this discrepancy, we
studied the consequences of inducible expression and depletion of MYC in human
cells and murine tumour models. Changes in MYC levels activate and repress
specific sets of direct target genes that are characteristic of MYC-transformed
tumour cells. Three factors account for this specificity. First, the magnitude of
response parallels the change in occupancy by MYC at each promoter. Functionally 
distinct classes of target genes differ in the E-box sequence bound by MYC,
suggesting that different cellular responses to physiological and oncogenic MYC
levels are controlled by promoter affinity. Second, MYC both positively and
negatively affects transcription initiation independent of its effect on
transcriptional elongation. Third, complex formation with MIZ1 (also known as
ZBTB17) mediates repression of multiple target genes by MYC and the ratio of MYC 
and MIZ1 bound to each promoter correlates with the direction of response.

PMID: 25043018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cancer. 2014 Mar 11;13:54. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-54.

Regulation of CDKN2B expression by interaction of Arnt with Miz-1--a basis for
functional integration between the HIF and Myc gene regulatory pathways.

Aesoy R(1), Gradin K, Aasrud KS, Hoivik EA, Ruas JL, Poellinger L, Bakke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Jonas Lies vei 91, N-5009
Bergen, Norway. Reidun.Asoy@biomed.uib.no.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia- and Myc-dependent transcriptional regulatory pathways are
frequently deregulated in cancer cells. These pathways converge in many cellular 
responses, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are unclear.
METHODS: The ability of Miz-1 and Arnt to interact was identified in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. The mode of interaction and the functional consequences of
complex formation were analyzed by diverse molecular biology methods, in vitro.
Statistical analyses were performed by Student's t-test and ANOVA.
RESULTS: In the present study we demonstrate that the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translocator (Arnt), which is central in hypoxia-induced signaling, forms
a complex with Miz-1, an important transcriptional regulator in Myc-mediated
transcriptional repression. Overexpression of Arnt induced reporter gene activity
driven by the proximal promoter of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B gene 
(CDKN2B), which is an established target for the Myc/Miz-1 complex. In contrast, 
mutated forms of Arnt, that were unable to interact with Miz-1, had reduced
capability to activate transcription. Moreover, repression of Arnt reduced
endogenous CDKN2B expression, and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that
Arnt interacts with the CDKN2B promoter. The transcriptional activity of Arnt was
counteracted by Myc, but not by a mutated variant of Myc that is unable to
interact with Miz-1, suggesting mutually exclusive interaction of Arnt and Myc
with Miz-1. Our results also establish CDKN2B as a hypoxia regulated gene, as
endogenous CDKN2B mRNA and protein levels were reduced by hypoxic treatment of
U2OS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal a novel mode of regulation by protein-protein
interaction that directly ties together, at the transcriptional level, the Myc-
and hypoxia-dependent signaling pathways and expands our understanding of the
roles of hypoxia and cell cycle alterations during tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3984710
PMID: 24618291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013 Dec 1;3(12):a014290. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a014290.

The role of MIZ-1 in MYC-dependent tumorigenesis.

Wiese KE(1), Walz S, von Eyss B, Wolf E, Athineos D, Sansom O, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken and Theodor Boveri Institute,
Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

A hallmark of MYC-transformed cells is their aberrant response to antimitogenic
signals. Key examples include the inability of MYC-transformed cells to arrest
proliferation in response to antimitogenic signals such as TGF-ß or DNA damage
and their inability to differentiate into adipocytes in response to hormonal
stimuli. Given the plethora of antimitogenic signals to which a tumor cell is
exposed, it is likely that the ability to confer resistance to these signals is
central to the transforming properties of MYC in vivo. At the same time, the
inability of MYC-transformed cells to halt cell-cycle progression on stress may
establish a dependence on mutations that impair or disable apoptosis. We propose 
that the interaction of MYC with the zinc finger protein MIZ-1 mediates
resistance to antimitogenic signals. In contrast to other interactions of MYC,
there is currently little evidence that MIZ-1 associates with MYC in normal,
unperturbed cells. The functional interaction of both proteins becomes apparent
at oncogenic expression levels of MYC and association with MIZ-1 mediates both
oncogenic functions of MYC as well as tumor-suppressive responses to oncogenic
levels of MYC.

PMCID: PMC3839600
PMID: 24296348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Discov. 2013 Jul;3(7):OF32. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2013-119. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

The MULE/HUWE1 E3 ubiquitin ligase is a tumor suppressor.

[No authors listed]

MULE/HUWE1 suppresses RAS-driven skin tumorigenesis in vivo by regulating
c-MYC/MIZ1 stability.

PMID: 23847377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Eur J Med Res. 2013 Apr 9;18:10. doi: 10.1186/2047-783X-18-10.

Polymorphism of ZBTB17 gene is associated with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy:
a case control study in a Han Chinese population.

Li X(1), Luo R, Mo X, Jiang R, Kong H, Hua W, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiac Arrhythmia Center, Cardiovascular Institute and Fu Wai Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
100037, China.

BACKGROUND: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) has been extensively investigated for
many years, but its pathogenesis remains uncertain. The ACTC1 gene was the first 
sarcomeric gene whose mutation was shown to cause DCM; recent studies have
indicated that the HSPB7 and ZBTB17 genes are also associated with DCM. To assess
the potential role of these three genes in DCM, we examined 11 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ZBTB17, HSPB7 and ACTC1 genes: namely, rs10927875 in 
ZBTB17; rs1739843, rs7523558, and rs6660685 in HSPB7; rs533021, rs589759,
rs1370154, rs2070664, rs3759834, rs525720 and rs670957 in ACTC1.
METHODS: A total of 97 DCM patients and 189 controls were included in the study. 
All SNPs were genotyped by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS).
RESULTS: The genotype of SNP rs10927875 in ZBTB17 (OR=5.19, 95% CI =1.00 to
27.03, P=0.05) was associated with DCM in a Han Chinese population. There was no 
difference in genotype or allele frequencies in ACTC1 or HSPB7 between DCM
patients and control subjects.
CONCLUSION: The ZBTB17 polymorphism rs10927875 appears to play a role in the
susceptibility of the Han Chinese population to DCM.

PMCID: PMC3626695
PMID: 23570452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biomol NMR. 2012 Nov;54(3):317-23. doi: 10.1007/s10858-012-9670-1. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

NMR structure note: solution structure of human Miz-1 zinc fingers 8 to 10.

Bédard M(1), Maltais L, Beaulieu ME, Bilodeau J, Bernard D, Lavigne P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie de Sherbrooke, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences
de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, 3001 12e Avenue Nord, Campus de la santé, 
Sherbrooke, QC, J1H 5N4, Canada.

PMID: 22986688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 3;109(1):191-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1105176108. 
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Site-specific ubiquitination is required for relieving the transcription factor
Miz1-mediated suppression on TNF-a-induced JNK activation and inflammation.

Liu J(1), Yan J, Jiang S, Wen J, Chen L, Zhao Y, Lin A.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The transcription factor zinc-finger protein Miz1 represses TNF-a-induced JNK
activation and the repression is relieved upon TNF-a stimulation. However, the
underlying mechanism is incompletely understood. Here we report that Miz1
interferes with the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) Ubc13 for binding to the
RING domain of TNF-receptor associated factor 2 (TRAF2), thereby inhibiting the
ubiquitin ligase (E3) activity of TRAF2 and suppressing TNF-a-induced JNK
activation. Upon TNF-a stimulation, Miz1 rapidly undergoes K48-linked
polyubiquitination at Lys388 and Lys472 residues and subsequent proteasomal
degradation in a TRAF2-dependent manner. Replacement of Lysine 388 and Lysine 472
by arginines generates a nondegradable Miz1 mutant, which significantly
suppresses TNF-a-induced JNK1 activation and inflammation. Thus, our results
reveal a molecular mechanism by which the repression of TNF-a-induced JNK
activation by Miz1 is de-repressed by its own site-specific ubiquitination and
degradation, which may account for the temporal control of TNF-a-JNK signaling.

PMCID: PMC3252938
PMID: 22184250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Feb;33(2):294-300. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr286. Epub 2011 Dec
9.

MicroRNA-34a suppresses malignant transformation by targeting c-Myc
transcriptional complexes in human renal cell carcinoma.

Yamamura S(1), Saini S, Majid S, Hirata H, Ueno K, Chang I, Tanaka Y, Gupta A,
Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

We investigated the functional effects of microRNA-34a (miR-34a) on c-Myc
transcriptional complexes in renal cell carcinoma. miR-34a down-regulated
expression of multiple oncogenes including c-Myc by targeting its 3' untranslated
region, which was revealed by luciferase reporter assays. miR-34a was also found 
to repress RhoA expression by suppressing the c-Myc-Skp2-Miz1 transcriptional
complex that activates RhoA. Overexpression of c-Myc reversed miR-34a suppression
of RhoA expression and inhibition of cell invasion, suggesting that miR-34a
inhibits invasion by suppressing RhoA through c-Myc. miR-34a was also found to
repress the c-Myc-P-TEFb transcription elongation complex, indicating one of the 
mechanisms by which miR-34a has profound effects on cellular functions. Our
results demonstrate that miR-34a suppresses assembly and function of the c-Myc
complex that activates or elongates transcription, indicating a novel role of
miR-34a in the regulation of transcription by c-Myc.

PMCID: PMC3271269
PMID: 22159222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Virology. 2012 Jan 20;422(2):242-53. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.10.027. Epub 2011 
Nov 17.

The human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein targets Myc-interacting
zinc-finger protein-1.

Morandell D(1), Kaiser A, Herold S, Rostek U, Lechner S, Mitterberger MC,
Jansen-Dürr P, Eilers M, Zwerschke W.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Metabolism and Differentiation Research Group, Institute for Biomedical
Aging Research of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Innsbruck, Austria.

We demonstrate that HPV-16 E7 forms a complex with Miz-1. UV-induced expression
of the CDK-inhibitor p21(Cip1) and subsequent cell cycle arrest depends upon
endogenous Miz-1 in HPV-negative C33A cervical cancer cells containing mutated
p53. Transient expression of E7 in C33A inhibits UV-induced expression of
p21(Cip1) and overcomes Miz-1-induced G1-phase arrest. The C-terminal
E7<U+0394>79LEDLL83-mutant with reduced Miz-1-binding capacity was impaired in its
capability to repress p21(Cip1) expression; whereas the pRB-binding-deficient
E7C24G-mutant inhibited p21(Cip1) expression similar to wild-type E7. Using ChIP,
we demonstrate that endogenous E7 is bound to the endogenous p21(Cip1)
core-promoter in CaSki cells and RNAi-mediated knock down of Miz-1 abrogates
E7-binding to the p21(Cip1) promoter. Co-expression of E7 with Miz-1 inhibited
Miz-1-induced p21(Cip1) expression from the minimal-promoter via Miz-1
DNA-binding sites. Co-expression of E7<U+0394>79LEDLL83 did not inhibit Miz-1-induced
p21(Cip1) expression. E7C24G retained E7-wild-type capability to inhibit
Miz-1-dependent transactivation. These findings suggest that HPV-16 E7 can
repress Miz-1-induced p21(Cip1) gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3268862
PMID: 22099967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Semin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):379-87. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2011.09.001. Epub 2011 
Oct 13.

The role of the transcription factor Miz-1 in lymphocyte development and
lymphomagenesis-Binding Myc makes the difference.

Möröy T(1), Saba I, Kosan C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal - IRCM, 110 Avenue des Pins
Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada. Tarik.Moroy@ircm.qc.ca

The Myc interacting zinc finger protein 1 (Miz-1) is a BTB/POZ domain containing 
transcription factor that can function as an activator or repressor depending on 
its binding partners. In a complex with co-factors such as nuclophosmin or p300, 
Miz-1 stimulates transcription of genes that encode regulators of cell cycle
progression such as p21(Cip1) or p15(Ink4b) or inhibitors of apoptosis such as
Bcl-2. In contrast, Miz-1 becomes a transcriptional repressor when it binds to
c-Myc or Bcl-6, which replace nucleophosmin or p300. During lymphocyte
development, Miz-1 functions as a regulator of the IL-7 signaling pathway at very
early steps in the bone marrow and thymus. When the IL-7 receptor (IL-7R)
recognizes its cognate cytokine, a cascade of events is initiated that involves
the recruitment of janus kinases (JAK) to the cytoplasmic part of the IL-7R, the 
phosphorylation of Stat5, its dimerization and relocation to the nucleus,
enabling a transcriptional programming that governs commitment, survival and
proliferation of lymphoid lineage cells. Miz-1 is critical in this signal
transduction pathway, since it controls the expression of Socs1, an inhibitor of 
JAKs and thus of Stat5 activation and Bcl-2 expression. A lack of Miz-1 blocks
IL-7 mediated signaling, which is detrimental for early B- and T-lymphoid
development. These functions of Miz-1 during early lymphocyte development are
c-Myc-independent. In contrast, when c-Myc is constitutively over-expressed, for 
instance during c-Myc induced lymphomagenesis, the interaction between Miz-1 and 
c-Myc becomes important and critical for the initiation and maintenance of
c-Myc-dependent lymphoid malignancies.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22000024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;17(21):6681-92. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0313.
Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Expression of NLRR3 orphan receptor gene is negatively regulated by MYCN and
Miz-1, and its downregulation is associated with unfavorable outcome in
neuroblastoma.

Akter J(1), Takatori A, Hossain MS, Ozaki T, Nakazawa A, Ohira M, Suenaga Y,
Nakagawara A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Innovative Cancer Therapeutics, Chiba Cancer
Center, Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: Our previous study showed that expression of NLRR3 is significantly high
in favorable neuroblastomas (NBL), whereas that of NLRR1 is significantly high in
unfavorable NBLs. However, the molecular mechanism of transcriptional regulation 
of NLRR3 remains elusive. This study was undertaken to clarify the
transcriptional regulation of NLRR3 and its association with the prognosis of
NBL.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: NLRR3 and MYCN expressions in NBL cell lines were analyzed
after induction of cell differentiation, MYCN knockdown, and overexpression. The 
transcriptional regulation of NLRR3 was analyzed by luciferase reporter and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Quantitative PCR was used for examining the
expression of NLRR3, Miz-1, or MYCN in 87 primary NBLs.
RESULTS: The expression of NLRR3 mRNA was upregulated during differentiation of
NBL cells induced by retinoic acid, accompanied with reduced expression of MYCN, 
suggesting that NLRR3 expression was inversely correlated with MYCN in
differentiation. Indeed, knockdown of MYCN induced NLRR3 expression, whereas
exogenously expressed MYCN reduced cellular NLRR3 expression. We found that Miz-1
was highly expressed in favorable NBLs and NLRR3 was induced by Miz-1 expression 
in NBL cells. MYCN and Miz-1 complexes bound to NLRR3 promoter and showed a
negative regulation of NLRR3 expression. In addition, a combination of low
expression of NLRR3 and high expression of MYCN was highly associated with poor
prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: NLRR3 is a direct target of MYCN, which associates with Miz-1 and
negatively regulates NLRR3 expression. NLRR3 may play a role in NBL
differentiation and the survival of NBL patients by inversely correlating with
MYCN amplification.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21908575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 15;31(11):1442-58. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.331. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

The proto-oncoprotein KR-POK represses transcriptional activation of CDKN1A by
MIZ-1 through competitive binding.

Lee KM(1), Choi WI, Koh DI, Kim YJ, Jeon BN, Yoon JH, Lee CE, Kim SH, Oh J, Hur
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The BTB/POZ family of proteins has been implicated in multiple biological
processes, including tumourigenesis, DNA damage responses and cell cycle
progression and development. MIZ-1 (Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein 1) is
known to activate transcription of CDKN1A. We recently found that a kidney
cancer-related POK transcription factor, KR-POK, is highly expressed in kidney,
brain and bone marrow cancer tissues and is a potential proto-oncoprotein. Mouse 
Kr-pok represses transcription of the CDKN1A by acting on the proximal promoter. 
The BiFC/FRET assay, co-immunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase-fusion 
protein pull-down assay indicate that MIZ-1 and Kr-pok interact via their POZ
domains. Oligoucleotide pull-down assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that MIZ-1 binds to the proximal GC-box#3 (bp, -55 to -63) and the
MIZ-1-binding elements, MRE-A (bp, -90 to -64) and MRE-B (bp, -27 to -17).
Interestingly, MIZ-1 also binds to the distal p53-binding elements. Kr-pok binds 
to the proximal GC-box#1 (bp, -95 to -100) and #3 (bp, -55 to -63) relatively
strongly. It also shows weak binding to the MREs and the distal p53-binding
elements. Kr-pok competes with MIZ-1 in binding to these elements and represses
transcription by inhibiting MIZ-1/p300 recruitment, which decreases the
acetylation of histones H3 and H4. Our data indicate that Kr-pok stimulates cell 
proliferation by interfering with the function of MIZ-1 in CDKN1A gene
transcription using a mechanism that is radically different from other
MIZ-1-interacting proteins, such as B-cell lymphoma 6, c-Myc and Gfi-1.

PMID: 21804610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Blood. 2011 Mar 24;117(12):3370-81. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-310680. Epub 2011 
Jan 21.

IL-7R-dependent survival and differentiation of early T-lineage progenitors is
regulated by the BTB/POZ domain transcription factor Miz-1.

Saba I(1), Kosan C, Vassen L, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

T cells originate from early T lineage precursors that have entered the thymus
and differentiate through well-defined steps. Mice deficient for the BTB/POZ
domain of zinc finger protein-1 (Miz-1) almost entirely lack early T lineage
precursors and have a CD4(-)CD8(-) to CD4(+)CD8(+) block causing a strong
reduction in thymic cellularity. Miz-1(<U+0394>POZ) pro-T cells cannot differentiate in 
vitro and are unable to relay signals from the interleukin-7R (IL-7R). Both STAT5
phosphorylation and Bcl-2 up-regulation are perturbed. The high expression levels
of SOCS1 found in Miz-1(<U+0394>POZ) cells probably cause these alterations. Moreover,
Miz-1 can bind to the SOCS1 promoter, suggesting that Miz-1 deficiency causes a
deregulation of SOCS1. Transgenic overexpression of Bcl-2 or inhibition of SOCS1 
restored pro-T cell numbers and their ability to differentiate, supporting the
hypothesis that Miz-1 is required for the regulation of the
IL-7/IL-7R/STAT5/Bcl-2 signaling pathway by monitoring the expression levels of
SOCS1.

PMID: 21258009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):917-28. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.11.028.

Transcription factor miz-1 is required to regulate interleukin-7 receptor
signaling at early commitment stages of B cell differentiation.

Kosan C(1), Saba I, Godmann M, Herold S, Herkert B, Eilers M, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7,
Canada.

B cell development requires the coordinated action of transcription factors and
cytokines, in particular interleukin-7 (IL-7). We report that mice lacking the
POZ (Poxvirus and zinc finger) domain of the transcription factor Miz-1
(Zbtb17(<U+0394>POZ/<U+0394>POZ)) almost entirely lacked follicular B cells, as shown by the
fact that their progenitors failed to activate the Jak-Stat5 pathway and to
upregulate the antiapoptotic gene Bcl2 upon IL-7 stimulation. We show that Miz-1 
exerted a dual role in the interleukin-7 receptor (IL-7R) pathway by directly
repressing the Janus kinase (Jak) inhibitor suppressor of cytokine signaling 1
(Socs1) and by activating Bcl2 expression. Zbtb17(<U+0394>POZ/<U+0394>POZ) (Miz-1-deficient) B 
cell progenitors had low expression of early B cell genes as transcription factor
3 (Tcf3) and early B cell factor 1 (Ebf1) and showed a propensity for apoptosis. 
Only the combined re-expression of Bcl2 and Ebf1 could reconstitute the ability
of Miz-1-deficient precursors to develop into CD19(+) B cells.

PMID: 21167753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;71(2):404-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2627. Epub
2010 Dec 1.

A SP1/MIZ1/MYCN repression complex recruits HDAC1 at the TRKA and p75NTR
promoters and affects neuroblastoma malignancy by inhibiting the cell response to
NGF.

Iraci N(1), Diolaiti D, Papa A, Porro A, Valli E, Gherardi S, Herold S, Eilers M,
Bernardoni R, Della Valle G, Perini G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bologna, Department of Biology, Bologna, Italy.

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. One
important factor that predicts a favorable prognosis is the robust expression of 
the TRKA and p75NTR neurotrophin receptor genes. Interestingly, TRKA and p75NTR
expression is often attenuated in aggressive MYCN-amplified tumors, suggesting a 
causal link between elevated MYCN activity and the transcriptional repression of 
TRKA and p75NTR, but the precise mechanisms involved are unclear. Here, we show
that MYCN acts directly to repress TRKA and p75NTR gene transcription.
Specifically, we found that MYCN levels were critical for repression and that
MYCN targeted proximal/core promoter regions by forming a repression complex with
transcription factors SP1 and MIZ1. When bound to the TRKA and p75NTR promoters, 
MYCN recruited the histone deacetylase HDAC1 to induce a repressed chromatin
state. Forced re-expression of endogenous TRKA and p75NTR with exposure to the
HDAC inhibitor TSA sensitized neuroblastoma cells to NGF-mediated apoptosis. By
directly connecting MYCN to the repression of TRKA and p75NTR, our findings
establish a key pathway of clinical pathogenicity and aggressiveness in
neuroblastoma.

© 2010 AACR.

PMID: 21123453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Nov 19;11:165. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-165.

A novel syndrome of paediatric cataract, dysmorphism, ectodermal features, and
developmental delay in Australian Aboriginal family maps to 1p35.3-p36.32.

Hattersley K(1), Laurie KJ, Liebelt JE, Gecz J, Durkin SR, Craig JE, Burdon KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia.

BACKGROUND: A novel phenotype consisting of cataract, mental retardation,
erythematous skin rash and facial dysmorphism was recently described in an
extended pedigree of Australian Aboriginal descent. Large scale chromosomal
re-arrangements had previously been ruled out. We have conducted a genome-wide
scan to map the linkage region in this family.
METHODS: Genome-wide linkage analysis using Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) 
markers on the Affymetrix 10K SNP array was conducted and analysed using MERLIN. 
Three positional candidate genes (ZBTB17, EPHA2 and EPHB2) were sequenced to
screen for segregating mutations.
RESULTS: Under a fully penetrant, dominant model, the locus for this unique
phenotype was mapped to chromosome 1p35.3-p36.32 with a maximum LOD score of
2.41. The critical region spans 48.7 cM between markers rs966321 and rs1441834
and encompasses 527 transcripts from 364 annotated genes. No coding mutations
were identified in three positional candidate genes EPHA2, EPHB2 or ZBTB17. The
region overlaps with a previously reported region for Volkmann cataract and the
phenotype has similarity to that reported for 1p36 monosomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene for this syndrome is located in a 25.6 Mb region on
1p35.3-p36.32. The known cataract gene in this region (EPHA2) does not harbour
mutations in this family, suggesting that at least one additional gene for
cataract is present in this region.

PMCID: PMC2995478
PMID: 21092079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 4;29(44):5923-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.322. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

Transcriptional regulation of Wnt inhibitory factor-1 by Miz-1/c-Myc.

Licchesi JD(1), Van Neste L, Tiwari VK, Cope L, Lin X, Baylin SB, Herman JG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. jlicchesi@yahoo.com

The Wnt signaling pathway is capable of self-regulation through positive and
negative feedback mechanisms. For example, the oncoprotein c-Myc, which is
upregulated by Wnt signaling activity, participates in a positive feedback loop
of canonical Wnt signaling through repression of Wnt antagonists DKK1 and SFRP1. 
In this study, we investigated the mechanism of Wnt inhibitory factor-1 (WIF-1)
silencing. Mapping of CpG island methylation of the WIF-1 promoter reveals
regional methylation (-295 to -95 bp from the transcription start site) that
correlates with transcriptional silencing. We identified Miz-1 as a direct
activator of WIF-1 transcriptional activity, which is found at WIF-1 promoter. In
addition, we show that c-Myc contributes to WIF-1 transcriptional repression in a
Miz-1-dependent manner. Although the transient repression mediated by Miz-1/c-Myc
is independent of de novo methylation, the stable repression by this complex is
associated with CpG island methylation of the critical -295 to -95-bp region of
the WIF-1 promoter. Importantly, Miz-1 and c-Myc are found at WIF-1 promoter in
WIF-1 non-expressing cell lines DLD-1 and 209myc. Transient knockdown or somatic 
knockout of c-Myc in DLD-1 failed to restore WIF-1 expression suggesting that
c-Myc is involved in initiating rather than maintaining WIF-1 epigenetic
silencing. In a genome-wide screen, DNAJA4, TGFß-induced and TRIM59 were
repressed by c-Myc overexpression and DNA promoter hypermethylation. Our data
reveal novel insights into c-Myc-mediated DNA methylation-dependent
transcriptional silencing, a mechanism that might contribute to the dysregulation
of Wnt signaling in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3230129
PMID: 20697356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 30;400(5):983-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.05.028. Epub 2010 
May 21.

Insights into strand exchange in BTB domain dimers from the crystal structures of
FAZF and Miz1.

Stogios PJ(1), Cuesta-Seijo JA, Chen L, Pomroy NC, Privé GG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The BTB domain is a widely distributed protein-protein interaction motif that is 
often found at the N-terminus of zinc finger transcription factors. Previous
crystal structures of BTB domains have revealed tightly interwound homodimers,
with the N-terminus from one chain forming a two-stranded anti-parallel
beta-sheet with a strand from the other chain. We have solved the crystal
structures of the BTB domains from Fanconi anemia zinc finger (FAZF) and Miz1
(Myc-interacting zinc finger 1) to resolutions of 2.0 A and 2.6 A, respectively. 
Unlike previous examples of BTB domain structures, the FAZF BTB domain is a
nonswapped dimer, with each N-terminal beta-strand associated with its own chain.
As a result, the dimerization interface in the FAZF BTB domain is about half as
large as in the domain-swapped dimers. The Miz1 BTB domain resembles a typical
swapped BTB dimer, although it has a shorter N-terminus that is not able to form 
the interchain sheet. Using cysteine cross-linking, we confirmed that the
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) BTB dimer is strand exchanged in
solution, while the FAZF BTB dimer is not. A phylogenic tree of the BTB fold
based on both sequence and structural features shows that the common ancestor of 
the BTB domain in BTB-ZF (bric à brac, tramtrack, broad-complex zinc finger)
proteins was a domain-swapped dimer. The differences in the N-termini seen in the
FAZF and Miz1 BTB domains appear to be more recent developments in the structural
evolution of the domain.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20493880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cancer. 2010 Apr 28;9:92. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-92.

Myc interacts with Max and Miz1 to repress C/EBPdelta promoter activity and gene 
expression.

Si J(1), Yu X, Zhang Y, DeWille JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Ohio State University College of
Veterinary Medicine, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: "Loss of function" alterations in CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteindelta
(C/EBPdelta) have been reported in a number of human cancers including breast,
prostate and cervical cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and acute myeloid
leukemia. C/EBPdelta gene transcription is induced during cellular quiescence and
repressed during active cell cycle progression. C/EBPdelta exhibits tumor
suppressor gene properties including reduced expression in cancer cell lines and 
tumors and promoter methylation silencing. We previously reported that C/EBPdelta
expression is inversely correlated with c-Myc (Myc) expression. Aberrant Myc
expression is common in cancer and transcriptional repression is a major
mechanism of Myc oncogenesis. A number of tumor suppressor genes are targets of
Myc transcriptional repression including C/EBPalpha, p15INK4, p21CIP1, p27KIP1
and p57KIP2. This study investigated the mechanisms underlying Myc repression of 
C/EBPdelta expression.
RESULTS: Myc represses C/EBPdelta promoter activity in nontransformed mammary
epithelial cells in a dose-dependent manner that requires Myc Box II, Basic
Region and HLH/LZ domains. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
demonstrate that Myc, Miz1 and Max are associated with the C/EBPdelta promoter in
proliferating cells, when C/EBPdelta expression is repressed. EMSAs demonstrate
that Miz1 binds to a 30 bp region (-100 to -70) of the C/EBPdelta promoter which 
contains a putative transcription initiator (Inr) element. Miz1 functions
exclusively as a repressor of C/EBPdelta promoter activity. Miz1 siRNA expression
or expression of a Miz1 binding deficient Myc (MycV394D) construct reduces Myc
repression of C/EBPdelta promoter activity. Max siRNA expression, or expression
of a Myc construct lacking the HLH/LZ (Max interacting) region, also reduces Myc 
repression of C/EBPdelta promoter activity. Miz1 and Max siRNA treatments
attenuate Myc repression of endogenous C/EBPdelta expression. Myc Box II
interacting proteins RuvBl1 (Pontin, TIP49) and RuvBl2 (Reptin, TIP48) enhances
Myc repression of C/EBPdelta promoter activity.
CONCLUSION: Myc represses C/EBPdelta expression by associating with the
C/EBPdelta proximal promoter as a transient component of a repressive complex
that includes Max and Miz1. RuvBl1 and RuvBl2 enhance Myc repression of
C/EBPdelta promoter activity. These results identify protein interactions that
mediate Myc repression of C/EBPdelta, and possibly other tumor suppressor genes, 
and suggest new therapeutic targets to block Myc transcriptional repression and
oncogenic function.

PMCID: PMC2879254
PMID: 20426839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Cell Biol. 2010 Mar 22;188(6):905-18. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200908103.

The Arf tumor suppressor protein inhibits Miz1 to suppress cell adhesion and
induce apoptosis.

Herkert B(1), Dwertmann A, Herold S, Abed M, Naud JF, Finkernagel F, Harms GS,
Orian A, Wanzel M, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institute and 2 Rudolf-Virchow-Center, University of Würzburg, 
D-97070 Würzburg, Germany.

Oncogenic stress induces expression of the alternate reading frame (Arf) tumor
suppressor protein. Arf then stabilizes p53, which leads to cell cycle arrest or 
apoptosis. The mechanisms that distinguish both outcomes are incompletely
understood. In this study, we show that Arf interacts with the Myc-associated
zinc finger protein Miz1. Binding of Arf disrupts the interaction of Miz1 with
its coactivator, nucleophosmin, induces the sumoylation of Miz1, and facilitates 
the assembly of a heterochromatic complex that contains Myc and trimethylated
H3K9 in addition to Miz1. Arf-dependent assembly of this complex leads to the
repression of multiple genes involved in cell adhesion and signal transduction
and induces apoptosis. Our data point to a tumor-suppressive pathway that weakens
cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions in response to expression of Arf and that 
may thereby facilitate the elimination of cells harboring an oncogenic mutation.

PMCID: PMC2845071
PMID: 20308430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Apr;30(7):1838-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01442-09. Epub 2010 Feb
1.

Modulation of cellular migration and survival by c-Myc through the downregulation
of urokinase (uPA) and uPA receptor.

Alfano D(1), Votta G, Schulze A, Downward J, Caputi M, Stoppelli MP, Iaccarino I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati-Traverso, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Via P. Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

It has been proposed that c-Myc proapoptotic activity accounts for most of its
restraint of tumor formation. We established a telomerase-immortalized human
epithelial cell line expressing an activatable c-Myc protein. We found that c-Myc
activation induces, in addition to increased sensitivity to apoptosis, reductions
in cell motility and invasiveness. Transcriptome analysis revealed that urokinase
(uPA) and uPA receptor (uPAR) were strongly downregulated by c-Myc. Evidence is
provided that the repression of uPA and uPAR may account for most of the
antimigratory and proapoptotic activities of c-Myc. c-Myc is known to cooperate
with Ras in cellular transformation. We therefore investigated if this
cooperation could converge in the control of uPA/uPAR expression. We found that
Ras is able to block the effects of c-Myc activation on apoptosis and cellular
motility but not on cell invasiveness. Accordingly, the activation of c-Myc in
the context of Ras expression had only minor influence on uPAR expression but
still had a profound repressive effect on uPA expression. Thus, the differential 
regulation of uPA and uPAR by c-Myc and Ras correlates with the effects of these 
two oncoproteins on cell motility, invasiveness, and survival. In conclusion, we 
have discovered a novel link between c-Myc and uPA/uPAR. We propose that
reductions of cell motility and invasiveness could contribute to the inhibition
of tumorigenesis by c-Myc and that the regulation of uPA and uPAR expression may 
be a component of the ability of c-Myc to reduce motility and invasiveness.

PMCID: PMC2838082
PMID: 20123981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncogene. 2010 Feb 4;29(5):711-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.372. Epub 2009 Nov 9.

ARF antagonizes the ability of Miz-1 to inhibit p53-mediated transactivation.

Miao L(1), Song Z, Jin L, Zhu YM, Wen LP, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui,
People's Republic of China.

Although Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein-1 (Miz-1) is known to be a poxvirus 
and zinc-finger (POZ) transcription factor required for Myc transcriptional
repression, additional regulatory function of Miz-1 is less well understood.
Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified human alternate reading frame
(ARF) protein as a novel interaction partner of Miz-1. The zinc-finger domain of 
Miz-1 is involved in its binding to ARF. In addition, we found that Miz-1 was
able to interact with p53 through its DNA-binding domain, thus to diminish the
binding of p53 to its target promoter and inhibit p53-mediated gene
transcription. Interestingly, the Miz-1-regulated p53 transcriptional suppression
does not require the presence of ARF or Mdm2. Importantly, ARF and p53 were found
to competitively bind to Miz-1 in regulating p53-mediated transcription, and this
conclusion was verified by both in vitro binding assay and competitive chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assay using a bona fide p53 endogenous Bax and Puma
promoters. Thus, our study reveals that Miz-1 acts as a p53 suppressor by
interfering with p53 DNA-binding ability, and ARF is able to counteract the
suppression of Miz-1 on p53 by direct binding to Miz-1, suggesting that Miz-1 is 
a novel mediator in the ARF-p53 pathway.

PMID: 19901969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18279-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906328106. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

Miz1 is a signal- and pathway-specific modulator or regulator (SMOR) that
suppresses TNF-alpha-induced JNK1 activation.

Liu J(1), Zhao Y, Eilers M, Lin A.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. jing@northwestern.edu

The proinflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha exerts its pleiotropic functions through
activation of multiple downstream effectors, including JNK1. Yet, the underlying 
regulatory mechanism is incompletely understood. Here, we report that the
transcription factor Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein 1 (Miz1) selectively
suppresses TNF-alpha-induced JNK1 activation and cell death independently of its 
transcription activity. Proteomics analysis and yeast two-hybrid screening reveal
that Miz1 is a JNK-associated protein. The TNF-alpha-induced activation of JNK1
is augmented in Miz1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (Miz1(-/-) MEFs), but 
the augmentation is abrogated by reintroduction of Miz1 or its
transcription-deficient mutant. The regulation by Miz1 is highly specific,
because it regulates TNF-alpha-induced TRAF2 K63-linked polyubiquitination.
Neither JNK1 activation by IL-1beta or UV nor TNF-alpha-induced activation of
p38, ERK, or IkappaB kinase complex is affected by the loss of Miz1. The
TNF-alpha-induced cell death also is accelerated in Miz1(-/-) MEFs. Upon
TNF-alpha stimulation, Miz1 is degraded rapidly by the proteasome, relieving its 
suppression on JNK1 activation. Thus, our results show that in addition to being 
a transcription factor Miz1 acts as a signal- and pathway-specific modulator or
regulator that specifically regulates TNF-alpha-induced JNK1 activation and cell 
death.

PMCID: PMC2775337
PMID: 19815509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 3;106(5):1433-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0804863106.
Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Gfi-1 represses CDKN2B encoding p15INK4B through interaction with Miz-1.

Basu S(1), Liu Q, Qiu Y, Dong F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606,
USA.

Gfi-1 is a nuclear zinc finger (ZF) transcriptional repressor that plays an
important role in hematopoiesis and inner ear development, and has been
implicated in lymphomagenesis. Gfi-1 represses transcription by directly binding 
to the consensus DNA sequence in the promoters of its target genes. We report
here an alternative mechanism by which Gfi-1 represses CDKN2B encoding
p15(INK4B). Gfi-1 does not directly bind to CDKN2B, but interacts with Miz-1 and,
via Miz-1, is recruited to the core promoter of CDKN2B. Miz-1 is a POZ-ZF
transcription factor that has been shown to mediate transcriptional repression by
c-Myc. Like c-Myc, upon recruitment to the CDKN2B promoter, Gfi-1 represses
transcriptional activation of CDKN2B by Miz-1 and in response to TGFbeta.
Consistent with its role in repressing CDKN2B transcription, knockdown of Gfi-1
in human leukemic cells or deficiency of Gfi-1 in mouse bone marrow cells results
in augmented expression of p15(INK4B). Notably, Gfi-1 and c-Myc are both
recruited to the CDKN2B core promoter and act in collaboration to repress CDKN2B.
Our data reveal a mechanism of transcriptional repression by Gfi-1 and may have
important implications for understanding the roles of Gfi-1 in normal development
and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2635772
PMID: 19164764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Vis. 2008;14:1799-804. Epub 2008 Sep 30.

Investigation of eight candidate genes on chromosome 1p36 for autosomal dominant 
total congenital cataract.

Burdon KP(1), Hattersley K, Lachke SA, Laurie KJ, Maas RL, Mackey DA, Craig JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia.
kathryn.burdon@flinders.edu.au

PURPOSE: To identify the causative gene for autosomal dominant total congenital
cataract in a six-generation Australian family displaying linkage to chromosome
1p36.
METHODS: Eight candidate genes (HSPB7, FBXO42, EFHD2, ZBTB17, CAPZB, FBLIM1,
ALDH4A1, and MFAP2) from within the previously defined linkage interval were
selected based on expression in lens and their known or putative function. The
coding exons were sequenced in multiple affected family members and compared to
the reference sequence.
RESULTS: No segregating mutations were identified in any of the eight genes.
Thirty-one polymorphisms were detected, 20 of which were in the exons and 11 in
the flanking introns.
CONCLUSIONS: Coding mutations in HSPB7, FBXO42, EFHD2, ZBTB17, CAPZB, FBLIM1,
ALDH4A1, and MFAP2 do not account for congenital cataract in this family.

PMCID: PMC2563027
PMID: 18843385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 2008 Jun 4;27(11):1563-74. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.85. Epub 2008 May 1.

Zbtb4 represses transcription of P21CIP1 and controls the cellular response to
p53 activation.

Weber A(1), Marquardt J, Elzi D, Forster N, Starke S, Glaum A, Yamada D, Defossez
PA, Delrow J, Eisenman RN, Christiansen H, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumour Research (IMT), Marburg, Germany.

In response to stimuli that activate p53, cells can undergo either apoptosis or
cell cycle arrest, depending on the precise pattern of p53 target genes that is
activated. We show here that Zbtb4, a transcriptional repressor protein,
associates with the Sin3/histone deacetylase co-repressor and represses
expression of P21CIP1 as part of a heterodimeric complex with Miz1. In vivo,
expression of ZBTB4 is downregulated in advanced stages of multiple human
tumours. In cell culture, depletion of ZBTB4 promotes cell cycle arrest in
response to activation of p53 and suppresses apoptosis through regulation of
P21CIP1, thereby promoting long-term cell survival. Our data suggest that Zbtb4
is a critical determinant of the cellular response to p53 activation and
reinforce the notion that p21Cip1 can provide an essential survival signal in
cells with activated p53.

PMCID: PMC2426723
PMID: 18451802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;13(20):6001-9.

De novo identification of MIZ-1 (ZBTB17) encoding a MYC-interacting zinc-finger
protein as a new favorable neuroblastoma gene.

Ikegaki N(1), Gotoh T, Kung B, Riceberg JS, Kim DY, Zhao H, Rappaport EF, Hicks
SL, Seeger RC, Tang XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, The University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: Neuroblastoma is a childhood cancer that exhibits either a favorable or 
an unfavorable phenotype. Favorable neuroblastoma genes (EPHB6, EFNB2, EFNB3,
NTRK1, and CD44) are genes whose high-level expression predicts favorable
neuroblastoma disease outcome. Accordingly, the forced expression of these genes 
or their reactivation by gene silencing inhibitors in unfavorable neuroblastoma
cells results in suppression of tumor growth and metastases. This study was
undertaken to design an experimental strategy to identify additional favorable
neuroblastoma genes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Favorable neuroblastoma gene candidates were first
identified by gene expression profiling analysis on IMR5 neuroblastoma cells
treated with inhibitors of DNA methylation and histone deacetylase against the
untreated control cells. Among the candidates, we focused on MIZ-1, which encodes
a MYC-interacting zinc-finger protein, because it is known to enhance the
expression of growth suppressive genes, such as CDKN1A.
RESULTS: High-level MIZ-1 expression was associated with favorable disease
outcome of neuroblastoma (P = 0.0048). Forced MIZ-1 expression suppressed in
vitro growth of neuroblastoma cell lines. High MIZ-1 expression was correlated
with the small-size neuroblastoma xenografts treated with gene silencing
inhibitors or a glucocorticoid. In addition, forced MIZ-1 expression enhanced the
expression of CD44 and EFNB2 in neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro. Furthermore,
MIZ-1 expression was positively correlated with the expression of favorable
neuroblastoma genes (EFNB2, EFNB3, EPHB6, and NTRK1) in the human neuroblastoma
xenograft therapeutic models.
CONCLUSION: MIZ-1 is a new favorable neuroblastoma gene, which may directly or
indirectly regulate the expression of other favorable neuroblastoma genes.

PMID: 17947461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 2;373(4):820-6. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

A beta-sheet interaction interface directs the tetramerisation of the Miz-1 POZ
domain.

Stead MA(1), Trinh CH, Garnett JA, Carr SB, Baron AJ, Edwards TA, Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology Research Group, Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Garstang/Astbury
Buildings, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

The POZ/BTB domain is an evolutionarily conserved motif found in approximately 40
zinc-finger transcription factors (POZ-ZF factors). Several POZ-ZF factors are
implicated in human cancer, and POZ domain interaction interfaces represent an
attractive target for therapeutic intervention. Miz-1 (Myc-interacting
zinc-finger protein) is a POZ-ZF factor that regulates DNA-damage-induced cell
cycle arrest and plays an important role in human cancer by virtue of its
interaction with the c-Myc and BCL6 oncogene products. The Miz-1 POZ domain
mediates both self-association and the recruitment of non-POZ partners. POZ-ZF
factors generally function as homodimers, although higher-order associations and 
heteromeric interactions are known to be physiologically important; crucially,
the interaction interfaces in such large complexes have not been characterised.
We report here the crystal structure of the Miz-1 POZ domain up to 2.1 A
resolution. The tetrameric organisation of Miz-1 POZ reveals two types of
interaction interface between subunits; an interface of alpha-helices resembles
the dimerisation interface of reported POZ domain structures, whereas a novel
beta-sheet interface directs the association of two POZ domain dimers. We show
that the beta-sheet interface directs the tetramerisation of the Miz-1 POZ domain
in solution and therefore represents a newly described candidate interface for
the higher-order homo- and hetero-oligomerisation of POZ-ZF proteins in vivo.

PMID: 17880999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Sep 1;102(1):171-82.

The DNA topoisomerase IIbeta binding protein 1 (TopBP1) interacts with poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1).

Wollmann Y(1), Schmidt U, Wieland GD, Zipfel PF, Saluz HP, Hänel F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural
Product Research and Infection Biology (Hans Knoell Institute), Beutenbergstrasse
11a, D-07745 Jena, Germany.

We investigated the physical association of the DNA topoisomerase IIbeta binding 
protein 1 (TopBP1), involved in DNA replication and repair but also in regulation
of apoptosis, with poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1). This enzyme plays a
crucial role in DNA repair and interacts with many DNA replication/repair
factors. It was shown that the sixth BRCA1 C-terminal (BRCT) domain of TopBP1
interacts with a protein fragment of PARP-1 in vitro containing the DNA-binding
and the automodification domains. More significantly, the in vivo interaction of 
endogenous TopBP1 and PARP-1 proteins could be shown in HeLa-S3 cells by
co-immunoprecipitation. TopBP1 and PARP-1 are localized within overlapping
regions in the nucleus of HeLa-S3 cells as shown by immunofluorescence. Exposure 
to UVB light slightly enhanced the interaction between both proteins.
Furthermore, TopBP1 was detected in nuclear regions where poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) 
synthesis takes place and is ADP-ribosylated by PARP-1. Finally, cellular
(ADP-ribosyl)ating activity impairs binding of TopBP1 to Myc-interacting zinc
finger protein-1 (Miz-1). The results indicate an influence of post-translational
modifications of TopBP1 on its function during DNA repair.

PMID: 17340632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 5;282(1):5-13. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

BCL2 is a downstream effector of MIZ-1 essential for blocking c-MYC-induced
apoptosis.

Patel JH(1), McMahon SB.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Graduate Studies, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The c-MYC oncoprotein is among the most potent transforming agents in human
cells. Ironically, c-MYC is also capable of inducing massive apoptosis under
certain conditions. A clear understanding of the distinct pathways activated by
c-MYC during apoptosis induction and transformation is crucial to the design of
therapeutic strategies aimed at selectively reactivating the apoptotic potential 
of c-MYC in cancer cells. We recently demonstrated that apoptosis induction in
primary human cells strictly requires that c-MYC bind and inactivate the
transcription factor MIZ-1. This presumably blocked the ability of MIZ-1 to
activate the transcription of an unidentified pro-survival gene. Here we report
that MIZ-1 activates the transcription of BCL2. More importantly, inhibition of
the MIZ-1/BCL2 signal is an essential event during the apoptotic response.
Furthermore, targeting BCL2 with short hairpin RNA or small molecule inhibitors
restores the apoptotic potential of a c-MYC mutant that is defective for MIZ-1
inhibition. These observations suggest that repression of BCL2 transcription is
the single essential consequence of targeting the MIZ-1 pathway during apoptosis 
induction. These data define a genetic pathway that helps to explain historical
observations documenting cooperation between c-MYC and BCL2 overexpression in
human cancer.

PMID: 17082179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 22;281(51):39159-68. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

The repression of human differentiation-related gene NDRG2 expression by Myc via 
Miz-1-dependent interaction with the NDRG2 core promoter.

Zhang J(1), Li F, Liu X, Shen L, Liu J, Su J, Zhang W, Deng Y, Wang L, Liu N, Han
W, Zhang J, Ji S, Yang A, Han H, Yao L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and the State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology,
Fourth Military Medical University, 710032 Xi'an, China.

The N-myc downstream-regulated gene 1 (ndrg1) is highly expressed in N-myc
knock-out mice through an unknown regulatory mechanism. As one member of the
human NDRG gene family, NDRG2 encodes a protein highly homologous to Ndrg1.
However, it is uncertain whether the expression of human NDRG2 is regulated by
Myc because mouse ndrg2 and -3 are not affected by Myc. In this study, we provide
the novel evidence that the expression of human NDRG2 is down-regulated by Myc
via transcriptional repression. A high level of NDRG2 was observed as Myc
expression was reduced in differentiated cells, whereas a low level of NDRG2 was 
shown following increased Myc expression upon serum stimulation. The ectopic
expression of c-Myc dramatically reduces the cellular Ndrg2 protein and mRNA
level. We further identified the core promoter region of NDRG2 that is required
for Myc repression on NDRG2 transcription, and we verified the interaction of Myc
with the core promoter region both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the
c-Myc-mediated repression of NDRG2 requires association with Miz-1, and possibly 
the recruitment of other epigenetic factors, such as histone deacetylases, to the
promoter. The regulatory function of Myc on NDRG2 gene expression implicated the 
role of the Ndrg2 in regulating cell differentiation.

PMID: 17050536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. EMBO J. 2006 Oct 18;25(20):4795-807. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Regulation of TopBP1 oligomerization by Akt/PKB for cell survival.

Liu K(1), Paik JC, Wang B, Lin FT, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Regulation of E2F1-mediated apoptosis is essential for proper cellular growth.
This control requires TopBP1, a BRCT (BRCA1 carboxyl-terminal) domain-containing 
protein, which interacts with E2F1 but not other E2Fs and represses its
proapoptotic activity. We now show that the regulation of E2F1 by TopBP1 involves
the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling pathway, and is independent of
pocket proteins. Akt phosphorylates TopBP1 in vitro and in vivo. Phosphorylation 
by Akt induces oligomerization of TopBP1 through its seventh and eighth BRCT
domains. The Akt-dependent oligomerization is crucial for TopBP1 to interact with
and repress E2F1. Akt phosphorylation is also required for interaction between
TopBP1 and Miz1 or HPV16 E2, and repression of Miz1 transcriptional activity,
suggesting a general role for TopBP1 oligomerization in the control of
transcription factors. Together, this study defines a novel pathway involving
PI3K-Akt-TopBP1 for specific control of E2F1 apoptosis, in parallel with
cyclin-Cdk-Rb for general control of E2F activities.

PMCID: PMC1618094
PMID: 17006541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Sep;4(9):645-53. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Ketogenic HMGCS2 Is a c-Myc target gene expressed in differentiated cells of
human colonic epithelium and down-regulated in colon cancer.

Camarero N(1), Mascaró C, Mayordomo C, Vilardell F, Haro D, Marrero PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

HMGCS2, the gene that regulates ketone body production, is expressed in liver and
several extrahepatic tissues, such as the colon. In CaCo-2 colonic epithelial
cells, the expression of this gene increases with cell differentiation.
Accordingly, immunohistochemistry with specific antibodies shows that HMGCS2 is
expressed mainly in differentiated cells of human colonic epithelium. Here, we
used a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay to study the molecular mechanism
responsible for this expression pattern. The assay revealed that HMGCS2 is a
direct target of c-Myc, which represses HMGCS2 transcriptional activity. c-Myc
transrepression is mediated by blockade of the transactivating activity of Miz-1,
which occurs mainly through a Sp1-binding site in the proximal promoter of the
gene. Accordingly, the expression of human HMGCS2 is down-regulated in 90% of
Myc-dependent colon and rectum tumors. HMGCS2 protein expression is
down-regulated preferentially in moderately and poorly differentiated carcinomas.
In addition, it is also down-regulated in 80% of small intestine Myc-independent 
tumors. Based on these findings, we propose that ketogenesis is an undesirable
metabolic characteristic of the proliferating cell, which is down-regulated
through c-Myc-mediated repression of the key metabolic gene HMGCS2.

PMID: 16940161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 14;103(11):4062-7. Epub 2006 Mar 7.

Sleeping Beauty transposase modulates cell-cycle progression through interaction 
with Miz-1.

Walisko O(1), Izsvák Z, Szabó K, Kaufman CD, Herold S, Ivics Z.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, D-13092 Berlin, Germany.

We used the Sleeping Beauty (SB) transposable element as a tool to probe
transposon-host cell interactions in vertebrates. The Miz-1 transcription factor 
was identified as an interactor of the SB transposase in a yeast two-hybrid
screen. Through its association with Miz-1, the SB transposase down-regulates
cyclin D1 expression in human cells, as evidenced by differential gene expression
analysis using microarray hybridization. Down-regulation of cyclin D1 results in 
a prolonged G(1) phase of the cell cycle and retarded growth of
transposase-expressing cells. G(1) slowdown is associated with a decrease of
cyclin D1/cdk4-specific phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein. Both
cyclin D1 down-regulation and the G(1) slowdown induced by the transposase
require Miz-1. A temporary G(1) arrest enhances transposition, suggesting that SB
transposition is favored in the G(1) phase of the cell cycle, where the
nonhomologous end-joining pathway of DNA repair is preferentially active. Because
nonhomologous end-joining is required for efficient SB transposition, the
transposase-induced G(1) slowdown is probably a selfish act on the transposon's
part to maximize the chance for a successful transposition event.

PMCID: PMC1449646
PMID: 16537485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3283-9. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Targeting of Miz-1 is essential for Myc-mediated apoptosis.

Patel JH(1), McMahon SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The c-Myc oncoprotein plays a central role in human cancer via its ability to
either activate or repress the transcription of essential downstream targets. For
many of the repressed target genes, down-regulation by c-Myc relies on its
ability to bind and inactivate the transcription factor Miz-1. Although Miz-1
inactivation is suspected to be essential for at least some of the biological
activities of c-Myc, it has been difficult to demonstrate this requirement
experimentally. Using a combination of short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown and a
previously characterized mutant of c-Myc that is defective for Miz-1
inactivation, we examined whether this inactivation is critical for three of the 
most central biological functions of c-Myc, cell cycle progression,
transformation, and apoptosis. The results of this analysis demonstrated that in 
the in vitro assays utilized here, Miz-1 inactivation is dispensable for
c-Myc-induced cell cycle progression and transformation. In marked contrast, the 
ability of c-Myc to induce apoptosis in primary diploid human fibroblasts in
response to growth factor withdrawal is entirely dependent on its ability to
inactivate Miz-1. These data have a significant impact on our understanding of
the biochemical mechanisms dictating how c-Myc mediates opposing biological
functions, such as transformation and apoptosis, and demonstrate the first
requirement for Miz-1 inactivation in any of the biological functions of c-Myc.

PMID: 16352593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cell. 2005 Nov 4;123(3):409-21.

The ubiquitin ligase HectH9 regulates transcriptional activation by Myc and is
essential for tumor cell proliferation.

Adhikary S(1), Marinoni F, Hock A, Hulleman E, Popov N, Beier R, Bernard S,
Quarto M, Capra M, Goettig S, Kogel U, Scheffner M, Helin K, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, University of Marburg,
Emil-Mannkopff-Str.2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

The Myc oncoprotein forms a binary activating complex with its partner protein,
Max, and a ternary repressive complex that, in addition to Max, contains the zinc
finger protein Miz1. Here we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase HectH9
ubiquitinates Myc in vivo and in vitro, forming a lysine 63-linked polyubiquitin 
chain. Miz1 inhibits this ubiquitination. HectH9-mediated ubiquitination of Myc
is required for transactivation of multiple target genes, recruitment of the
coactivator p300, and induction of cell proliferation by Myc. HectH9 is
overexpressed in multiple human tumors and is essential for proliferation of a
subset of tumor cells. Our results suggest that site-specific ubiquitination
regulates the switch between an activating and a repressive state of the Myc
protein, and they suggest a strategy to interfere with Myc function in vivo.

PMID: 16269333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8927-35.

Src inhibits adriamycin-induced senescence and G2 checkpoint arrest by blocking
the induction of p21waf1.

Vigneron A(1), Roninson IB, Gamelin E, Coqueret O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U564, Cancer Center 
Paul Papin, Angers, France.

DNA-damaging drugs stop tumor cell proliferation by inducing apoptosis, necrosis,
or senescence. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21waf1 is an important
regulator of these responses, promoting senescence and preventing aberrant
mitosis that leads to cell death. Because tumors expressing oncogenic tyrosine
kinases are relatively resistant to DNA-damaging agents, the effects of Src on
cellular responses to anticancer drug Adriamycin were investigated. Src
expression increased drug survival in HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells, as measured by
the colony formation assay, and strongly inhibited Adriamycin-induced senescence.
Src also decreased the number of apoptotic cells while increasing the fraction of
cells dying through necrosis. In addition, Src inhibited the G2 and G1
tetraploidy checkpoints of Adriamycin-treated cells, permitting these cells to
proceed into mitosis and subsequently double their DNA content. Inhibition of
senescence and G2-G1 checkpoints in Src-expressing cells was associated with the 
failure of these cells to up-regulate p21waf1 in response to Adriamycin. The
failure of p21waf1 induction, despite increased expression of p53 and its binding
to p21waf1 promoter, was mediated by the up-regulation of c-Myc, a negative
regulator of p21waf1 transcription. Conversely, ectopic expression of p21waf1
inhibited Myc transcription in Src-expressing cells, an effect that was
associated with the interaction of p21waf1 with the STAT3 transcription factor at
the Myc promoter. These results reveal a complex effect of Src on cellular drug
responses and provide an explanation for the effect of this oncogene on cellular 
drug resistance.

PMID: 16204065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):964-6.

A-Miz-ing BCL6.

Wu X, Jelinek DF.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):1054-60.

PMID: 16177801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Dec 1;96(5):1071-85.

c-Myc creates an activation loop by transcriptionally repressing its own
functional inhibitor, hMad4, in young fibroblasts, a loop lost in replicatively
senescent fibroblasts.

Marcotte R(1), Chen JM, Huard S, Wang E.

Author information: 
(1)The Bloomfield Center for Research in Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical 
Research, The Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, and Department of
Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

c-Myc transcriptional activity in cells is dampened by the Mad family of
transcriptional repressors. The expression of one member, hMad4, is increased in 
growth-arrested states such as quiescence or replicative senescence; hMad4 mRNA
levels in replicatively senescent fibroblasts are about twice those seen in their
young contact-inhibited quiescent counterparts. Moreover, the repression of hMad4
transcription following serum stimulation observed in quiescent young fibroblasts
is lost in senescent cells. This loss results in persistent expression of hMad4, 
which leads to an inability to switch from an hMad4/Max complex to a c-Myc/Max
complex on selected c-Myc target genes following serum stimulation. We have
located an initiator element (Inr), a candidate for Miz-1 binding, in the hMad4
promoter. In reporter assays, Miz-1 enhances reporter GFP expression; this
enhancement is inhibited by co-expressing c-Myc. Thus hMad4, as does its murine
counterpart, contains the Inr element through which Miz-1 activates its
expression; but this action is inhibited in the presence of c-Myc. This
inhibition may explain the down-regulation of hMad4, corresponding to the
up-regulation of c-Myc, in young serum-starved quiescent fibroblasts upon serum
stimulation. However, this reciprocal change does not occur in replicatively
senescent fibroblasts upon serum stimulation; instead, hMad4 persists in the
presence of high levels of c-Myc activation. Our results suggest that: (1)
replicative senescence-specific factors may block c-Myc inhibition of Miz-1
activation of hMad4 expression; and (2) the continual presence of hMad4 protein
may transcriptionally repress selected c-Myc target genes, whose functions are
key to the signaling pathways leading to apoptosis inhibition and permanent exit 
of cell cycle traverse in normal human fibroblasts.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16167342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):1054-60. Epub 2005 Sep 4.

BCL6 interacts with the transcription factor Miz-1 to suppress the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and cell cycle arrest in germinal center B 
cells.

Phan RT(1), Saito M, Basso K, Niu H, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Department of Pathology, Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):964-6.

The BCL6 proto-oncogene encodes a transcriptional repressor that is required for 
germinal center formation and has been linked to lymphomagenesis. BCL6 functions 
by directly binding to specific DNA sequences and suppressing the transcription
of target genes. Here we report an alternative mechanism by which BCL6 controls
the transcription of genes lacking a BCL6 binding site and show that this
mechanism was required for the prevention of tumor suppressor p53-independent
cell cycle arrest in germinal center B cells. BCL6 interacted with the
transcriptional activator Miz-1 and, via Miz-1, bound to the promoter and
suppressed transcription of the cell cycle arrest gene CDKN1A. Through this
mechanism, BCL6 may facilitate the proliferative expansion of germinal centers
during the normal immune response and, when deregulated, the pathological
expansion of B cell lymphomas.

PMID: 16142238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 14;336(1):274-80.

Six lysine residues on c-Myc are direct substrates for acetylation by p300.

Zhang K(1), Faiola F, Martinez E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California at Riverside, Riverside, CA 
92521, USA.

The c-Myc oncoprotein (Myc) functions as a transcription regulator in association
with an obligatory partner, Max, to control cell growth and differentiation. The 
Myc:Max complex regulates specific genes by recognizing "E-box" DNA sequences and
promoter-bound factors such as Miz-1. Myc recruits histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) to modify chromatin and is, itself, acetylated in mammalian cells by
several of these HATs including p300/CBP, GCN5, and Tip60. The Myc residues that 
are directly modified by these different HATs remain unknown. Here, we have
analyzed the acetylation of recombinant Myc:Max complexes by purified p300 HAT in
vitro by using MALDI-TOF and LC-ESI-MS/MS mass spectrometry. These analyses
identify six lysine residues in human Myc (K143, K157, K275, K317, K323, and
K371) as direct substrates for p300. Our results further indicate that p300 can
acetylate DNA-bound Myc:Max complexes and that acetylated Myc:Max heterodimers
efficiently interact with Miz-1.

PMID: 16126174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;7(1):30-41. Epub 2004 Dec 5.

Akt and 14-3-3eta regulate Miz1 to control cell-cycle arrest after DNA damage.

Wanzel M(1), Kleine-Kohlbrecher D, Herold S, Hock A, Berns K, Park J, Hemmings B,
Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, University of Marburg,
Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

The transcription factor Miz1 is required for DNA-damage-induced cell-cycle
arrest. We have now identified 14-3-3eta as a gene that inhibits Miz1 function
through interaction with its DNA binding domain. Binding of 14-3-3eta to Miz1
depends on phosphorylation by Akt and regulates the recovery of cells from arrest
after DNA damage. Miz1 has two functions in response to DNA damage: first, it is 
required for upregulation of a large group of genes, a function that is regulated
by c-Myc, but not by 14-3-3eta; second, Miz1 represses the expression of many
genes in response to DNA damage in an Akt- and 14-3-3eta-regulated manner.

PMID: 15580267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):5004-12. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

Systematic identification and analysis of mammalian small ubiquitin-like modifier
substrates.

Gocke CB(1), Yu H, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) regulates diverse cellular processes through
its reversible, covalent attachment to target proteins. Many SUMO substrates are 
involved in transcription and chromatin structure. Sumoylation appears to
regulate the functions of target proteins by changing their subcellular
localization, increasing their stability, and/or mediating their binding to other
proteins. Using an in vitro expression cloning approach, we have identified 40
human SUMO1 substrates. The spectrum of human SUMO1 substrates identified in our 
screen suggests general roles of sumoylation in transcription, chromosome
structure, and RNA processing. We have validated the sumoylation of 24 substrates
in living cells. Analysis of this panel of SUMO substrates leads to the following
observations. 1) Sumoylation is more efficient in vitro than in living cells.
Polysumoylation occurs on several substrates in vitro. 2) SUMO isopeptidases have
little substrate specificity. 3) The SUMO ligases, PIAS1 and PIASxbeta, have
broader substrate specificities than does PIASy. 4) Although SUMO1 and SUMO2 are 
equally efficiently conjugated to a given substrate in vitro, SUMO1 conjugation
is more efficient in vivo. 5) Most SUMO substrates localize to the nucleus, and
sumoylation does not generally affect their subcellular localization. Therefore, 
sumoylation appears to regulate the functions of its substrates through multiple,
context-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 15561718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1112-22. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

Myc antagonizes Ras-mediated growth arrest in leukemia cells through the
inhibition of the Ras-ERK-p21Cip1 pathway.

Vaqué JP(1), Navascues J, Shiio Y, Laiho M, Ajenjo N, Mauleon I, Matallanas D,
Crespo P, León J.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Biología Molecular del Cáncer, Departamento de Biología Molecular,
Unidad de Biomedicina del Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientiíficas,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

Even though RAS usually acts as a dominant transforming oncogene, in primary
fibroblasts and some established cell lines Ras inhibits proliferation. This can 
explain the virtual absence of RAS mutations in some types of tumors, such as
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). We report that in the CML cell line K562 Ras
induces p21Cip1 expression through the Raf-MEK-ERK pathway. Because K562 cells
are deficient for p15INK4b, p16INK4a, p14ARF, and p53, this would be the main
mechanism whereby Ras up-regulates p21 expression in these cells. Accordingly, we
also found that Ras suppresses K562 growth by signaling through the Raf-ERK
pathway. Because c-Myc and Ras cooperate in cell transformation and c-Myc is
up-regulated in CML, we investigated the effect of c-Myc on Ras activity in K562 
cells. c-Myc antagonized the induction of p21Cip1 mediated by oncogenic H-, K-,
and N-Ras and by constitutively activated Raf and ERK2. Activation of the p21Cip1
promoter by Ras was dependent on Sp1/3 binding sites in K562. However, mutational
analysis of the p21 promoter and the use of a Gal4-Sp1 chimeric protein strongly 
suggest that c-Myc affects Sp1 transcriptional activity but not the binding of
Sp1 to the p21 promoter. c-Myc-mediated impairment of Ras activity on p21
expression required a transactivation domain, a DNA binding region, and a Max
binding region. Moreover, the effect was independent of Miz1 binding to c-Myc.
Consistent with its effect on p21Cip1 expression, c-Myc rescued cell growth
inhibition induced by Ras. The data suggest that in particular tumor types, such 
as those associated with CML, c-Myc contributes to tumorigenesis by inhibiting
Ras antiproliferative activity.

PMID: 15528212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Cell Biochem. 2004 May 1;92(1):65-76.

Induction of G1 cell cycle arrest and P15INK4b expression by ECRG1 through
interaction with Miz-1.

Zhao N(1), Wang J, Cui Y, Guo L, Lu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Etiology and Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute, Peking Union
Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100021, P.R.
China.

ECRG1 is a novel candidate of tumor suppressor gene identified from human
esophagus. To study the biological role of ECRG1 gene, we performed a GAL4-based 
yeast two-hybrid screen of a human fetal liver cDNA library. Using the ECRG1 cDNA
as bait, we identified two putative clones as associated proteins, Miz-1 and FLNA
(Filamin A). The interaction of ECRG1 and Miz-1 was confirmed by
glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-pull-down assays in vitro and
co-immunoprecipitation experiments in vivo. ECRG1 was co-localized with Miz-1 in 
nucleus, as shown by confocal microscopy. Transfection of ECRG1 gene into the
esophageal cancer (EC) cells inhibited cell proliferation and induced G1 phase
arrest of cell cycle. In the co-transfection of ECRG1 and Miz-1 assays, we found 
inhibition of cell proliferation and G1/S phase in EC cells, but the levels of
cell proliferation inhibition and G1/S phase arrest were more strongly compared
with the transfection of ECRG1 or Miz-1 alone. In addition, the interaction of
ECRG1 and Miz-1 could induce expression of P15(INK4b) gene in esophageal cancer
9706 (EC9706) cells. However, the transfection of ECRG1 or Miz-1 alone was not
revealed the expressions of P15(INK4b) gene. When antisense ECRG1 interdicted
expression of endogenous ECRG1 in Balb/c-3T3 cells, Transfection of Miz-1
couldn't induce P15(INK4b) expression. The results provide evidences that ECRG1
and Miz-1 in EC cells may be acting as a co-functional protein associated with
regulation of cell cycle and induction of P15(INK4b) expression. It suggests that
ECRG1 may inhibit tumor cell growth by affecting cell cycle, and that expression 
of P15(INK4b) may be likely to enhance G1 cell cycle arrest during the
interaction of ECRG1 and Miz-1. The physical interaction of ECRG1 and Miz-1 may
play an important role in carcinogenesis of EC.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15095404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jan 29;32(2):598-610. Print 2004.

Modification of de novo DNA methyltransferase 3a (Dnmt3a) by SUMO-1 modulates its
interaction with histone deacetylases (HDACs) and its capacity to repress
transcription.

Ling Y(1), Sankpal UT, Robertson AK, McNally JG, Karpova T, Robertson KD.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic Gene Regulation and Cancer Section, LRBGE/NCI/NIH, Building 41, 41 
Library Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a is one of three mammalian DNA
methyltransferases that has been shown to play crucial roles in embryonic
development, genomic imprinting and transcriptional silencing. Despite its
importance, very little is known about how the enzymatic activity and
transcriptional repression functions of Dnmt3a are regulated. Here we show that
Dnmt3a interacts with multiple components of the sumoylation machinery, namely
the E2 sumo conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and the E3 sumo ligases PIAS1 and PIASxalpha,
all of which are involved in conjugating the small ubiquitin-like modifier
polypeptide, SUMO-1, to its target proteins. Dnmt3a is modified by SUMO-1 in vivo
and in vitro and the region of Dnmt3a responsible for interaction maps to the
N-terminal regulatory domain. Functionally, sumoylation of Dnmt3a disrupts its
ability to interact with histone deacetylases (HDAC1/2), but not with another
interaction partner, Dnmt3b. Conditions that enhance the sumoylation of Dnmt3a in
vivo abolish its capacity to repress transcription. These studies reveal a new
level of regulation governing Dnmt3a whereby a post-translational modification
can dramatically regulate its interaction with specific protein partners and
alter its ability to repress transcription.

PMCID: PMC373322
PMID: 14752048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15505-14. Epub 2004 Jan 22.

A cleaved form of MAGE-A4 binds to Miz-1 and induces apoptosis in human cells.

Sakurai T(1), Itoh K, Higashitsuji H, Nagao T, Nonoguchi K, Chiba T, Fujita J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Gankyrin, a recently discovered oncoprotein, is a promising target for drug
therapy because it is overexpressed in most hepatocellular carcinomas. Since
gankyrin interacts with MAGE-A4, we made several MAGE-A4 mutants and assessed
their effects on cell growth. We found that the C-terminal 107 amino acids of
MAGE-A4 (MAGE-A4DeltaN1) induced p53-dependent and p53-independent apoptosis.
MAGE-A4DeltaN1 increased the p53 protein level, but decreased the p21(Cip1)
transcript and protein levels. During apoptosis Bcl-xL was down-regulated and
mitochondrial integrity was disrupted. A yeast two-hybrid screen identified Miz-1
as a MAGE-A4DeltaN1-binding protein. MAGE-A4DeltaN1 was recruited through
association with Miz-1 to the p21(Cip1) promoter and down-regulated transcription
of p21(Cip1). In 293T cells and U-2 OS cells, full-length MAGE-A4 was processed
to generate a C-terminal fragment of 104 amino acids with activities similar to
MAGE-A4DeltaN1. Processing was inhibited with a broad range caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK, but not by site-directed mutagenesis of aspartic acids in MAGE-A4,
suggesting an indirect involvement of caspase(s) in the processing. The amount of
the processed form was increased by exposure of cells to adriamycin. Transduction
with a HIV Tat-MAGE-A4DeltaN1 fusion protein suppressed anchorage-independent
growth of gankyrin-overexpressing cells in vitro and in vivo. These results
demonstrate that the C-terminal fragment of MAGE-A4 induces apoptosis at least
partly by binding to Miz-1, and that the fragment may be exploited as an
anticancer agent. Furthermore, the finding that a C-terminal fragment with
pro-apoptotic activity is generated from full-length MAGE-A4 after genotoxic
stress in human cells suggests a novel function for MAGE-A4.

PMID: 14739298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jan 13;101(2):458-63. Epub 2004 Jan 2.

Myc-interacting protein 1 target gene profile: a link to microtubules,
extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and cell growth.

Ziegelbauer J(1), Wei J, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 30;101(13):4718.

To study the role of the transcription factor Myc-interacting protein 1 (MIZ-1)
in activating various target genes after induction with the microtubule
disrupting agent T113242, we have used small interfering RNA duplexes (siRNAs) to
knockdown the expression of MIZ-1. As expected, depletion of MIZ-1 resulted in
the inhibition of T113242-dependent activation of the low-density lipoprotein
receptor (LDLR) gene in hepatocytes. Cells transfected with MIZ-1 siRNAs also
exhibited growth arrest. In addition, inhibition of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway inhibited T113242-induced nuclear
accumulation of MIZ-1 and activation of LDLR. Gene expression microarray analysis
under various induction conditions identified other T113242-activated genes
affected by a decrease in MIZ-1 and inhibition of the ERK pathway. We also found 
that the accumulation of MIZ-1 in the nucleus is influenced by cell-cell contact 
and/or growth. Taken together, our studies suggest that MIZ-1 regulates a
specific set of genes that includes LDLR and that the ERK pathway plays a role in
the activation of target promoters by MIZ-1.

PMCID: PMC327169
PMID: 14704274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7648-57.

Miz1 is required for early embryonic development during gastrulation.

Adhikary S(1), Peukert K, Karsunky H, Beuger V, Lutz W, Elsässer HP, Möröy T,
Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research. Institute for Cytobiology 
and Cytopathology, University of Marburg, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Miz1 is a member of the POZ domain/zinc finger transcription factor family. In
vivo, Miz1 forms a complex with the Myc oncoprotein and recruits Myc to core
promoter elements. Myc represses transcription through Miz1 binding sites. We now
show that the Miz1 gene is ubiquitously expressed during mouse embryogenesis. In 
order to elucidate the physiological function of Miz1, we have deleted the mouse 
Miz1 gene by homologous recombination. Miz1(+/-) mice are indistinguishable from 
wild-type animals; in contrast, Miz1(-/-) embryos are not viable. They are
severely retarded in early embryonic development and do not undergo normal
gastrulation. Expression of Goosecoid and Brachyury is detectable in Miz1(-/-)
embryos, suggesting that Miz1 is not required for signal transduction by Nodal.
Expression of p21Cip1, a target gene of Miz1 is unaltered; in contrast,
expression of p57Kip2, another target gene of Miz1 is absent in Miz1(-/-)
embryos. Miz1(-/-) embryos succumb to massive apoptosis of ectodermal cells
around day 7.5 of embryonic development. Our results show that Miz1 is required
for early embryonic development during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC207589
PMID: 14560010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44025-32. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

Nramp1-mediated innate resistance to intraphagosomal pathogens is regulated by
IRF-8, PU.1, and Miz-1.

Alter-Koltunoff M(1), Ehrlich S, Dror N, Azriel A, Eilers M, Hauser H, Bowen H,
Barton CH, Tamura T, Ozato K, Levi BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Technion, Haifa 32000,
Israel.

Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1 (Nramp1) is a proton/divalent 
cation antiporter exclusively expressed in monocyte/macrophage cells with a
unique role in innate resistance to intraphagosomal pathogens. In humans, it is
linked to several infectious diseases, including leprosy, pulmonary tuberculosis,
visceral leishmaniasis, meningococcal meningitis, and human immunodeficiency
virus as well as to autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's 
disease. Here we demonstrate that the restricted expression of Nramp1 is mediated
by the macrophage-specific transcription factor IRF-8. This factor exerts its
activity via protein-protein interaction, which facilitates its binding to target
DNA. Using yeast two-hybrid screen we identified Myc Interacting Zinc finger
protein 1 (Miz-1) as new interacting partner. This interaction is restricted to
immune cells and takes place on the promoter Nramp1 in association with PU.1, a
transcription factor essential for myelopoiesis. Consistent with these data,
IRF-8 knockout mice are sensitive to a repertoire of intracellular pathogens.
Accordingly, IRF-8-/- mice express low levels of Nramp1 that can not be induced
any further. Thus, our results explain in molecular terms the role of IRF-8 in
conferring innate resistance to intracellular pathogens and point to its possible
involvement in autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 12904288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Trends Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;13(3):146-50.

Transcriptional repression by Myc.

Wanzel M(1), Herold S, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumour Research (IMT), University of
Marburg, Marburg 35033, Germany.

The Myc oncoprotein is a transcription factor that can both activate and repress 
genes. Transcriptional activation by Myc is well understood, but, by contrast,
the mechanisms through which Myc represses transcription have remained elusive.
Recent evidence suggests that complex formation by Myc with a zinc-finger
transcription factor, Miz-1, plays an important role in mediating repression by
Myc. The findings might explain how Myc interferes with cell-cycle arrest in
response to TGF-beta, APC and DNA damage.

PMID: 12628347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2003 Jan 23;22(3):351-60.

Myc represses differentiation-induced p21CIP1 expression via Miz-1-dependent
interaction with the p21 core promoter.

Wu S(1), Cetinkaya C, Munoz-Alonso MJ, von der Lehr N, Bahram F, Beuger V, Eilers
M, Leon J, Larsson LG.

Author information: 
(1)Upsala Genetic Center, Department of Plant Biology, Swedish University of
Agricultural Sciences.

Inhibition of cellular differentiation is one of the well-known biological
activities of c-Myc-family proteins. We show here that Myc represses
differentiation-induced expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
p21CIP1 (CDKN1A, p21), known to play an important role in cell fate decisions
during growth and differentiation, in hematopoietic cells. Our results
demonstrate that the c-Myc-responsive region is situated in the p21 core
promoter. c-Myc binds to this region in vitro and in vivo through interaction
with the initiator-binding Zn-finger transcription factor Miz-1, which associates
directly with the promoter. Association of Myc with the promoter in vivo
correlates inversely with p21 expression. Using mutants of c-Myc with impaired
binding to Miz-1, our results further show that repression of p21
promoter/reporters as well as the endogenous p21 gene by Myc depends on
interaction with Miz-1. Expression of Miz-1 increases during hematopoietic
differentiation and Miz-1 activates the p21 promoter under conditions of low Myc 
levels, indicating a positive role for free Miz-1 in this process. In conclusion,
repression of differentiation-induced p21 expression through Miz-1 may be an
important mechanism by which Myc blocks differentiation.

PMID: 12545156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2002 May;24(3):219-21.

[Search for interacting proteins of esophageal cancer related gene-1 encoded
protein through the yeast two-hybrid system].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Fan Y, Guo L, Lu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Etiology and Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute
(Hospital), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the role that esophageal cancer related gene-1 (ECRG-1) 
plays and to search for ECRG-1-interacting proteins.
METHODS: A DNA fragment encoding the carboxy-terminus of ECRG-1 (amino acids 40 -
418) was inserted into pGBKT7-DNA-BD vector and fused in-frame to the DNA-binding
domain of GAL4. Then, it was used as a bait to screen the human fetal liver cDNA 
library by yeast two-hybrid, with the cDNA fragment inserted into pACT2 vector
and fused in-frame to the Gal4 activation domain. If ECRG-1 interacted with a
protein encoded by a cDNA fragmant in the yeast, the transcription of reporter
Gene could be activated. With the false positive clonies eliminated, the inserts 
in the positive plasmids were sequenced and compared to those in the GenBank.
RESULTS: In approximately 3 x 10(6) independent tansformants screened, 23 clonies
exhibited the expression of reporter gene. After eliminating the false positive
clonies, two cDNA fragments were obtained. DNA sequencing revealed that one
encoded Miz-1 (Myc-interacting Zn finger protein-1), and another encoded FLNA
(actin-binding protein-280), Miz-1, being a Zn finger protein, could be bound to 
p15 promotor and activated the transcription. FLNA, being an actin-binding
protein took part in the TGF-beta pathway via interaction with Smad.
CONCLUSION: ECRG-1 is able to be specifically bound to Miz-1 and FLNA in the
yeast. It may play a role in the regulation of cell cycle via interaction with
Miz-1 and FLNA.

PMID: 12515610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cancer Cell. 2002 Nov;2(5):351-2.

Switching from life to death: the Miz-ing link between Myc and p53.

Vousden KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road,
Bearsden, Galsgow G61 1BD, UK. k.vousden@beatson.gla.ac.uk

Cells can respond to the activation of the tumor suppressor protein p53 by
undergoing cell cycle arrest or apoptosis, and Myc has now been shown to help
switch the response to apoptosis by repressing the expression of p21(CIP1), a
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor with antiapoptotic activity.

PMID: 12450789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 2003 Feb 15;370(Pt 1):291-8.

Mad4 is regulated by a transcriptional repressor complex that contains Miz-1 and 
c-Myc.

Kime L(1), Wright SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2
9JT, U.K.

Myc and Mad family proteins are central regulators of cellular proliferation and 
differentiation. We show that various Mad family genes have distinct patterns of 
expression during the chemically induced differentiation of mouse
erythroleukaemia (MEL) cells, suggesting that they each serve a different
function. Mad4 RNA is highly induced and persists in terminally differentiated
cells, in agreement with observations in other systems. Using reporter gene
assays in stably transfected MEL cells, we show that induction of Mad4 is
mediated by a 49 nt core promoter region. We demonstrate that the initiator
element is required for Mad4 activation, and show that induction is associated
with the loss from the initiator of a complex that contains Miz-1 and c-Myc.
Miz-1 activates the Mad4 promoter in transient transfection assays, and this
effect is antagonized by c-Myc. We therefore identify Mad4 as a novel target of
transcriptional repression by c-Myc. These data suggest that the expression of
Mad4 in proliferating undifferentiated cells is suppressed by the binding of a
c-Myc-Miz-1 repressor complex at the initiator, and that the activation of Mad4
during differentiation results, at least in part, from a decrease in
c-Myc-mediated repression.

PMCID: PMC1223147
PMID: 12418961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell. 2002 Sep;10(3):509-21.

Negative regulation of the mammalian UV response by Myc through association with 
Miz-1.

Herold S(1), Wanzel M, Beuger V, Frohme C, Beul D, Hillukkala T, Syvaoja J, Saluz
HP, Haenel F, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

The Myc oncoprotein represses initiator-dependent transcription through the POZ
domain transcription factor Miz-1. We now show that transactivation by Miz-1 is
negatively regulated by association with topoisomerase II binding protein
(TopBP1); UV irradiation downregulates expression of TopBP1 and releases Miz-1.
Miz-1 binds to the p21Cip1 core promoter in vivo and is required for upregulation
of p21Cip1 upon UV irradiation. Using both c-myc(-/-) cells and a point mutant of
Myc that is deficient in Miz-1 dependent repression, we show that Myc negatively 
regulates transcription of p21Cip1 upon UV irradiation and facilitates recovery
from UV-induced cell cycle arrest through binding to Miz-1. Our data implicate
Miz-1 in a pathway that regulates cell proliferation in response to UV
irradiation.

PMID: 12408820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nature. 2002 Oct 17;419(6908):729-34. Epub 2002 Oct 2.

Myc suppression of the p21(Cip1) Cdk inhibitor influences the outcome of the p53 
response to DNA damage.

Seoane J(1), Le HV, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Activation of the tumour suppressor p53 by DNA damage induces either cell cycle
arrest or apoptotic cell death. The cytostatic effect of p53 is mediated by
transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
p21(Cip1), whereas the apoptotic effect is mediated by transcriptional activation
of mediators including PUMA and PIG3 (ref. 2). What determines the choice between
cytostasis and apoptosis is not clear. Here we show that the transcription factor
Myc is a principal determinant of this choice. Myc is directly recruited to the
p21(Cip1) promoter by the DNA-binding protein Miz-1. This interaction blocks
p21(Cip1) induction by p53 and other activators. As a result Myc switches, from
cytostatic to apoptotic, the p53-dependent response of colon cancer cells to DNA 
damage. Myc does not modify the ability of p53 to bind to the p21(Cip1) or PUMA
promoters, but selectively inhibits bound p53 from activating p21(Cip1)
transcription. By inhibiting p21(Cip1) expression Myc favours the initiation of
apoptosis, thereby influencing the outcome of a p53 response in favour of cell
death.

PMID: 12384701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):43185-93. Epub 2002 Aug 21.

The SUMO ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase family member Miz1/PIASxbeta /Siz2
is a transcriptional cofactor for TFII-I.

Tussie-Luna MI(1), Michel B, Hakre S, Roy AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Programs in Immunology and Genetics, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

We have shown previously that a TFII-I-related protein, hMusTRD1/BEN, represses
transcriptional activity of TFII-I. The repression by hMusTRD1/BEN was
hypothesized to occur via a two-step competition mechanism involving a
cytoplasmic shuttling factor and a nuclear cofactor required for transcriptional 
activation of TFII-I. Employing a two-hybrid approach with both yeast genomic and
mouse cDNA libraries in parallel, we have identified the RING-like zinc finger
containing Miz1/PIASxbeta/Siz2, which is a ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase in
the SUMO pathway, as the potential nuclear cofactor that interacts with both
TFII-I and hMusTRD1/BEN. Our conclusion is based on the following observations.
First, the interactions are biochemically confirmed in mammalian cells where
Miz1/mPIASxbeta interacts with both TFII-I and hMusTRD1/BEN when these proteins
are ectopically co-expressed. Second, co-expression of a nuclear localization
signal-deficient mutant of Miz1/mPIASxbeta with wild type TFII-I fails to alter
the subcellular localization of the former. Finally, ectopically expressed
Miz1/mPIASxbeta augments the transcriptional activity of TFII-I and relieves the 
repression exerted by a mutant hMusTRD1/BEN that co-localized with TFII-I in the 
nucleus.

PMID: 12193603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell. 2001 Aug;8(2):339-49.

Transcription factor MIZ-1 is regulated via microtubule association.

Ziegelbauer J(1), Shan B, Yager D, Larabell C, Hoffmann B, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA.

A synthetic drug, T113242, activates low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)
transcription in the presence of sterols. T113242 also covalently binds to
beta-tubulin and induces microtubule depolymerization. The myc-interacting zinc
finger protein (MIZ-1) associates with microtubules, can bind directly to the
LDLR promoter, and can activate LDLR transcription. MIZ-1 also binds to the
promoter and activates transcription of other T113242-induced genes such as
alpha(2) integrin. Soft X-ray, indirect immunofluorescence, and green fluorescent
protein time-lapse microscopy reveal that MIZ-1 is largely cytoplasmic but
accumulates in the nuclei of HepG2 cells upon treatment with T113242. Thus, MIZ-1
appears to be regulated by association with microtubules and may activate gene
transcription in response to changes in the cytoskeleton.

PMID: 11545736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genes Dev. 2001 Jun 1;15(11):1334-48.

The Drosophila Su(var)2-10 locus regulates chromosome structure and function and 
encodes a member of the PIAS protein family.

Hari KL(1), Cook KR, Karpen GH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratories, The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The conserved heterochromatic location of centromeres in higher eukaryotes
suggests that intrinsic properties of heterochromatin are important for
chromosome inheritance. Based on this hypothesis, mutations in Drosophila
melanogaster that alter heterochromatin-induced gene silencing were tested for
effects on chromosome inheritance. Here we describe the characterization of the
Su(var)2-10 locus, initially identified as a Suppressor of Position-Effect
Variegation. Su(var)2-10 is required for viability, and mutations cause both
minichromosome and endogenous chromosome inheritance defects. Mitotic chromosomes
are improperly condensed in mutants, and polytene chromosomes are structurally
abnormal and disorganized in the nucleus. Su(var)2-10 encodes a member of the
PIAS protein family, a group of highly conserved proteins that control diverse
functions. SU(VAR)2-10 proteins colocalize with nuclear lamin in interphase, and 
little to no SU(VAR)2-10 is found on condensed mitotic chromosomes. SU(VAR)2-10
is present at some polytene chromosome telomeres, and FISH analyses in mutant
polytene nuclei revealed defects in telomere clustering and
telomere-nuclear-lamina associations. We propose that Su(var2-10 controls
multiple aspects of chromosome structure and function by establishing/maintaining
chromosome organization in interphase nuclei.

PMCID: PMC312712
PMID: 11390354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 May;3(5):E112-3.

Integrating Myc and TGF-beta signalling in cell-cycle control.

Amati B.

PMID: 11331894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;3(4):400-8.

TGFbeta influences Myc, Miz-1 and Smad to control the CDK inhibitor p15INK4b.

Seoane J(1), Pouponnot C, Staller P, Schader M, Eilers M, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) is a cytokine that arrests epithelial
cell division by switching off the proto-oncogene c-myc and rapidly switching on 
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors such as p15INK4b. Gene responses to
TGFbeta involve Smad transcription factors that are directly activated by the
TGFbeta receptor. Why downregulation of c-myc expression by TGFbeta is required
for rapid activation of p15INK4b has remained unknown. Here we provide evidence
that TGFbeta signalling prevents recruitment of Myc to the p15INK4b
transcriptional initiator by Myc-interacting zinc-finger protein 1 (Miz-1). This 
relieves repression and enables transcriptional activation by a TGFbeta-induced
Smad protein complex that recognizes an upstream p15INK4b promoter region and
contacts Miz-1. Thus, two separate TGFbeta-dependent inputs - Smad-mediated
transactivation and relief of repression by Myc - keep tight control over
p15INK4b activation.

PMID: 11283614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;3(4):392-9.

Repression of p15INK4b expression by Myc through association with Miz-1.

Staller P(1), Peukert K, Kiermaier A, Seoane J, Lukas J, Karsunky H, Möröy T,
Bartek J, Massagué J, Hänel F, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumour Research, Emil Mannkopff Strabetae
2, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Deregulated expression of c-myc can induce cell proliferation in established cell
lines and in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), through a combination of
both transcriptional activation and repression by Myc. Here we show that a
Myc-associated transcription factor, Miz-1, arrests cells in G1 phase and
inhibits cyclin D-associated kinase activity. Miz-1 upregulates expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) inhibitor p15INK4b by binding to the initiator
element of the p15INK4b promoter. Myc and Max form a complex with Miz-1 at the
p15 initiator and inhibit transcriptional activation by Miz-1. Expression of Myc 
in primary cells inhibits the accumulation of p15INK4b that is associated with
cellular senescence; conversely, deletion of c-myc in an established cell line
activates p15INK4b expression. Alleles of c-myc that are unable to bind to Miz-1 
fail to inhibit accumulation of p15INK4b messenger RNA in primary cells and are, 
as a consequence, deficient in immortalization.

PMID: 11283613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Gene. 1999 Mar 18;229(1-2):109-16.

Zimp encodes a homologue of mouse Miz1 and PIAS3 and is an essential gene in
Drosophila melanogaster.

Mohr SE(1), Boswell RE.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular, Cellular and
Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0347, USA.

The related mouse proteins Miz1 and PIAS3, which have predicted zinc finger
domains, interact with the transcription factors Msx2 and STAT3, modulating the
ability of Msx2 and STAT3 to regulate transcription. Here, we describe a
Drosophila gene, zimp, that encodes a protein with similarity to Miz1 and PIAS3. 
The zimp gene appears to be post-transcriptionally regulated, as three
alternatively spliced forms are detected in a cDNA library screen and on an RNA
blot. In addition, all three zimp transcripts are detected in embryonic mRNA, but
only two of the transcripts are detected in adult mRNA. The three transcripts
have the ability to encode two proteins, of 554 and 522 amino acids. The two Zimp
amino acid sequences share an amino-terminal 515-amino-acid region and differ in 
their carboxy-termini. These proteins and related proteins in other organisms,
including mammals, C. elegans, yeast, and plants, share a highly conserved region
predicted to form a zinc finger. Deletion of the zimp gene or P-element insertion
in zimp is lethal; thus, zimp is an essential gene in Drosophila. These data
underscore the potential importance of Zimp-related proteins cross-species, and
conservation of the putative zinc finger domain suggests that it is functionally 
important.

PMID: 10095110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 1;18(3):717-26.

Destruction of Myc by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis: cancer-associated and
transforming mutations stabilize Myc.

Salghetti SE(1), Kim SY, Tansey WP.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, PO Box 100, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The human proto-oncogene c-myc encodes a highly unstable transcription factor
that promotes cell proliferation. Although the extreme instability of Myc plays
an important role in preventing its accumulation in normal cells, little is known
about how Myc is targeted for rapid destruction. Here, we have investigated
mechanisms regulating the stability of Myc. We show that Myc is destroyed by
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and define two elements in Myc that oppositely
regulate its stability: a transcriptional activation domain that promotes Myc
destruction, and a region required for association with the POZ domain protein
Miz-1 that stabilizes Myc. We also show that Myc is stabilized by
cancer-associated and transforming mutations within its transcriptional
activation domain. Our data reveal a complex network of interactions regulating
Myc destruction, and imply that enhanced protein stability contributes to
oncogenic transformation by mutant Myc proteins.

PMCID: PMC1171164
PMID: 9927431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. EMBO J. 1997 Sep 15;16(18):5672-86.

An alternative pathway for gene regulation by Myc.

Peukert K(1), Staller P, Schneider A, Carmichael G, Hänel F, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Hans-Knöll-Institut für Naturstoff-Forschung, Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany.

The c-Myc protein activates transcription as part of a heteromeric complex with
Max. However, Myc-transformed cells are characterized by loss of expression of
several genes, suggesting that Myc may also repress gene expression. Two-hybrid
cloning identifies a novel POZ domain Zn finger protein (Miz-1; Myc-interacting
Zn finger protein-1) that specifically interacts with Myc, but not with Max or
USF. Miz-1 binds to start sites of the adenovirus major late and cyclin D1
promoters and activates transcription from both promoters. Miz-1 has a potent
growth arrest function. Binding of Myc to Miz-1 requires the helix-loop-helix
domain of Myc and a short amphipathic helix located in the carboxy-terminus of
Miz-1. Expression of Myc inhibits transactivation, overcomes Miz-1-induced growth
arrest and renders Miz-1 insoluble in vivo. These processes depend on Myc and
Miz-1 association and on the integrity of the POZ domain of Miz-1, suggesting
that Myc binding activates a latent inhibitory function of this domain. Fusion of
a nuclear localization signal induces efficient nuclear transport of Miz-1 and
impairs the ability of Myc to overcome transcriptional activation and growth
arrest by Miz-1. Our data suggest a model for how gene repression by Myc may
occur in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1170199
PMID: 9312026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mech Dev. 1997 Jul;65(1-2):3-17.

Miz1, a novel zinc finger transcription factor that interacts with Msx2 and
enhances its affinity for DNA.

Wu L(1), Wu H, Ma L, Sangiorgi F, Wu N, Bell JR, Lyons GE, Maxson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC Norris Cancer Hospital
and Research Institute, University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles 90033, USA.

Erratum in
    Mech Dev 1997 Dec;69(1-2):219.

Msx2 is a homeobox gene with a regulatory role in inductive tissue interactions, 
including those that pattern the skull. We demonstrated previously that
individuals affected with an autosomal dominant disorder of skull morphogenesis
(craniosynostosis, Boston type) bear a mutated form of Msx2 in which a histidine 
is substituted for a highly conserved proline in position 7 of the N-terminal arm
of the homeodomain (p148h). The mutation behaves as a dominant positive in
transgenic mice. The location of the mutation in the N-terminal arm of the
homeodomain, a region which in other homeodomain proteins plays a key part in
protein-protein interactions, prompted us to undertake a yeast two hybrid screen 
for Msx2-interacting proteins. Here we present a functional analysis of one such 
protein, designated Miz1 (Msx-interacting-zinc finger). Miz1 is a zinc
finger-containing protein whose amino acid sequence closely resembles that of the
yeast protein, Nfi-1. Together these proteins define a new, highly conserved
protein family. Analysis of Miz1 expression by Northern blot and in situ
hybridization revealed a spatiotemporal pattern that overlaps that of Msx2.
Further, Miz1 is a sequence specific DNA binding protein, and it can function as 
a positive-acting transcription factor. Miz1 interacts directly with Msx2 in
vitro and enhances the DNA binding affinity of Msx2 for a functionally important 
element in the rat osteocalcin promoter. The p148h mutation in Msx2 augments the 
Miz1 effect on Msx2 DNA binding, suggesting a reason why this mutation behaves in
vivo as a dominant positive, and providing a potential explanation of the
craniosynostosis phenotype.

PMID: 9256341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1997;224:137-46.

Association of Myc with the zinc-finger protein Miz-1 defines a novel pathway for
gene regulation by Myc.

Schneider A(1), Peukert K, Eilers M, Hänel F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg (ZMBH), Germany.

The Myc protein activates transcription as part of a complex with its partner
protein, Max. Myc-transformed cells are also characterised by the loss of
expression of a number of genes and this repressive effect of Myc on gene
expression may not be mediated by the Myc/Max complex. We recently isolated by
two-hybrid cloning a novel zinc-finger protein that associates with the
carboxy-terminus of Myc. We have termed this protein Miz-1 (Myc-interacting zinc 
finger protein). Some of the properties of Miz-1 suggest that it may be involved 
in gene repression by Myc in vivo.

PMID: 9308237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


