
1. EBioMedicine. 2015 Jul 29;2(9):1133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.07.017.
eCollection 2015.

Integration of copy number and transcriptomics provides risk stratification in
prostate cancer: A discovery and validation cohort study.

Ross-Adams H(1), Lamb AD(2), Dunning MJ(1), Halim S(1), Lindberg J(3), Massie
CM(1), Egevad LA(4), Russell R(1), Ramos-Montoya A(1), Vowler SL(1), Sharma
NL(5), Kay J(6), Whitaker H(6), Clark J(7), Hurst R(7), Gnanapragasam VJ(8), Shah
NC(9), Warren AY(10), Cooper CS(7), Lynch AG(1), Stark R(1), Mills IG(11),
Grönberg H(12), Neal DE(13); CamCaP Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2
0RE, UK. (2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK ; Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge 
CB2 2QQ, UK ; Academic Urology Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2
0QQ, UK. (3)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences,
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, UK. (6)Cancer Research UK
Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK ; Molecular
Diagnostics and Therapeutics Group, University College London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
(7)University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.
(8)Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK ;
Academic Urology Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(9)Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.
(10)Department of Pathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.
(11)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0RE, UK ; Prostate Cancer Research Group, Centre for Molecular Medicine
Norway, Nordic EMBL Partnership, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital,
N-0318 Oslo, Norway ; Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Cancer
Research, Oslo University Hospitals, N-0424 Oslo, Norway ; Prostate Cancer
UK/Movember Centre of Excellence for Prostate Cancer Research, Centre for Cancer 
Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University, Belfast, UK. (12)Academic Urology 
Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK. (13)Cancer Research UK
Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK ; Department 
of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the heterogeneous genotypes and phenotypes of prostate 
cancer is fundamental to improving the way we treat this disease. As yet, there
are no validated descriptions of prostate cancer subgroups derived from
integrated genomics linked with clinical outcome.
METHODS: In a study of 482 tumour, benign and germline samples from 259 men with 
primary prostate cancer, we used integrative analysis of copy number alterations 
(CNA) and array transcriptomics to identify genomic loci that affect expression
levels of mRNA in an expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) approach, to
stratify patients into subgroups that we then associated with future clinical
behaviour, and compared with either CNA or transcriptomics alone.
FINDINGS: We identified five separate patient subgroups with distinct genomic
alterations and expression profiles based on 100 discriminating genes in our
separate discovery and validation sets of 125 and 103 men. These subgroups were
able to consistently predict biochemical relapse (p = 0.0017 and p = 0.016
respectively) and were further validated in a third cohort with long-term
follow-up (p = 0.027). We show the relative contributions of gene expression and 
copy number data on phenotype, and demonstrate the improved power gained from
integrative analyses. We confirm alterations in six genes previously associated
with prostate cancer (MAP3K7, MELK, RCBTB2, ELAC2, TPD52, ZBTB4), and also
identify 94 genes not previously linked to prostate cancer progression that would
not have been detected using either transcript or copy number data alone. We
confirm a number of previously published molecular changes associated with high
risk disease, including MYC amplification, and NKX3-1, RB1 and PTEN deletions, as
well as over-expression of PCA3 and AMACR, and loss of MSMB in tumour tissue. A
subset of the 100 genes outperforms established clinical predictors of poor
prognosis (PSA, Gleason score), as well as previously published gene signatures
(p = 0.0001). We further show how our molecular profiles can be used for the
early detection of aggressive cases in a clinical setting, and inform treatment
decisions.
INTERPRETATION: For the first time in prostate cancer this study demonstrates the
importance of integrated genomic analyses incorporating both benign and tumour
tissue data in identifying molecular alterations leading to the generation of
robust gene sets that are predictive of clinical outcome in independent patient
cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4588396
PMID: 26501111  [PubMed]


2. Curr Pharmacol Rep. 2015 Apr;1(2):73-78. Epub 2015 Jan 11.

MicroRNA-Specificity Protein (Sp) Transcription Factor Interactions and
Significance in Carcinogenesis.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466 USA, Tel: 979-845-5989, ,
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) such as Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 are
overexpressed in tumors and Sp1 is a negative prognostic factor for multiple
tumor types. Sp TFs regulate expression of pro-oncogenic factors important for
cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, migration/invasion and inflammation
and the high expression of Sp TFs in tumors is primarily due to miRNAs. For
example, expression of tumor-suppressor-like miRNAs such as miR-200b/c, miR-335, 
miR-22, miR-149 and others that inactivate Sp1 expression is low in many tumor
types. Research in our laboratory has also demonstrated that high expression of
Sp TFs is also due to miRNA-dependent inhibition of the transcriptional
repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 by miR-27a and miR-20a/miR-17p, respectively. Thus,
miRNAs play a critical role in maintaining high levels of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in tumors and cancer cells, and there is ample
evidence that anticancer agents targeting the miRNASp TF axis can be highly
effective for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4596546
PMID: 26457240  [PubMed]


3. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Sep;14(9):2143-53. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0148. Epub
2015 Jul 10.

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors Inhibit Rhabdomyosarcoma by Reactive Oxygen
Species-Dependent Targeting of Specificity Protein Transcription Factors.

Hedrick E(1), Crose L(2), Linardic CM(3), Safe S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina. Department of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina. (4)Department of
Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station,
Texas. Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Sciences Center,
Houston, Texas. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

The two major types of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) are predominantly diagnosed in
children, namely embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS) RMS, and patients are
treated with cytotoxic drugs, which results in multiple toxic side effects later 
in life. Therefore, development of innovative chemotherapeutic strategies is
imperative, and a recent genomic analysis suggested the potential efficacy of
reactive oxygen species (ROS)-inducing agents. Here, we demonstrate the efficacy 
of the potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, panobinostat and vorinostat,
as agents that inhibit RMS tumor growth in vivo, induce apoptosis, and inhibit
invasion of RD and Rh30 RMS cell lines. These effects are due to epigenetic
repression of cMyc, which leads to decreased expression of cMyc-regulated
miRs-17, -20a, and -27a; upregulation of ZBTB4, ZBTB10, and ZBTB34; and
subsequent downregulation of Sp transcription factors. We also show that
inhibition of RMS cell growth, survival and invasion, and repression of Sp
transcription factors by the HDAC inhibitors are independent of histone
acetylation but reversible after cotreatment with the antioxidant glutathione.
These results show a novel ROS-dependent mechanism of antineoplastic activity for
panobinostat and vorinostat that lies outside of their canonical HDAC-inhibitory 
activity and demonstrates the potential clinical utility for treating RMS
patients with ROS-inducing agents.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4618474 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26162688  [PubMed - in process]


4. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep. 2013 Dec;9(4):350-357.

REACTIVE OXYGEN SPECIES AND COLORECTAL CANCER.

Sreevalsan S(1), Safe S(2).

Author information: 
(1)VMR 1197, Room 413, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843
979-845-9182 ssreevalsan@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)VMR 1197, Room 410, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, 77843 979-845-5988.

Several agents used for treatment of colon and other cancers induce reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and this plays an important role in their anticancer
activities. In addition to the well-known proapoptotic effects of ROS inducers,
these compounds also decrease expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several pro-oncogenic Spregulated
genes important for cancer cell proliferation, survival and metastasis. The
mechanism of these responses involve ROS-dependent downregulation of microRNA-27a
(miR-27a) or miR-20a (and paralogs) and induction of two Sp-repressors, ZBTB10
and ZBTB4 respectively. This pathway significantly contributes to the anticancer 
activity of ROS inducers and should be considered in development of drug
combinations for cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4288935
PMID: 25584043  [PubMed]


5. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1059-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.011.

The transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 regulates EZH2 through a
MicroRNA-ZBTB4-specificity protein signaling axis.

Yang WS(1), Chadalapaka G(2), Cho SG(3), Lee SO(4), Jin UH(4), Jutooru I(2), Choi
K(5), Leung YK(1), Ho SM(1), Safe S(6), Kim K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45267. (2)Department of Veterinary
Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of
Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030. (5)Division of
Experimental Biology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843; Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030.

ZBTB4 is a transcriptional repressor and examination of publically-available
microarray data sets demonstrated an inverse relationship in the prognostic value
and expression of ZBTB4 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in tumors from
breast cancer patients. The possibility of functional interactions between EZH2
and ZBTB4 was investigated in breast cancer cells and the results showed that
EZH2 is directly suppressed by ZBTB4 which in turn is regulated (suppressed) by
miR-106b and other paralogues from the miR-17-92, miR-106b-25 and miR-106a-363
clusters that are highly expressed in breast and other tumors. ZBTB4 also acts a 
suppressor of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4,
and RNA interference studies show that Sp proteins are required for EZH2
expression. The prediction analysis results from breast cancer patient array data
sets confirm an association of Sp1-dependent EZH2 gene signature with decreased
survival of breast cancer patients. Disruption of oncogenic miR-ZBTB4 signaling
axis by anticancer agent such as betulinic acid that induce down-regulation of Sp
proteins in breast cancer cells resulted in inhibition of tumor growth and
colonization of breast cancer cells in a mouse model. Thus, EZH2 is reciprocally 
regulated by a novel signaling network consisting of Sp proteins, oncogenic miRs 
and ZBTB4, and modulation of this gene network is a novel therapeutic approach
for treatment of breast cancer and possibly other cancers.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4309261
PMID: 25499219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(13):2382-95. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01602-13. Epub 2014 Apr 
14.

Mechanism of action of phenethylisothiocyanate and other reactive oxygen
species-inducing anticancer agents.

Jutooru I(1), Guthrie AS(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Pathi S(1), Kim K(3), Burghardt
R(4), Jin UH(5), Safe S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas
A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (4)Department of
Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
USA. (5)Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA Institute of Biosciences &
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA
ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-inducing anticancer agents such as
phenethylisothiocyanate (PEITC) activate stress pathways for killing cancer
cells. Here we demonstrate that PEITC-induced ROS decreased expression of
microRNA 27a (miR-27a)/miR-20a:miR-17-5p and induced miR-regulated ZBTB10/ZBTB4
and ZBTB34 transcriptional repressors, which, in turn, downregulate specificity
protein (Sp) transcription factors (TFs) Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 in pancreatic cancer
cells. Decreased expression of miR-27a/miR-20a:miR-17-5p by PEITC-induced ROS is 
a key step in triggering the miR-ZBTB Sp cascade leading to downregulation of Sp 
TFs, and this is due to ROS-dependent epigenetic effects associated with
genome-wide shifts in repressor complexes, resulting in decreased expression of
Myc and the Myc-regulated miRs. Knockdown of Sp1 alone by RNA interference also
induced apoptosis and decreased pancreatic cancer cell growth and invasion,
indicating that downregulation of Sp transcription factors is an important common
mechanism of action for PEITC and other ROS-inducing anticancer agents.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054319
PMID: 24732804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051205. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Kaiso directs the transcriptional corepressor MTG16 to the Kaiso binding site in 
target promoters.

Barrett CW(1), Smith JJ, Lu LC, Markham N, Stengel KR, Short SP, Zhang B, Hunt
AA, Fingleton BM, Carnahan RH, Engel ME, Chen X, Beauchamp RD, Wilson KT, Hiebert
SW, Reynolds AB, Williams CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Myeloid translocation genes (MTGs) are transcriptional corepressors originally
identified in acute myelogenous leukemia that have recently been linked to
epithelial malignancy with non-synonymous mutations identified in both MTG8 and
MTG16 in colon, breast, and lung carcinoma in addition to functioning as negative
regulators of WNT and Notch signaling. A yeast two-hybrid approach was used to
discover novel MTG binding partners. This screen identified the Zinc fingers,
C2H2 and BTB domain containing (ZBTB) family members ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 as MTG16
interacting proteins. ZBTB4 is downregulated in breast cancer and modulates p53
responses. Because ZBTB33 (Kaiso), like MTG16, modulates Wnt signaling at the
level of TCF4, and its deletion suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in the
Apc(Min) mouse, we determined that Kaiso also interacted with MTG16 to modulate
transcription. The zinc finger domains of Kaiso as well as ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 bound
MTG16 and the association with Kaiso was confirmed using co-immunoprecipitation. 
MTG family members were required to efficiently repress both a heterologous
reporter construct containing Kaiso binding sites (4×KBS) and the known Kaiso
target, Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7/Matrilysin). Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies placed MTG16 in a complex occupying the Kaiso binding
site on the MMP-7 promoter. The presence of MTG16 in this complex, and its
contributions to transcriptional repression both required Kaiso binding to its
binding site on DNA, establishing MTG16-Kaiso binding as functionally relevant in
Kaiso-dependent transcriptional repression. Examination of a large multi-stage
CRC expression array dataset revealed patterns of Kaiso, MTG16, and MMP-7
expression supporting the hypothesis that loss of either Kaiso or MTG16 can
de-regulate a target promoter such as that of MMP-7. These findings provide new
insights into the mechanisms of transcriptional control by ZBTB family members
and broaden the scope of co-repressor functions for the MTG family, suggesting
coordinate regulation of transcription by Kaiso/MTG complexes in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3521008
PMID: 23251453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 30;12:564. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-564.

Curcumin and synthetic analogs induce reactive oxygen species and decreases
specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors by targeting microRNAs.

Gandhy SU(1), Kim K, Larsen L, Rosengren RJ, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Curcumin inhibits growth of several cancer cell lines, and studies in
this laboratory in bladder and pancreatic cancer cells show that curcumin
downregulates specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and
pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes. In this study, we investigated the anticancer
activity of curcumin and several synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs
in colon cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of curcumin and synthetic analogs on colon cancer cell
proliferation and apoptosis were determined using standardized assays. The
changes in Sp proteins and Sp-regulated gene products were analysed by western
blots, and real time PCR was used to determine microRNA-27a (miR-27a), miR-20a,
miR-17-5p and ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 mRNA expression.
RESULTS: The IC50 (half-maximal) values for growth inhibition (24 hr) of colon
cancer cells by curcumin and synthetic cyclohexanone and piperidine analogs of
curcumin varied from 10 µM for curcumin to 0.7 µM for the most active synthetic
piperidine analog RL197, which was used along with curcumin as model agents in
this study. Curcumin and RL197 inhibited RKO and SW480 colon cancer cell growth
and induced apoptosis, and this was accompanied by downregulation of specificity 
protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes
including the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), hepatocyte growth factor
receptor (c-MET), survivin, bcl-2, cyclin D1 and NF<U+03BA>B (p65 and p50). Curcumin and
RL197 also induced reactive oxygen species (ROS), and cotreatment with the
antioxidant glutathione significantly attenuated curcumin- and RL197-induced
growth inhibition and downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, Sp4 and Sp-regulated genes. The
mechanism of curcumin-/RL197-induced repression of Sp transcription factors was
ROS-dependent and due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of microRNAs (miR)-27a, miR-20a and miR-17-5p that regulate these 
repressors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify a new and highly potent curcumin derivative
and demonstrate that in cells where curcumin and RL197 induce ROS, an important
underlying mechanism of action involves perturbation of miR-ZBTB10/ZBTB4,
resulting in the induction of these repressors which downregulate Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3522018
PMID: 23194063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Sep;11(9):1852-62. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0181. Epub
2012 Jun 29.

Induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells by
drug-induced targeting of microRNA-17-92/106b-25 clusters.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Pathi SS, Jin UH, Lee JS, Park YY, Cho SG,
Chintharlapalli S, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas, Houston, USA.

Androgen-insensitive DU145 and PC3 human prostate cancer cells express high
levels of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4, and
treatment of cells with methyl 2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-olean-1,12-dien-30-oate
(CDODA-Me) inhibited cell growth and downregulated Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 expression. 
CDODA-Me (15 mg/kg/d) was a potent inhibitor of tumor growth in a mouse xenograft
model (PC3 cells) and also decreased expression of Sp transcription factors in
tumors. CDODA-Me-mediated downregulation of Sp1, Sp3, and Sp4 was due to
induction of the transcriptional repressor ZBTB4, which competitively binds and
displaces Sp transcription factors from GC-rich sites in Sp1-, Sp3-, Sp4-, and
Sp-regulated gene promoters. ZBTB4 levels are relatively low in DU145 and PC3
cells due to suppression by miR paralogs that are members of the miR-17-92
(miR-20a/17-5p) and miR-106b-25 (miR-106b/93) clusters. Examination of publically
available prostate cancer patient array data showed an inverse relationship
between ZBTB4 and miRs-20a/17-5p/106b/93 expression, and increased ZBTB4 in
patients with prostate cancer was a prognostic factor for increased survival.
CDODA-Me induces ZBTB4 in prostate cancer cells through disruption of miR-ZBTB4
interactions, and this results in downregulation of pro-oncogenic Sp
transcription factors and Sp-regulated genes.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3632183
PMID: 22752225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2012 Dec;12(10):1211-20.

Unifying mechanisms of action of the anticancer activities of triterpenoids and
synthetic analogs.

Safe SH(1), Prather PL, Brents LK, Chadalapaka G, Jutooru I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-4466, USA. ssafe@cvm.tamu.edu

Triterpenoids such as betulinic acid (BA) and synthetic analogs of oleanolic acid
[2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO)] and glycyrrhetinic acid
[2-cyano-3,11-dioxo-18ß-oleana-1,12-dien-30-oc acid (CDODA)] are potent
anticancer agents that exhibit antiproliferative, antiangiogenic,
anti-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic activities. Although their effects on
multiple pathways have been reported, unifying mechanisms of action have not been
reported. Studies in this laboratory have now demonstrated that several
triterpenoids including BA and some derivatives, celastrol, methyl ursolate,
ß-boswellic acid derivatives, and the synthetic analogs CDDO, CDODA and their
esters decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors and
several pro-oncogenic Sp-regulated genes in multiple cancer cell lines. The
mechanisms of this response are both compound- and cell context-dependent and
include activation of both proteasome-dependent and -independent pathways.
Triterpenoid-mediated induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) has now been
characterized as an important proteasome-independent pathway for downregulation
of Sp transcription factors. ROS decreases expression of microRNA-27a (miR-27a)
and miR-20a/miR-17-5p and this results in the induction of the transcriptional
"Sp-repressors" ZBTB10 and ZBTB4, respectively, which in turn downregulate Sp and
Sp-regulated genes. Triterpenoids also activate or deactive nuclear receptors and
G-protein coupled receptors, and these pathways contribute to their
antitumorigenic activity and may also play a role in targeting Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4
which are highly overexpressed in multiple cancers and appear to be important for
maintaining the cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3532564
PMID: 22583404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Dev Dyn. 2012 Jun;241(6):1062-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23787. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Biphasic wnt8a expression is achieved through interactions of multiple regulatory
inputs.

Narayanan A(1), Lekven AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843-3258, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vertebrate axis development depends upon wnt8a transcription in a
dynamic pool of mesoderm progenitors at the posterior pole of the gastrulating
embryo. The transcriptional mechanisms controlling wnt8a expression are not
understood, but previous studies identified two phases of wnt8a expression in
zebrafish: Nodal-dependent activation during early gastrulation (phase I) and No 
tail (Ntl)-dependent regulation from mid gastrula stages (phase II).
RESULTS: We identified two upstream cis-regulatory regions, proximal and distal, 
each of which possesses a promoter. The proximal regulatory region contains a
margin-specific enhancer that is required for both the Nodal and Ntl responses.
Phase I expression requires Nodal activation of the margin enhancer in
combination with the transcription factor Zbtb4 and the distal regulatory region.
Phase II expression requires Ntl regulation of the margin enhancer in the context
of the proximal regulatory region. An additional mechanism is required to ensure 
the transition from phase I to phase II regulation. Analysis of stickleback wnt8a
suggests this mechanism of regulation may be conserved.
CONCLUSIONS: The seemingly simple wnt8a expression pattern reflects complex
interactions of multiple regulatory inputs.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22473868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Leukemia. 2012 Jul;26(7):1584-93. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.44. Epub 2012 Feb 20.

The miR-17~92 family regulates the response to Toll-like receptor 9 triggering of
CLL cells with unmutated IGHV genes.

Bomben R(1), Gobessi S, Dal Bo M, Volinia S, Marconi D, Tissino E, Benedetti D,
Zucchetto A, Rossi D, Gaidano G, Del Poeta G, Laurenti L, Efremov DG, Gattei V.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Onco-Hematology Unit, Centro di Riferimento
Oncologico, I.R.C.C.S., Aviano (PN), Italy.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells from clinically aggressive cases have a 
greater capacity to respond to external microenvironmental stimuli, including
those transduced through Toll-like-receptor-9 (TLR9). Concomitant microRNA and
gene expression profiling in purified CLL cells (n=17) expressing either
unmutated (UM) or mutated (M) IGHV genes selected microRNAs from the miR-17~92
family as significantly upregulated and in part responsible for modifications in 
the gene expression profile of UM CLL cells stimulated with the TLR9 agonist CpG.
Notably, the stable and sustained upregulation of miR-17~92 microRNAs by CpG was 
preceded by a transient induction of the proto-oncogene MYC. The enforced
expression of miR-17, a major member from this family, reduced the expression of 
the tumor suppressor genes E2F5, TP53INP1, TRIM8 and ZBTB4, and protected cells
from serum-free-induced apoptosis (P = 0.05). Consistently, transfection with
miR-17~92 family antagomiRs reduced Bromo-deoxy-uridine incorporation in
CpG-stimulated UM CLL cells. Finally, miR-17 expression levels, evaluated in 83
CLL samples, were significantly higher in UM (P=0.03) and ZAP-70(high) (P=0.02)
cases. Altogether, these data reveal a role for microRNAs of the miR-17~92 family
in regulating pro-survival and growth-promoting responses of CLL cells to TLR9
triggering. Overall, targeting of this pathway may represent a novel therapeutic 
option for management of aggressive CLL.

PMID: 22343732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Apr;33(4):886-94. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs102. Epub 2012 Feb 
14.

Celastrol decreases specificity proteins (Sp) and fibroblast growth factor
receptor-3 (FGFR3) in bladder cancer cells.

Chadalapaka G(1), Jutooru I, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
4466 TAMU, Vet Res Bldg 410, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Celastrol (CSL) is a naturally occurring triterpenoid acid that exhibits
anticancer activity, and in KU7 and 253JB-V bladder cells, CSL induced apoptosis,
inhibited growth, colony formation and migration and CSL decreased bladder tumor 
growth in vivo. CSL also decreased expression of specificity protein (Sp)
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 and several Sp-regulated genes/proteins
including vascular endothelial growth factor, survivin and cyclin D1 and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-3, a potential drug target for bladder cancer
therapy, has now been characterized as an Sp-regulated gene downregulated by CSL.
The mechanism of Sp downregulation by CSL was cell context-dependent due to
activation of proteosome-dependent (KU7) and -independent (253JB-V) pathways. In 
253JB-V cells, CSL induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inhibitors of ROS
blocked CSL-induced growth inhibition and repression of Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4. This
response was due to induction of the Sp repressors ZBTB10 and ZBTB4 and
downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p, respectively, which regulate
expression of these transcriptional repressors. Thus, the anticancer activity of 
CSL in 253JB-V cells is due to induction of ROS and ROS-mediated induction of Sp 
repressors (ZBTB4/ZBTB10) through downregulation of miR-27a and miR-20a/17-5p.

PMCID: PMC3324448
PMID: 22334592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2011 Nov;32(11):1411-8. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.121. Epub 2011 
Oct 3.

Yeast two-hybrid screening of proteins interacting with plasmin receptor subunit:
C-terminal fragment of annexin A2.

Li Q(1), Laumonnier Y, Syrovets T, Simmet T.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Laboratory of Vascular Biology, Ruijin Hospital, Health Science Center, 
Shanghai, China. liqun@sibs.ac.cn

AIM: To identify proteins that interact with the C-terminal fragment of annexin
A2 (A2IC), generated by plasmin cleavage of the plasmin receptor, a
heterotetramer (AA2t) containing annexin A2.
METHODS: The gene that encodes the A2IC fragment was obtained from PCR-amplified 
cDNA isolated from human monocytes, and was ligated into the pBTM116 vector using
a DNA ligation kit. The resultant plasmid (pBTM116-A2IC) was sequenced with an
ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer. The expression of an A2IC bait protein fused with
a LexA-DNA binding domain (BD) was determined using Western blot analysis. The
identification of proteins that interact with A2IC and are encoded in a human
monocyte cDNA library was performed using yeast two-hybrid screening. The DNA
sequences of the relevant cDNAs were determined using an ABI PRISM BigDye
terminator cycle sequencing ready reaction kit. Nucleotide sequence databases
were searched for homologous sequences using BLAST search analysis
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Confirmation of the interaction between the
protein LexA-A2IC and each of cathepsin S and SNX17 was conducted using a
small-scale yeast transformation and X-gal assay.
RESULTS: The yeast transformed with plasmids encoding the bait proteins were
screened with a human monocyte cDNA library by reconstituting full-length
transcription factors containing the GAL4-active domain (GAL4-AD) as the prey in 
a yeast two-hybrid approach. After screening 1×10(7) clones, 23 independent
ß-Gal-positive clones were identified. Sequence analysis and a database search
revealed that 15 of these positive clones matched eight different proteins
(SNX17, ProCathepsin S, RPS2, ZBTB4, OGDH, CCDC32, PAPD4, and actin which was
already known to interact with annexin A2).
CONCLUSION: A2IC A2IC interacts with various proteins to form protein complexes, 
which may contribute to the molecular mechanism of monocyte activation induced by
plasmin. The yeast two-hybrid system is an efficient approach for investigating
protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC4002734
PMID: 21963895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 23;31(8):1034-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.296. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Identification of oncogenic microRNA-17-92/ZBTB4/specificity protein axis in
breast cancer.

Kim K(1), Chadalapaka G, Lee SO, Yamada D, Sastre-Garau X, Defossez PA, Park YY, 
Lee JS, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77843, USA.

The human POK family members are transcription factors with a POZ domain and
zinc-fingers that act primarily as transcriptional repressors. Several members of
this family are involved in oncogenesis and this prompted us to assess whether
expression levels of individual POK family members are associated with clinical
outcomes in cancer. We have observed that ZBTB4 (zinc-finger and BTB domain
containing 4) is downregulated in breast cancer patients, and that its expression
is significantly correlated with relapse-free survival. Further integrative
analysis of mRNA and microRNA (miR) expression data from the NCI-60 cell lines
revealed an inverse correlation between ZBTB4 and oncogenic miRs derived from the
miR-17-92 cluster and its paralogs. The experimental results using MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells confirm that miRNAs derived from these clusters, 
containing miR-17-5p, miR-20a, miR-106a, miR-106b and miR-93, negatively regulate
ZBTB4 expression. Overexpression of ZBTB4 or restoration of ZBTB4 by using an
antagomir inhibit growth and invasion of breast cancer cells, and this effect is 
due, in part, to ZBTB4-dependent repression of the specificity protein 1 (Sp1),
Sp3 and Sp4 genes, and subsequent downregulation of several Sp-dependent
oncogenes, in part, through competition between ZBTB4 and Sp transcription
factors for GC-rich promoter sequences. These results confirm that ZBTB4
functions as a novel tumor-suppressor gene with prognostic significance for
breast cancer survival, and the oncogenic miR-17-92/ZBTB4/Sp axis may be a
potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3288192
PMID: 21765466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 31;5(12):e15747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015747.

The molecular evolution of the p120-catenin subfamily and its functional
associations.

Carnahan RH(1), Rokas A, Gaucher EA, Reynolds AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: p120-catenin (p120) is the prototypical member of a subclass of
armadillo-related proteins that includes d-catenin/NPRAP, ARVCF, p0071, and the
more distantly related plakophilins 1-3. In vertebrates, p120 is essential in
regulating surface expression and stability of all classical cadherins, and
directly interacts with Kaiso, a BTB/ZF family transcription factor.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To clarify functional relationships between these
proteins and how they relate to the classical cadherins, we have examined the
proteomes of 14 diverse vertebrate and metazoan species. The data reveal a single
ancient d-catenin-like p120 family member present in the earliest metazoans and
conserved throughout metazoan evolution. This single p120 family protein is
present in all protostomes, and in certain early-branching chordate lineages.
Phylogenetic analyses suggest that gene duplication and functional
diversification into "p120-like" and "d-catenin-like" proteins occurred in the
urochordate-vertebrate ancestor. Additional gene duplications during early
vertebrate evolution gave rise to the seven vertebrate p120 family members. Kaiso
family members (i.e., Kaiso, ZBTB38 and ZBTB4) are found only in vertebrates,
their origin following that of the p120-like gene lineage and coinciding with the
evolution of vertebrate-specific mechanisms of epigenetic gene regulation by CpG 
island methylation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The p120 protein family evolved from a common
d-catenin-like ancestor present in all metazoans. Through several rounds of gene 
duplication and diversification, however, p120 evolved in vertebrates into an
essential, ubiquitously expressed protein, whereas loss of the more selectively
expressed d-catenin, p0071 and ARVCF are tolerated in most species. Together with
phylogenetic studies of the vertebrate cadherins, our data suggest that the
p120-like and d-catenin-like genes co-evolved separately with non-neural (E- and 
P-cadherin) and neural (N- and R-cadherin) cadherin lineages, respectively. The
expansion of p120 relative to d-catenin during vertebrate evolution may reflect
the pivotal and largely disproportionate role of the non-neural cadherins with
respect to evolution of the wide range of somatic morphology present in
vertebrates today.

PMCID: PMC3013132
PMID: 21209830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):5015-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq280. Epub 2010
Apr 19.

Sequence-specific recognition of methylated DNA by human zinc-finger proteins.

Sasai N(1), Nakao M, Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR7216, Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.

DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic mark. Three classes of mammalian
proteins recognize methylated DNA: MBD proteins, SRA proteins and the zinc-finger
proteins Kaiso, ZBTB4 and ZBTB38. The last three proteins can bind either
methylated DNA or unmethylated consensus sequences; how this is achieved is
largely unclear. Here, we report that the human zinc-finger proteins Kaiso, ZBTB4
and ZBTB38 can bind methylated DNA in a sequence-specific manner, and that they
may use a mode of binding common to other zinc-finger proteins. This suggests
that many other sequence-specific methyl binding proteins may exist.

PMCID: PMC2926618
PMID: 20403812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Chem Biol Interact. 2010 Apr 15;185(1):42-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.02.002.
Epub 2010 Feb 6.

Factors determining sensitivity or resistance of tumor cell lines towards
artesunate.

Sertel S(1), Eichhorn T, Sieber S, Sauer A, Weiss J, Plinkert PK, Efferth T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Clinical oncology is still challenged by the development of drug resistance of
tumors that result in poor prognosis for patients. There is an urgent necessity
to understand the molecular mechanisms of resistance and to develop novel therapy
strategies. Artesunate (ART) is an anti-malarial drug, which also exerts profound
cytotoxic activity towards cancer cells. We first applied a gene-hunting approach
using cluster and COMPARE analyses of microarray-based transcriptome-wide mRNA
expression profiles. Among the genes identified by this approach were genes from 
diverse functional groups such as structural constituents of ribosomes (RPL6,
RPL7, RPS12, RPS15A), kinases (CABC1, CCT2, RPL41), transcriptional and
translational regulators (SFRS2, TUFM, ZBTB4), signal transducers (FLNA), control
of cell growth and proliferation (RPS6), angiogenesis promoting factors (ITGB1), 
and others (SLC25A19, NCKAP1, BST1, DBH, FZD7, NACA, MTHFD2). Furthermore, we
applied a candidate gene approach and tested the role of resistance mechanisms
towards established anti-cancer drugs for ART resistance. By using transfected or
knockout cell models we found that the tumor suppressor p16(INK4A) and the
anti-oxidant protein, catalase, conferred resistance towards ART, while the
oncogene HPV-E6 conferred sensitivity towards ART. The tumor suppressor p53 and
its downstream protein, p21, as well as the anti-oxidant manganese-dependent
superoxide dismutase did not affect cellular response to ART. In conclusion, our 
pharmacogenomic approach revealed that response of tumor cells towards ART is
multi-factorial and is determined by gene expression associated with either ART
sensitivity or resistance. At least some of the functional groups of genes (e.g. 
angiogenesis promoting factors, cell growth and proliferation-associated genes
signal transducers and kinases) are also implicated in clinical responsiveness of
tumors towards chemotherapy. It merits further investigation, whether ART is
responsive in clinically refractory tumors and whether the genes identified in
the present study also determine clinical responsiveness towards ART.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20144594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Oncogene. 2009 Jul 9;28(27):2535-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.109. Epub 2009 May 18.

The human protein kinase HIPK2 phosphorylates and downregulates the
methyl-binding transcription factor ZBTB4.

Yamada D(1), Pérez-Torrado R, Filion G, Caly M, Jammart B, Devignot V, Sasai N,
Ravassard P, Mallet J, Sastre-Garau X, Schmitz ML, Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR218, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

HIPK2 is a eukaryotic Serine-Threonine kinase that controls cellular
proliferation and survival in response to exogenous signals. Here, we show that
the human transcription factor ZBTB4 is a new target of HIPK2. The two proteins
interact in vitro, colocalize and associate in vivo, and HIPK2 phosphorylates
several conserved residues of ZBTB4. Overexpressing HIPK2 causes the degradation 
of ZBTB4, whereas overexpressing a kinase-deficient mutant of HIPK2 has no
effect. The chemical activation of HIPK2 also decreases the amount of ZBTB4 in
cells. Conversely, the inhibition of HIPK2 by drugs or by RNA interference causes
a large increase in ZBTB4 levels. This negative regulation of ZBTB4 by HIPK2
occurs under normal conditions of cell growth. In addition, the degradation is
increased by DNA damage. These findings have two consequences. First, we have
recently shown that ZBTB4 inhibits the transcription of p21. Therefore, the
activation of p21 by HIPK2 is two-pronged: stimulation of the activator p53, and 
simultaneous repression of the inhibitor ZBTB4. Second, ZBTB4 is also known to
bind methylated DNA and repress methylated sequences. Consequently, our findings 
raise the possibility that HIPK2 might influence the epigenetic regulation of
gene expression at loci that remain to be identified.

PMID: 19448668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO J. 2008 Jun 4;27(11):1563-74. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.85. Epub 2008 May 1.

Zbtb4 represses transcription of P21CIP1 and controls the cellular response to
p53 activation.

Weber A(1), Marquardt J, Elzi D, Forster N, Starke S, Glaum A, Yamada D, Defossez
PA, Delrow J, Eisenman RN, Christiansen H, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumour Research (IMT), Marburg, Germany.

In response to stimuli that activate p53, cells can undergo either apoptosis or
cell cycle arrest, depending on the precise pattern of p53 target genes that is
activated. We show here that Zbtb4, a transcriptional repressor protein,
associates with the Sin3/histone deacetylase co-repressor and represses
expression of P21CIP1 as part of a heterodimeric complex with Miz1. In vivo,
expression of ZBTB4 is downregulated in advanced stages of multiple human
tumours. In cell culture, depletion of ZBTB4 promotes cell cycle arrest in
response to activation of p53 and suppresses apoptosis through regulation of
P21CIP1, thereby promoting long-term cell survival. Our data suggest that Zbtb4
is a critical determinant of the cellular response to p53 activation and
reinforce the notion that p21Cip1 can provide an essential survival signal in
cells with activated p53.

PMCID: PMC2426723
PMID: 18451802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biotechniques. 2008 Jan;44(1):66, 68.

Assessment of sera for chromatin-immunoprecipitation.

Nguyen J(1), Yamada D, Schultz DC, Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France.

Chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is a powerful technique for mapping the
protein-DNA interactions that occur in living cells. The critical technical
determinant for successful ChIP is the availability of an appropriate,
"ChIP-grade" serum. Here we present a technique designed to assess whether sera
are suitable for ChIP, and to quantify their efficiency relative to a positive
internal reference. This approach is useful as a first step toward ChIP-on-chip
or ChIP-sequencing, especially in the case of recently identified proteins for
which no binding sites are yet known.

PMID: 18254381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Anal Biochem. 2006 Oct 1;357(1):156-8. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Using reverse electrophoretic mobility shift assay to measure and compare
protein-DNA binding affinities.

Filion GJ(1), Fouvry L, Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR218, Institut Curie, Section recherche, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.

PMID: 16914111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(1):169-81.

A family of human zinc finger proteins that bind methylated DNA and repress
transcription.

Filion GJ(1), Zhenilo S, Salozhin S, Yamada D, Prokhortchouk E, Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS UMR218, Paris 75248, France.

In vertebrates, densely methylated DNA is associated with inactive transcription.
Actors in this process include proteins of the MBD family that can recognize
methylated CpGs and repress transcription. Kaiso, a structurally unrelated
protein, has also been shown to bind methylated CGCGs through its three
Krüppel-like C2H2 zinc fingers. The human genome contains two uncharacterized
proteins, ZBTB4 and ZBTB38, that contain Kaiso-like zinc fingers. We report that 
ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 bind methylated DNA in vitro and in vivo. Unlike Kaiso, they can
bind single methylated CpGs. When transfected in mouse cells, the proteins
colocalize with foci of heavily methylated satellite DNA and become delocalized
upon loss of DNA methylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation suggests that both of
these proteins specifically bind to the methylated allele of the H19/Igf2
differentially methylated region. ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 repress the transcription of
methylated templates in transfection assays. The two genes have distinct
tissue-specific expression patterns, but both are highly expressed in the brain. 
Our results reveal the existence of a family of Kaiso-like proteins that bind
methylated CpGs. Like proteins of the MBD family, they are able to repress
transcription in a methyl-dependent manner, yet their tissue-specific expression 
pattern suggests nonoverlapping functions.

PMCID: PMC1317629
PMID: 16354688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


