
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 22;7:11102. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11102.

Zbtb20 promotes astrocytogenesis during neocortical development.

Nagao M(1), Ogata T(1), Sawada Y(1), Gotoh Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation for the Movement Functions, Research Institute,
National Rehabilitation Center for Persons with Disabilities, 4-1 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama 359-8555, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Multipotent neural precursor cells (NPCs) generate astrocytes at late stages of
mammalian neocortical development. Many signalling pathways that regulate
astrocytogenesis directly induce the expression of GFAP, a marker of terminally
differentiated astrocytes. However, astrocyte specification occurs before GFAP
expression and essential factors for the specification step have remained
elusive. Here we show that Zbtb20 regulates astrocyte specification in the mouse 
neocortex. Zbtb20 is highly expressed in late-stage NPCs and their astrocytic
progeny. Overexpression and knockdown of Zbtb20 promote and suppress
astrocytogenesis, respectively, although Zbtb20 does not directly activate the
Gfap promoter. Astrocyte induction by Zbtb20 is suppressed by knockdown of Sox9
or NFIA. Furthermore, in the astrocyte lineage, Zbtb20 directly represses the
expression of Brn2, which encodes a protein necessary for upper-layer neuron
specification. Zbtb20 is thus a key determinant of astrocytogenesis, in which it 
collaborates with Sox9 and NFIA, and acts in part through direct repression of
Brn2 expression.

PMCID: PMC4804180
PMID: 27000654  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7425. [Epub ahead of print]

Zinc finger protein ZBTB20 is an independent prognostic marker and promotes tumor
growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma by repressing FoxO1.

Kan H(1), Huang Y(1), Li X(1), Liu D(2), Chen J(1), Shu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. (2)Department of Infectious Disease, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

Zinc finger and BTB domain-containing 20 (ZBTB20) is a new BTB/POZ-domain gene
and a member of the POK family of transcriptional repressors. Notably, the role
of ZBTB20 and its underlying mechanisms involved in hepatocarcinogenesis are
poorly investigated. In this study, the expression of ZBTB20 was significantly
overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues. The positive expression 
of ZBTB20 was associated with large tumor size, high Edmondson-Steiner grading
and advanced tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) tumor stage. Additionally, HCC patients 
with positive expression of ZBTB20 had a poorer 5-year survival. Multivariate
analyses revealed that ZBTB20 overexpression was an independent prognostic factor
for HCC. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments demonstrated that ZBTB20 promoted
HCC cell viability, proliferation, tumorigenicity, and cell cycle progression.
Mechanistically, Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E were increased, while p21 and p27 were
decreased by ZBTB20 in HCC cells. FoxO1 was inversely correlated with ZBTB20
protein expression in the same cohort of HCC specimens. We further revealed that 
FoxO1 was transcriptionally repressed by ZBTB20 in HCC. Moreover, restoration of 
FoxO1 expression partially abrogated ZBTB20-induced HCC cell proliferation and
growth entry in vitro and in vivo. Collectively, these results indicate that
ZBTB20 may serve as a prognostic marker and promotes tumor growth of HCC via
transcriptionally repressing FoxO1.

PMID: 26893361  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 21;14(4):17622-9. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.21.35.

Effect of transcription factor ZBTB20 on mouse pituitary development.

Dong Q(1,)(2), Chen XY(2), Li GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shandong Provincial Hospital. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Central Hospital of Tai'an, Tai'an, Shandong, China.

Pituitary, a critical component in the neuroendocrine system, plays an
indispensable role in the regulation of body growth. The transcriptional factor
ZBTB20 is widely expressed in brain tissues and participates in hippocampal
development; however, the detailed molecular mechanism remains unknown.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of ZBTB20 on mouse
pituitary development and related mechanisms in ZBTB20 gene knockout mice. The
expressional profiles of ZBTB20 in various neuroendocrinal cells during the
different developmental stages (from E10 to P0) were described by
immunofluorescence staining. A ZBTB20 gene knockout mouse model was then
generated. Real-time polymerase chain reaction and western blotting assays were
used to detect the levels of five hormones: growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL),
luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). ZBTB20 protein expression was identified from 
E14 until birth. A majority of the pituitary endocrinal cells were
ZBTB20-positive. In ZBTB20 knockout mice, the level of GH decreased by half and
PRL expression was eliminated. No significant change was observed in the other
three hormones (LH, FSH, and TSH). ZBTB20, an important transcriptional factor in
pituitary development, is mainly responsible for the terminal differentiation of 
prolactin-secreting cells, thereby regulating the secretion of the pituitary
hormones.

PMID: 26782407  [PubMed - in process]


4. Nat Commun. 2015 Nov 17;6:8896. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9896.

Generation of functional hippocampal neurons from self-organizing human embryonic
stem cell-derived dorsomedial telencephalic tissue.

Sakaguchi H(1,)(2,)(3), Kadoshima T(1), Soen M(1), Narii N(1), Ishida Y(1),
Ohgushi M(1), Takahashi J(3), Eiraku M(1,)(2), Sasai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Organogenesis and Neurogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental 
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for in vitro Histogenesis, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 
2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. (3)Department of
Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto
University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The developing dorsomedial telencephalon includes the medial pallium, which goes 
on to form the hippocampus. Generating a reliable source of human hippocampal
tissue is an important step for cell-based research into hippocampus-related
diseases. Here we show the generation of functional hippocampal granule- and
pyramidal-like neurons from self-organizing dorsomedial telencephalic tissue
using human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). First, we develop a hESC culture method
that utilizes bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt signalling to induce
choroid plexus, the most dorsomedial portion of the telencephalon. Then, we find 
that titrating BMP and Wnt exposure allowed the self-organization of medial
pallium tissues. Following long-term dissociation culture, these dorsomedial
telencephalic tissues give rise to Zbtb20(+)/Prox1(+) granule neurons and
Zbtb20(+)/KA1(+) pyramidal neurons, both of which were electrically functional
with network formation. Thus, we have developed an in vitro model that
recapitulates human hippocampus development, allowing the generation of
functional hippocampal granule- and pyramidal-like neurons.

PMCID: PMC4660208
PMID: 26573335  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(5):1725-34.

Human Dental Pulp Stem Cells via the NF-<U+03BA>B Pathway.

Gu S, Ran S, Qin F, Cao D, Wang J, Liu B, Liang J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Odontogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells
(HDPSCs) is regulated by multiple factors and signaling molecules. However, their
regulatory mechanisms are not completely understood. In this study, we
investigated the role of Zinc finger and BTB domain-containing 20 (ZBTB20) in
odontoblastic differentiation of HDPSCs.
METHODS: HDPSCs were obtained from human third molars and ZBTB20 expression was
examined by qRT-PCR and western blot. Their osteo/odontogenic differentiation and
the involvement of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway were subsequently investigated.
RESULTS: The expression of ZBTB20 is upregulated in a time-dependent manner
during odontogenic differentiation of hDPSCs. Inhibition of ZBTB20 reduced
osteogenic medium (OM)-induced odontogenic differentiation, reflected in
decreased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, mineralized nodule formation and
mRNA expression of odonto/osteogenic marker genes. In contrast, overexpression of
ZBTB20 enhanced ALP activity, mineralization and the expression of
differentiation marker genes. Furthermore, the expression of I<U+03BA>Ba was increased
by ZBTB20 silencing in HDPSCs, whereas ZBTB20 overexpression decreased I<U+03BA>Ba and
enhanced nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B p65. Inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway significantly
suppressed the odontogenic differentiation of HDPSCs induced by ZBTB20.
CONCLUSION: This study shows for the first time that ZBTB20 plays an important
role during odontoblastic differentiation of HDPSCs and may have clinical
implications for regenerative endodontics.

ight © 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 26183640  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 15;5:11979. doi: 10.1038/srep11979.

ZBTB20 is a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor of alpha-fetoprotein
gene.

Zhang H(1), Cao D(1), Zhou L(1), Zhang Y(2), Guo X(2), Li H(2), Chen Y(2), Spear 
BT(3), Wu JW(4), Xie Z(2), Zhang WJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, 800
Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China [2]. (2)Department of Pathophysiology,
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology &Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. (4)MOE
Key Laboratory for Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, 
Beijing 100084, China.

Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) represents a classical model system to study
developmental gene regulation in mammalian cells. We previously reported that
liver ZBTB20 is developmentally regulated and plays a central role in AFP
postnatal repression. Here we show that ZBTB20 is a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor of AFP. By ELISA-based DNA-protein binding assay and
conventional gel shift assay, we successfully identified a ZBTB20-binding site at
-104/-86 of mouse AFP gene, flanked by two HNF1 sites and two C/EBP sites in the 
proximal promoter. Importantly, mutation of the core sequence in this site fully 
abolished its binding to ZBTB20 in vitro, as well as the repression of AFP
promoter activity by ZBTB20. The unique ZBTB20 site was highly conserved in rat
and human AFP genes, but absent in albumin genes. These help to explain the
autonomous regulation of albumin and AFP genes in the liver after birth.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that transcriptional repression of AFP gene by
ZBTB20 was liver-specific. ZBTB20 was dispensable for AFP silencing in other
tissues outside liver. Our data define a cognate ZBTB20 site in AFP promoter
which mediates the postnatal repression of AFP gene in the liver.

PMCID: PMC4648434
PMID: 26173901  [PubMed - in process]


7. Curr Opin Immunol. 2015 Apr;33:64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.01.017. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Differentiation and maintenance of long-lived plasma cells.

Kometani K(1), Kurosaki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Lymphocyte Differentiation, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences (IMS), Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Differentiation, WPI Immunology Frontier Research
Center, and Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, 3-1
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; Laboratory for Lymphocyte
Differentiation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences (IMS), Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. Electronic address:
kurosaki@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Long-lived plasma cells, which mostly reside in the bone marrow have been shown
to be vital for protection from recurrent infections. Recent gene-targeting and
cell-ablation experiments have solidified the concept that their survival depends
on both cell-intrinsic programs and extrinsic factors. The BTB transcription
factor ZBTB20, which is expressed at high levels in long-lived plasma cells, is
critical for their survival. On the other hand, eosinophils, megakaryocytes and
monocytes function to establish a niche for long-lived plasma cells by secreting 
cytokines and growth factors such as APRIL and IL6.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25677584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Transl Med. 2015 Jan 27;13:24. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0383-6.

Berberine ameliorates nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by a global modulation of 
hepatic mRNA and lncRNA expression profiles.

Yuan X(1), Wang J(2), Tang X(3), Li Y(4), Xia P(5), Gao X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. yuanxinlu1982@126.com. (2)Key Laboratory of Systems 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. msswjw@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Systems Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. tangxy@sibs.ac.cn. (4)Key
Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. yxli@sibs.ac.cn.
(5)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. xiapu_fudan@163.com. (6)Department of Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
happy20061208@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common liver disorder
that currently lacks effective treatment. Berberine (BBR), a botanic compound
isolated from traditional Chinese medicine, exhibits a potent therapeutic
potential for the metabolic disease. The current study aimed to understand the
mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effect of BBR in NAFLD.
METHODS: We performed systematical analyses on hepatic expression profiles of
mRNAs and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in a high-fat diet (HFD)-induced
steatotic animal model with or without BBR treatment. The study was conducted by 
using the methods of bioinformatics, including hierarchical clustering, gene
enrichment and gene co-expression networks analysis. The effect of BBR on the
expression profile of some interesting genes was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR
and further studied in a human hepatic cell line, Huh7.
RESULTS: We found that a large group of genes including 881 mRNAs and 538 lncRNAs
whose expression in the steatotic liver was reversed by BBR treatment, suggesting
a global effect of BBR in modulating hepatic gene expression profiles. Among the 
BBR-regulated genes, we identified several modules and numerous significant genes
that were associated with liver metabolism and NAFLD-related functions.
Specifically, a conserved lncRNA, MRAK052686, was found strongly correlated with 
the antioxidant factor Nrf2, and both genes were down-regulated by the steatotic 
liver. Moreover, the reduced expression of MRAK052686 and Nrf2 was completely
reversed by BBR treatment, suggesting a new mechanism accounting for the
therapeutic effect of BBR.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings for the first time provide a new genetic insight into
the pharmaceutical mechanism of BBR in protecting against NAFLD.

PMCID: PMC4316752
PMID: 25623289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2015 Jan 15;142(2):385-93. doi: 10.1242/dev.108530.

Zbtb20 regulates the terminal differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes via
repression of Sox9.

Zhou G(1), Jiang X(1), Zhang H(1), Lu Y(2), Liu A(3), Ma X(2), Yang G(4), Yang
R(2), Shen H(5), Zheng J(6), Hu Y(7), Yang X(4), Zhang WJ(8), Xie Z(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai 200433, China. (2)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Department of Pathophysiology, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China Department of Cell Biology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. (4)Genetic Laboratory
of Development and Diseases, Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing 100071, China.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China. (8)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China wzhang@smmu.edu.cn xiezf@smmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200433, China wzhang@smmu.edu.cn xiezf@smmu.edu.cn.

The terminal differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes is a tightly regulated 
process that plays a pivotal role in endochondral ossification. As a negative
regulator, Sox9 is essentially downregulated in terminally differentiated
hypertrophic chondrocytes. However, the underlying mechanism of Sox9 silencing is
undefined. Here we show that the zinc finger protein Zbtb20 regulates the
terminal differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes by repressing Sox9. In the 
developing skeleton of the mouse, Zbtb20 protein is highly expressed by
hypertrophic chondrocytes from late embryonic stages. To determine its
physiological role in endochondral ossification, we have generated
chondrocyte-specific Zbtb20 knockout mice and demonstrate that disruption of
Zbtb20 in chondrocytes results in delayed endochondral ossification and postnatal
growth retardation. Zbtb20 deficiency caused a delay in cartilage vascularization
and an expansion of the hypertrophic zone owing to reduced expression of Vegfa in
the hypertrophic zone. Interestingly, Sox9, a direct suppressor of Vegfa
expression, was ectopically upregulated at both mRNA and protein levels in the
late Zbtb20-deficient hypertrophic zone. Furthermore, knockdown of Sox9 greatly
increased Vegfa expression in Zbtb20-deficient hypertrophic chondrocytes. Our
findings point to Zbtb20 as a crucial regulator governing the terminal
differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes at least partially through
repression of Sox9.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25564625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Sci Rep. 2014 Nov 14;4:7062. doi: 10.1038/srep07062.

Specific deficiency of Plzf paralog, Zbtb20, in Sertoli cells does not affect
spermatogenesis and fertility in mice.

Jiang X(1), Zhang H(1), Yin S(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang W(1), Zheng W(1), Wang L(1),
Wang Z(1), Bukhari I(1), Cooke HJ(2), Iqbal F(1), Shi Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Genetics, CAS Key Laboratory of Innate
Immunity and Chronic Disease, CAS Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Hefei
National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, School of Life Sciences,
University of Science &Technology of China, Hefei, China. (2)1] Laboratory of
Molecular and Cell Genetics, CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic
Disease, CAS Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Hefei National Laboratory for 
Physical Sciences at Microscale, School of Life Sciences, University of Science
&Technology of China, Hefei, China [2] MRC Human Genetics Unit and Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Ztbt20 is a POK family transcription factor and primarily functions through its
conserved C2H2 Krüppel type zinc finger and BTB/POZ domains. The present study
was designed to define the function of the Zbtb20, in vivo, during mouse
spermatogenesis. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that ZBTB20 protein was
localized specifically in the nuclei of Sertoli cells in seminiferous tubules. To
investigate its role during spermatogenesis, we crossed Amh-Cre transgenic mice
with Zbtb20 floxp mice to generate conditionally knockout mice (cKO) in which
Zbtb20 was specifically deleted in Sertoli cells. The cKO mice were fertile and
did not show any detectable abnormalities in spermatogenesis. Taken together,
though specific deletion of transcription factor Zbtb20 in Sertoli cells has no
apparent influence on spermatogenesis, its specific localization in Sertoli cells
makes Zbtb20 a useful marker for the identification of Sertoli cells in
seminiferous tubules.

PMCID: PMC4231391
PMID: 25395169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 5;5:4984. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5984.

ZBTB20 regulates nociception and pain sensation by modulating TRP channel
expression in nociceptive sensory neurons.

Ren AJ(1), Wang K(1), Zhang H(1), Liu A(2), Ma X(1), Liang Q(1), Cao D(1), Wood
JN(3), He DZ(4), Ding YQ(5), Yuan WJ(6), Xie Z(2), Zhang WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China. (2)1] Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China [2] Department of Cell Biology, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Biology Department,
University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebraska
68102, USA. (5)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Tongji University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. (6)Department of Physiology and
Neurobiology, Key Lab of Ministry of Education in Fertility Preservation and
Maintenance, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan 750004, China.

In mammals, pain sensation is initiated by the detection of noxious stimuli
through specialized transduction ion channels and receptors in nociceptive
sensory neurons. Transient receptor potential (TRP) channels are the key sensory 
transducers that confer nociceptors distinct sensory modalities. However, the
regulatory mechanisms about their expression are poorly defined. Here we show
that the zinc-finger protein ZBTB20 regulates TRP channels expression in
nociceptors. ZBTB20 is highly expressed in nociceptive sensory neurons of dorsal 
root ganglia. Disruption of ZBTB20 in nociceptors led to a marked decrease in the
expression levels of TRPV1, TRPA1 and TRPM8 and the response of calcium flux and 
whole-cell currents evoked by their respective specific agonists. Phenotypically,
the mice lacking ZBTB20 specifically in nociceptors showed a defect in
nociception and pain sensation in response to thermal, mechanical and
inflammatory stimulation. Our findings point to ZBTB20 as a critical regulator of
nociception and pain sensation by modulating TRP channels expression in
nociceptors.

PMID: 25369838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. FEBS Lett. 2014 Dec 20;588(24):4536-42. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.10.005. Epub 
2014 Oct 13.

Zinc finger protein ZBTB20 promotes cell proliferation in non-small cell lung
cancer through repression of FoxO1.

Zhao JG(1), Ren KM(2), Tang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, Liaoning Province, China. Electronic address:
Zjungang_12@163.com. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang 110004, Liaoning Province, China.

In the present study, we found that ZBTB20, a member of the POK (POZ and Krüppel)
family of transcriptional repressors, was significantly up-regulated in lung
cancer tissues, compared with adjacent normal tissues. Our in vitro studies
further found that ZBTB20 overexpression promoted, while its inhibition using
small interfering RNA suppressed cell proliferation. Consistently, key regulators
in cell-cycle progression, such as Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, P21 and P27, were also
regulated by ZBTB20. At the molecular level, we further revealed that FoxO1, a
tumor suppressor in multiple human cancers, was transcriptionally repressed by
ZBTB20. Therefore, our results highlight an important role for ZBTB20 in
controlling NSCLC development, which might be helpful to identify potential
therapeutic targets for its treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25311537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Med Genet. 2014 Sep;51(9):605-13. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102535. Epub 2014
Jul 25.

Neurodevelopmental disorders associated with dosage imbalance of ZBTB20 correlate
with the morbidity spectrum of ZBTB20 candidate target genes.

Rasmussen MB(1), Nielsen JV(2), Lourenço CM(3), Melo JB(4), Halgren C(1), Geraldi
CV(3), Marques W Jr(3), Rodrigues GR(3), Thomassen M(5), Bak M(1), Hansen C(1),
Ferreira SI(6), Venâncio M(7), Henriksen KF(1), Lind-Thomsen A(1), Carreira
IM(4), Jensen NA(2), Tommerup N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Department of Neurobiology Research,
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C,
Denmark. (3)Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Neuroscience and Behavioral
Sciences, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto-São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica and CIMAGO,
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (5)Department 
of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark.
(6)Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (7)Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar e
Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Recently, a number of patients have been described with structural
rearrangements at 3q13.31, delineating a novel microdeletion syndrome with common
clinical features including developmental delay and other neurodevelopmental
disorders (NDD). A smallest region of overlapping deletions (SRO) involved five
RefSeq genes, including the transcription factor gene ZBTB20 and the dopamine
receptor gene DRD3, considered as candidate genes for the syndrome.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We used array comparative genomic hybridization and
next-generation mate-pair sequencing to identify key structural rearrangements
involving ZBTB20 in two patients with NDD. In a patient with developmental delay,
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, psychosis, Tourette's syndrome and
autistic traits, a de novo balanced t(3;18) translocation truncated ZBTB20. The
other breakpoint did not disrupt any gene. In a second patient with developmental
delay and autism, we detected the first microdeletion at 3q13.31, which truncated
ZBTB20 but did not involve DRD3 or the other genes within the previously defined 
SRO. Zbtb20 directly represses 346 genes in the developing murine brain. Of the
342 human orthologous ZBTB20 candidate target genes, we found 68 associated with 
NDD. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation and quantitative PCR, we validated the
in vivo binding of Zbtb20 in evolutionary conserved regions in six of these genes
(Cntn4, Gad1, Nrxn1, Nrxn3, Scn2a, Snap25).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study links dosage imbalance of ZBTB20 to a range of
neurodevelopmental, cognitive and psychiatric disorders, likely mediated by
dysregulation of multiple ZBTB20 target genes, and provides new knowledge on the 
genetic background of the NDD seen in the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25062845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nat Genet. 2014 Aug;46(8):815-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.3035. Epub 2014 Jul 13.

Mutations in ZBTB20 cause Primrose syndrome.

Cordeddu V(1), Redeker B(2), Stellacci E(3), Jongejan A(4), Fragale A(5), Bradley
TE(6), Anselmi M(7), Ciolfi A(3), Cecchetti S(8), Muto V(3), Bernardini L(9),
Azage M(10), Carvalho DR(11), Espay AJ(12), Male A(13), Molin AM(14), Posmyk
R(15), Battisti C(16), Casertano A(17), Melis D(17), van Kampen A(4), Baas F(6), 
Mannens MM(18), Bocchinfuso G(7), Stella L(7), Tartaglia M(1), Hennekam RC(19).

Author information: 
(1)1] Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. [2]. (2)1] Department of Clinical Genetics,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
[2]. (3)Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Dipartimento di Malattie Infettive,
Parassitarie e Immunomediate, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (7)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie
Chimiche, Università 'Tor Vergata', Rome, Italy. (8)Dipartimento di Biologia
Cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(9)Laboratorio Mendel, Fondazione Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (10)Department of Medical Genetics, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (11)Medical Genetic Unit, SARAH
Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. (12)Department of
Neurology, University of Cincinnati, Gardner Family Center for Parkinson's
Disease and Movement Disorders, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (13)Clinical Genetics
Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children National Health Service
(NHS) Foundation Trust, London, UK. (14)Department of Animal Breeding and
Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
(15)Podlaskie Center of Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland. (16)Dipartimento di
Scienze Neurologiche, Neurochirurgiche e del Comportamento, Università degli
Studi di Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, Siena, Italy. (17)Dipartimento di
Pediatria, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università 'Federico II', Naples,
Italy. (18)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (19)1] Department of Clinical Genetics,
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. [2]
Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. [3].

Primrose syndrome and 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome are clinically related
disorders characterized by tall stature, macrocephaly, intellectual disability,
disturbed behavior and unusual facial features, with diabetes, deafness,
progressive muscle wasting and ectopic calcifications specifically occurring in
the former. We report that missense mutations in ZBTB20, residing within the
3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome critical region, underlie Primrose syndrome. This 
finding establishes a genetic link between these disorders and delineates the
impact of ZBTB20 dysregulation on development, growth and metabolism.

PMID: 25017102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer. 2014 Oct 1;120(19):3040-8. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28792. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Genetic and intermediate phenotypic susceptibility markers of gastric cancer in
Hispanic Americans: a case-control study.

Sun Y(1), Gu J, Ajani JA, Chang DW, Wu X, Stroehlein JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: Hispanics are the largest nonwhite ethnic group in the US population,
and they have higher incidence and mortality rates for gastric cancer (GC) than
whites and Asians. Studies have identified several genetic susceptibility loci
and intermediate phenotypic biomarkers for GC in whites and Asians. No studies
have evaluated genetic susceptibility and intermediate phenotypic biomarkers in
Hispanics.
METHODS: In a case-control study of 132 Hispanic patients with GC (cases) and a
control group of 125 Hispanics (controls), the authors evaluated the association 
of 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that predispose whites and/or Asians 
to GC and of 2 intermediate phenotypic markers in peripheral blood leukocytes,
ie, telomere length and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, with the GC risk.
RESULTS: The variant C allele of the reference SNP rs2294008 in the PSCA gene was
associated with a significantly reduced risk of GC (per allele-adjusted odds
ratio [aOR], 0.51; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.33-0.77; P =<U+2009>.002). Leukocyte 
mtDNA copy numbers were significantly lower in GC cases (mean ± standard
deviation, 0.91 ± 0.28) than in controls (1.29 ± 0.42; P <<U+2009>.001). When
individuals were dichotomized into high and low mtDNA copy number groups based on
the median mtDNA copy number value in the controls, those who had a low mtDNA
copy number had a significantly increased risk of GC (aOR, 11.00; 95% CI,
4.79-25.23; P <<U+2009>.001) compared with those who had a high mtDNA copy number.
Telomere length was not associated significantly with the risk of GC (aOR, 1.21; 
95% CI, 0.65-2.27; P =<U+2009>.551).
CONCLUSIONS: Hispanics share certain genetic susceptibility loci and intermediate
phenotypic GC biomarkers with whites and Asians and may also have distinct
genetic susceptibility factors.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24962126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):744. doi: 10.1084/jem.2115insight1.

Programming plasma cell survival.

Klein U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University.

Comment on
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):841-56.
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):827-40.

PMCID: PMC4010909
PMID: 24799529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):827-40. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131831. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

The BTB-ZF transcription factor Zbtb20 is driven by Irf4 to promote plasma cell
differentiation and longevity.

Chevrier S(1), Emslie D, Shi W, Kratina T, Wellard C, Karnowski A, Erikci E,
Smyth GK, Chowdhury K, Tarlinton D, Corcoran LM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Division, 2 Bioinformatics Division, 3 Immunology
Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):744.

The transcriptional network regulating antibody-secreting cell (ASC)
differentiation has been extensively studied, but our current understanding is
limited. The mechanisms of action of known "master" regulators are still unclear,
while the participation of new factors is being revealed. Here, we identify
Zbtb20, a Bcl6 homologue, as a novel regulator of late B cell development. Within
the B cell lineage, Zbtb20 is specifically expressed in B1 and germinal center B 
cells and peaks in long-lived bone marrow (BM) ASCs. Unlike Bcl6, an inhibitor of
ASC differentiation, ectopic Zbtb20 expression in primary B cells facilitates
terminal B cell differentiation to ASCs. In plasma cell lines, Zbtb20 induces
cell survival and blocks cell cycle progression. Immunized Zbtb20-deficient mice 
exhibit curtailed humoral responses and accelerated loss of antigen-specific
plasma cells, specifically from the BM pool. Strikingly, Zbtb20 induction does
not require Blimp1 but depends directly on Irf4, acting at a newly identified
Zbtb20 promoter in ASCs. These results identify Zbtb20 as an important player in 
late B cell differentiation and provide new insights into this complex process.

PMCID: PMC4010913
PMID: 24711583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):841-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131821. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Adjuvant-specific regulation of long-term antibody responses by ZBTB20.

Wang Y(1), Bhattacharya D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):744.

The duration of antibody production by long-lived plasma cells varies with the
type of immunization, but the basis for these differences is unknown. We
demonstrate that plasma cells formed in response to the same immunogen engage
distinct survival programs depending on the adjuvant. After alum-adjuvanted
immunization, antigen-specific bone marrow plasma cells deficient in the
transcription factor ZBTB20 failed to accumulate over time, leading to a
progressive loss of antibody production relative to wild-type controls. Fetal
liver reconstitution experiments demonstrated that the requirement for ZBTB20 was
B cell intrinsic. No defects were observed in germinal center numbers, affinity
maturation, or plasma cell formation or proliferation in ZBTB20-deficient
chimeras. However, ZBTB20-deficient plasma cells expressed reduced levels of MCL1
relative to wild-type controls, and transgenic expression of BCL2 increased serum
antibody titers. These data indicate a role for ZBTB20 in promoting survival in
plasma cells. Strikingly, adjuvants that activate TLR2 and TLR4 restored
long-term antibody production in ZBTB20-deficient chimeras through the induction 
of compensatory survival programs in plasma cells. Thus, distinct lifespans are
imprinted in plasma cells as they are formed, depending on the primary activation
conditions. The durability of vaccines may accordingly be improved through the
selection of appropriate adjuvants.

PMCID: PMC4010912
PMID: 24711582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genome Biol. 2014 Apr 2;15(4):R56. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-4-r56.

Hypermethylation in the ZBTB20 gene is associated with major depressive disorder.

Davies MN, Krause L, Bell JT, Gao F, Ward KJ, Wu H, Lu H, Liu Y, Tsai PC, Collier
DA, Murphy T, Dempster E, Mill J; UK Brain Expression Consortium, Battle A,
Mostafavi S, Zhu X, Henders A, Byrne E, Wray NR, Martin NG, Spector TD, Wang J.

BACKGROUND: Although genetic variation is believed to contribute to an
individual's susceptibility to major depressive disorder, genome-wide association
studies have not yet identified associations that could explain the full etiology
of the disease. Epigenetics is increasingly believed to play a major role in the 
development of common clinical phenotypes, including major depressive disorder.
RESULTS: Genome-wide MeDIP-Sequencing was carried out on a total of 50
monozygotic twin pairs from the UK and Australia that are discordant for
depression. We show that major depressive disorder is associated with significant
hypermethylation within the coding region of ZBTB20, and is replicated in an
independent cohort of 356 unrelated case-control individuals. The twins with
major depressive disorder also show increased global variation in methylation in 
comparison with their unaffected co-twins. ZBTB20 plays an essential role in the 
specification of the Cornu Ammonis-1 field identity in the developing
hippocampus, a region previously implicated in the development of major
depressive disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that aberrant methylation profiles affecting the
hippocampus are associated with major depressive disorder and show the potential 
of the epigenetic twin model in neuro-psychiatric disease.

PMCID: PMC4072999
PMID: 24694013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Mar 20;7(1):23. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-23.

Adult expression of a 3q13.31 microdeletion.

Lowther C, Costain G, Melvin R, Stavropoulos DJ, Lionel AC, Marshall CR, Scherer 
SW, Bassett AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
Toronto, ON, Canada. anne.bassett@utoronto.ca.

BACKGROUND: The emerging 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome appears to encompass
diverse neurodevelopmental conditions. However, the 3q13.31 deletion is rare and 
few adult cases have yet been reported. We examined a cohort with schizophrenia
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>459) and adult control subjects (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>26,826) using high-resolution
microarray technology for deletions and duplications at the 3q13.31 locus.
RESULTS: We report on the extended adult phenotype associated with a 3q13.31
microdeletion in a 41-year-old male proband with schizophrenia and a nonverbal
learning disability. He was noted to have a speech impairment, delayed motor
skills, and other features consistent with the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome.
The 2.06 Mb deletion overlapped two microRNAs and seven RefSeq genes, including
GAP43, LSAMP, DRD3, and ZBTB20. No overlapping 3q13.31 deletions or duplications 
were identified in control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Later-onset conditions like schizophrenia are increasingly
associated with rare copy number variations and associated genomic disorders like
the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome. Detailed phenotype information across the
lifespan facilitates genotype-phenotype correlations, accurate genetic
counselling, and anticipatory care.

PMCID: PMC4022390
PMID: 24650298  [PubMed]


21. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2014 Feb;13(1):48-54.

ZBTB20 is involved in liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy in mouse.

Weng MZ(1), Zhuang PY, Hei ZY, Lin PY, Chen ZS, Liu YB, Quan ZW, Tang ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. tangzhaohui@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms in liver
regeneration holds promise for exploring the new potential therapy for liver
failure. The present study was to investigate the role of zinc finger and BTB
domain-containing protein 20 (ZBTB20), a potential factor associated with liver
regeneration, in a model of 70% hepatectomy in mice.
METHODS: Parameters for liver proliferation such as liver/body ratio and BrdU
positivity were obtained via direct measurement and immunohistochemistry. The
levels of zinc fingers and homeoboxes 2 (ZHX2), ZBTB20, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
and glypican 3 (GPC3) transcripts in the regenerating liver tissue of a 70%
hepatectomy rodent model were monitored by real-time PCR analysis at different
time points. Knockdown of ZBTB20 was performed to characterize its regulatory
function.
RESULTS: A negatively regulating relationship between ZHX2, ZBTB20 and AFP, GPC3 
was revealed from 24 to 72 hours after 70% hepatectomy. ZBTB20 appears to
negatively regulate AFP and GPC3 transcription since the knockdown of ZBTB20
promoted the proliferation of hepatocytes and the expression of AFP and GPC3.
CONCLUSION: In addition to AFP, GPC3 and ZHX2, ZBTB20 is a new regulator in liver
regeneration and the decrease of ZBTB20 expression following 70% hepatectomy
promotes AFP and GPC3 expression.

PMID: 24463079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Mar;164A(3):666-70. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36346. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Microduplication 3q13.2q13.31 identified in a male with dysmorphic features and
multiple congenital anomalies.

Karavitakis E(1), Kitsiou-Tzeli S, Xaidara A, Kosma K, Makrythanasis P, Apazidou 
E, Kanavakis E, Tzetis M.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Special Care Unit, General Hospital of Chania, Crete, Greece.

Constitutional microdeletions affecting 3q13.2q13.31 are rare and attempts for
genotype-phenotype correlations have only recently been made in a cohort of 28
patients. The major phenotypic features of this rare syndrome are hypotonia,
developmental delay, and facial anomalies. In this study, we report on a male
infant with a novel reciprocal 3.671<U+2009>Mb microduplication at the genomic region
3q13.2q13.31 associated with dysmorphic features and multiple congenital
anomalies. The current patient was investigated by high-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). This is the first report of a
microduplication 3q13.2q13.31 that shares a lot of common clinical features with 
those carrying the microdeletion. The 3q13.2q13.31 duplicated region in our
patient contains nine dosage sensitive genes, amongst them the genes ATG3,
CCDC80, KIAA2018, NAA50, ZDHHC23, DRD3, ZBTB20, GAP43, LSAMP. As it is the case
for many other well-described reciprocal deletion/duplication syndromes, some
have very different clinical features (Williams-Beuren deletion syndrome, WBS/WBS
triplication) [Somerville et al. (2005); N Engl J Med 353:1694-1701], while
others share similar phenotypic features (22q11.2 microdeletion/microduplication)
[Portnoi (2009); Eur J Med Genet 52:88-93]. In conclusion, we describe the main
phenotypic features of a possibly novel microduplication 3q13.2q13.31 syndrome.
Additionally five of the dosage-sensitive genes and BOC gene are suggested to be 
responsible for the main phenotypic features. Evaluation of multiple patients
with the microduplication is needed for full delineation of this syndrome.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Sep-Oct;110(1-2):90-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.07.013.
Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Expanding the clinical phenotype at the 3q13.31 locus with a new case of
microdeletion and first characterization of the reciprocal duplication.

Vuillaume ML(1), Delrue MA, Naudion S, Toutain J, Fergelot P, Arveiler B, Lacombe
D, Rooryck C.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Place Amélie Raba Léon, Bordeaux,
France. marie-laure.vuillaume@chu-bordeaux.fr

Congenital deletions at the 3q13.31 locus have been recently described as a novel
microdeletion syndrome characterized by developmental delay, postnatal
overgrowth, hypoplastic male genitalia and characteristic facial features. A
common critical region of overlapping of 580kb was delineated including two
strong candidate genes for developmental delay: DRD3 and ZBTB20. In this report, 
we describe a new case of 3q13.31 microdeletion identified by array-CGH in a
16year-old girl sharing clinical features commonly observed in the 3q13.31
microdeletion syndrome. This girl had a microdeletion of 7.39Mb spanning the
common critical region of overlapping. More interestingly, we report for the
first time the existence of a microduplication reciprocal to the microdeletion
syndrome. This familial 2.76Mb microduplication identified by array-CGH was
carried by two brothers and their father. The phenotype shared by the brothers
resembled the phenotype related to the 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome including
especially severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, behavioral
abnormalities and obesity. This microduplication involves three strong candidate 
genes for the developmental delay ZBTB20, LSAMP and GAP43. Further molecular
characterization showed that DRD3, another strong candidate gene for
developmental delay, was not included in the duplicated region. However, a dosage
alteration of this gene cannot be completely excluded as the duplication was
inverted at proximity of this gene, as revealed by FISH analysis. Finally, we
hypothesized that the phenotype shared by the two brothers could be related to a 
gene dosage imbalance even if gene expression could not be measured in relevant
tissues such as brain or adipocytes.

© 2013.

PMID: 23920044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Hum Mutat. 2013 Oct;34(10):1415-23. doi: 10.1002/humu.22384. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Recurrent HERV-H-mediated 3q13.2-q13.31 deletions cause a syndrome of hypotonia
and motor, language, and cognitive delays.

Shuvarikov A(1), Campbell IM, Dittwald P, Neill NJ, Bialer MG, Moore C, Wheeler
PG, Wallace SE, Hannibal MC, Murray MF, Giovanni MA, Terespolsky D, Sodhi S,
Cassina M, Viskochil D, Moghaddam B, Herman K, Brown CW, Beck CR, Gambin A,
Cheung SW, Patel A, Lamb AN, Shaffer LG, Ellison JW, Ravnan JB, Stankiewicz P,
Rosenfeld JA.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, PerkinElmer, Inc, Spokane, Washington.

We describe the molecular and clinical characterization of nine individuals with 
recurrent, 3.4-Mb, de novo deletions of 3q13.2-q13.31 detected by chromosomal
microarray analysis. All individuals have hypotonia and language and motor
delays; they variably express mild to moderate cognitive delays (8/9), abnormal
behavior (7/9), and autism spectrum disorders (3/9). Common facial features
include downslanting palpebral fissures with epicanthal folds, a slightly bulbous
nose, and relative macrocephaly. Twenty-eight genes map to the deleted region,
including four strong candidate genes, DRD3, ZBTB20, GAP43, and BOC, with
important roles in neural and/or muscular development. Analysis of the breakpoint
regions based on array data revealed directly oriented human endogenous
retrovirus (HERV-H) elements of ~5 kb in size and of >95% DNA sequence identity
flanking the deletion. Subsequent DNA sequencing revealed different deletion
breakpoints and suggested nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) between
HERV-H elements as a mechanism of deletion formation, analogous to HERV-I-flanked
and NAHR-mediated AZFa deletions. We propose that similar HERV elements may also 
mediate other recurrent deletion and duplication events on a genome-wide scale.
Observation of rare recurrent chromosomal events such as these deletions helps to
further the understanding of mechanisms behind naturally occurring variation in
the human genome and its contribution to genetic disease.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4599348
PMID: 23878096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Nov;52 Suppl 1:E155-60. doi: 10.1002/mc.22063. Epub 2013 Jul
17.

Genetic variations in the PRKAA1 and ZBTB20 genes and gastric cancer
susceptibility in a Korean population.

Song HR(1), Kim HN, Kweon SS, Choi JS, Shim HJ, Cho SH, Chung IJ, Park YK, Kim
SH, Choi YD, Joo KW, Shin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju, Korea.

A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified new susceptibility
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs13361707 (PRKAA1 and PTGER4 gene on
5p13.1) and rs9841504 (ZBTB20 gene on 3q13.31) that were significantly associated
with non-cardia gastric cancer. The aim of this study was to determine whether
rs13361707 and rs9841504 polymorphisms are associated with the risk of gastric
cancer in a Korean population. We conducted a large-scale case-control study of
3245 gastric cancer patients and 1700 controls. The allele frequencies for
rs13361707 C and rs9841504 G were 53.5% and 18.3% among gastric cancer cases,
compared with 47.1% and 17.2% among controls, respectively. We found that
rs13361707 TC and CC genotypes were associated with increased risk for gastric
cancer (odds ratios [OR] = 1.29; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.11-1.51 for TC 
vs. TT and 1.68; 1.41-2.01 for CC vs. TT). However, we found no significant
association between rs9841504 and gastric cancer risk (OR = 1.11; 0.97-1.28 for
CG vs. CC; OR = 1.09; 0.77-1.53 for GG vs. CC). We observed no significant
interactions between rs13361707 and rs9841504 polymorphisms and age, gender,
smoking habit, alcohol consumption, and clinicopathologic characteristics such as
anatomical tumor location and histological type. Our study showed that the
rs13361707 polymorphism was associated with increased risk of gastric cancer in a
Korean population. This finding provides further evidence that genetic variant of
PRKAA1 and PTGER4 genes may contribute to the gastric carcinogenesis. However, we
found no association between rs9841504 and gastric cancer risk.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23861218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Gene. 2013 Oct 10;528(2):261-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.064. Epub 2013 Jul
13.

Regulation of cell proliferation and migration in gallbladder cancer by zinc
finger X-chromosomal protein.

Tan Z(1), Zhang S, Li M, Wu X, Weng H, Ding Q, Cao Y, Bao R, Shu Y, Mu J, Ding Q,
Wu W, Yang J, Zhang L, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biliary Tract Disease, Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) is one of the mostly aggressive and fatal
malignancies. However, little is known about the oncogenic genes that contributed
to the development of GBC. Zinc finger X-chromosomal protein (ZFX) was a novel
member of the Krueppel C2H2-type zinc-finger protein family and its
down-regulation led to impaired cell growth in human laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma. Here, we aim to investigate the function of ZFX in GBC cell
proliferation and migration. Loss of function analysis was performed on GBC cell 
line (GBC-SD) using lentivirus-mediated siRNA against ZFX. The proliferation, in 
vitro tumorigenesis (colony-formation) ability as well as cell migration was
significantly suppressed after GBC-SD cells which were infected with
ZFX-siRNA-expressing lentivirus (Lv-shZFX). Our finding suggested that ZFX
promoted the growth and migration of GBC cells and could present a potential
molecular target for gene therapy of GBC.

© 2013.

PMID: 23860324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 2;110(27):11097-102. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301257110. Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Zinc finger protein ZBTB20 promotes Toll-like receptor-triggered innate immune
responses by repressing I<U+03BA>Ba gene transcription.

Liu X(1), Zhang P, Bao Y, Han Y, Wang Y, Zhang Q, Zhan Z, Meng J, Li Y, Li N,
Zhang WJ, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling is critical in innate response against
invading pathogens. However, the molecular mechanisms for full activation of
TLR-triggered innate immunity need to be fully elucidated. The broad complex
tramtrack bric-a-brac/poxvirus and zinc finger (BTB/POZ) family is a class of
transcription factors involved in many biological processes. However, few BTB/POZ
proteins were reported to function in innate immune response. Zinc finger and BTB
domain-containing 20 (ZBTB20), a member of BTB/POZ family, functions in
neurogenesis and represses a-fetoprotein gene transcription in liver. However,
the immunological functions of ZBTB20 remain unknown. Here, we found that myeloid
cell-specific ZBTB20 KO mice were resistant to endotoxin shock and Escherichia
coli-caused sepsis. ZBTB20 deficiency attenuated TLR-triggered production of
proinflammatory cytokines and type I IFN in macrophages, which attributed to
higher abundance of I<U+03BA>Ba protein and impaired activity of NF-<U+03BA>B. Furthermore,
ChIP and next generation high-throughput DNA sequencing assay showed that ZBTB20 
specifically bound to I<U+03BA>Ba gene promoter (+1 to +60 region) after TLR activation.
ZBTB20 could inhibit I<U+03BA>Ba gene transcription, govern I<U+03BA>Ba protein expression, and
then promote NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Therefore, transcriptional repressor ZBTB20 is
needed to promote full activation of TLR signaling and TLR-triggered innate
immune response by selectively suppressing the suppressor I<U+03BA>Ba gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3704009
PMID: 23776228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1240-5. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202675. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Ethnic specificity of lupus-associated loci identified in a genome-wide
association study in Korean women.

Lee HS(1), Kim T, Bang SY, Na YJ, Kim I, Kim K, Kim JH, Chung YJ, Shin HD, Kang
YM, Shim SC, Suh CH, Park YB, Kim JS, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, , Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To identify novel genetic candidates for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in the Korean population, and to validate the risk loci for SLE identified 
in previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We performed a GWAS in 400 Korean female SLE patients and 445 controls. 
Selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then replicated in an
independent cohort of 385 SLE patients and 583 controls (replication cohort 1),
and in a further 811 SLE patients and 1502 controls (replication cohort 2).
RESULTS: In the GWAS phase, rs9275428 located near HLA-DQB1 showed the strongest 
association with SLE (OR 0.50, false discovery rate (FDR) p=3.07×10(-6)).
Although no loci reached genome-wide significance outside major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), C8orf13-BLK, STAT4, CSMD1, DIAPH3, GLDC and
TNFSF4 showed FDR p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Our results suggest that STAT4, BLK, IRF5,
PTTG1-miR-146a, UBE2L3 and TNFAIP3 are shared susceptibility loci among
Caucasians and Asians, while ETS1, IKZF1, SLC15A4 are likely to be Asian-specific
loci. In a combined analysis of 1596 SLE patients and 2540 controls for selected 
22 candidate SNP, STAT4 and BLK as positive controls showed a strong association 
with SLE (FDR p=9.85×10(-13) and 2.28×10(-8), respectively). Of these, 16
candidates (PEX5L, TRAJ50, MYO18B, SOS1, ARHGAP26, SMURF1, CADPS, HAND1, FAM78B, 
DIAPH3, TBL1XR1, CSMD1, ZBTB20, C3orf21, HIPK1 and AP001042.1) showed only
nominal significance (7.05×10(-4)=FDR p=4.38×10(-2)).
CONCLUSIONS: There are similarities and differences in genetic susceptibility for
SLE between Caucasian and Asian ethnic groups. Although 16 putative novel loci
for SLE have been suggested in the Korean population, further research on a
larger sample is required to discriminate truth from error.

PMID: 23740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Jul;26(4):487-98. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12106. Epub
2013 May 13.

Genetic modulation of the iris transillumination defect: a systems genetics
analysis using the expanded family of BXD glaucoma strains.

Swaminathan S(1), Lu H, Williams RW, Lu L, Jablonski MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hamilton Eye Institute, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.

We investigated the contributions of Tyrp1 and Gpnmb to the iris
transillumination defect (TID) in five age cohorts of BXD mice. Using systems
genetics, we also evaluated the role of other known pigmentation genes (PGs).
Mapping studies indicate that Tyrp1 contributes to the phenotype at all ages, yet
the TID maps to Gpnmb only in the oldest cohort. Composite interval mapping
reveals secondary loci viz. Oca2, Myo5a, Prkcz, and Zbtb20 that modulate the
phenotype in the age groups up to 10-13 months. The contributions of Tyrp1 and
Gpnmb were highly significant in all age cohorts. Moreover, in young mice, all
six gene candidates had substantial interactions in our model. Our model
accounted for 71-88% of the explained variance of the TID phenotype across the
age bins. These results demonstrate that along with Tyrp1 and Gpnmb, Oca2, Myo5a,
Prkcz, and Zbtb20 modulate the TID in an age-dependent manner.

© 2013 The Authors. Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3752936
PMID: 23582180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Hepatol Res. 2013 Aug;43(8):820-5. doi: 10.1111/hepr.12052. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Recent topics on a-fetoprotein.

Nakao K(1), Ichikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Zinc-fingers and homeoboxes 2 (ZHX2) and zinc-finger and BTB domain containing 20
(ZBTB20) repress the postnatal expression of a-fetoprotein (AFP) by interacting
with the AFP gene promoter regions. ZHX2 inhibits the expression of AFP and
cyclins A and E. ZBTB20 is negatively regulated by CUX1, which promotes
cell-cycle progression, suggesting that AFP reactivation is closely linked to
hepatocyte proliferation. A slight elevation in the serum AFP level often occurs 
in patients with chronic hepatitis C in the absence of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and is an independent risk factor for HCC development to complement the
fibrosis stage. In addition, the sustained elevation of AFP after interferon
therapy is a risk factor of HCC development. AFP levels are clinically useful in 
predicting the outcomes of liver transplantation and sorafenib therapy for HCC
patients. A low preoperative AFP level is a predictor of long-term survival and
is associated with a low recurrence rate of HCC after liver transplantation. AFP 
response (=20% decrease in AFP during 6-8 weeks of treatment) rather than
radiological outcomes is a significant prognostic factor for survival in
sorafenib-treated HCC patients. Highly sensitive Lens culinaris
agglutinin-reactive AFP (AFP-L3) is 5-10 times more sensitive than conventional
AFP-L3, and useful for early detection of HCC in patients with total AFP below
20<U+2009>ng/mL.

© 2013 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 23347387  [PubMed]


31. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1216-29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs400. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Zbtb20 defines a hippocampal neuronal identity through direct repression of genes
that control projection neuron development in the isocortex.

Nielsen JV(1), Thomassen M, Møllgård K, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampal pyramidal neurons are important for encoding and retrieval of spatial
maps and episodic memories. While previous work has shown that Zbtb20 is a cell
fate determinant for CA1 pyramidal neurons, the regulatory mechanisms governing
this process are not known. In this study, we demonstrate that Zbtb20 binds to
genes that control neuronal subtype specification in the developing isocortex,
including Cux1, Cux2, Fezf2, Foxp2, Mef2c, Rorb, Satb2, Sox5, Tbr1, Tle4, and
Zfpm2. We show that Zbtb20 represses these genes during ectopic CA1 pyramidal
neuron development in transgenic mice. These data reveal a novel regulatory
mechanism by which Zbtb20 suppresses the acquisition of an isocortical fate
during archicortical neurogenesis to ensure commitment to a CA1 pyramidal neuron 
fate. We further show that the expression pattern of Zbtb20 is evolutionary
conserved in the fetal human hippocampus, where it is complementary to the
expression pattern of the Zbtb20 target gene Tbr1. Therefore, the disclosed
Zbtb20-mediated transcriptional repressor mechanism may be involved in
development of the human archicortex.

PMID: 23283686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 18;109(51):21122-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1215366110. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

In vivo localization and identification of SUMOylated proteins in the brain of
His6-HA-SUMO1 knock-in mice.

Tirard M(1), Hsiao HH, Nikolov M, Urlaub H, Melchior F, Brose N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Experimental
Medicine, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.

SUMOylation, an essential posttranslational protein modification, is involved in 
many eukaryotic cellular signaling pathways. The identification of SUMOylated
proteins is difficult, because SUMOylation sites in proteins are hard to predict,
SUMOylated protein states are transient in vivo and labile in vitro, only a small
substrate fraction is SUMOylated in vivo, and identification tools for natively
SUMOylated proteins are rare. To solve these problems, we generated knock-in mice
expressing His(6)-HA-SUMO1. By anti-HA immunostaining, we show that SUMO1
conjugates in neurons are only detectable in nuclei and annulate lamellae. By
anti-HA affinity purification, we identified several hundred candidate SUMO1
substrates, of which we validated Smchd1, Ctip2, TIF1<U+03B3>, and Zbtb20 as novel
substrates. The knock-in mouse represents an excellent mammalian model for
studies on SUMO1 localization and screens for SUMO1 conjugates in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3529052
PMID: 23213215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Jun;21(6):620-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.219. Epub 2012 Oct 
3.

Application of custom-designed oligonucleotide array CGH in 145 patients with
autistic spectrum disorders.

Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B(1), Kastory-Bronowska M, Bartnik M, Derwinska K,
Dymczak-Domini W, Szumbarska D, Ziemka E, Szczaluba K, Sykulski M, Gambin T,
Gambin A, Shaw CA, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E, Bocian E, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental 
disorders, including childhood autism, atypical autism, and Asperger syndrome,
with an estimated prevalence of 1.0-2.5% in the general population. ASDs have a
complex multifactorial etiology, with genetic causes being recognized in only
10-20% of cases. Recently, copy-number variants (CNVs) have been shown to
contribute to over 10% of ASD cases. We have applied a custom-designed
oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization with an exonic coverage
of over 1700 genes, including 221 genes known to cause autism and autism
candidate genes, in a cohort of 145 patients with ASDs. The patients were
classified according to ICD-10 standards and the Childhood Autism Rating Scale
protocol into three groups consisting of 45 individuals with and 69 individuals
without developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), and 31 patients, in 
whom DD/ID could not be excluded. In 12 patients, we have identified 16
copy-number changes, eight (5.5%) of which likely contribute to ASDs. In addition
to known recurrent CNVs such as deletions 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) and 3q13.31
(including DRD3 and ZBTB20), and duplications 15q13.3 and 16p13.11, our analysis 
revealed two novel genes clinically relevant for ASDs: ARHGAP24 (4q21.23q21.3)
and SLC16A7 (12q14.1). Our results further confirm the diagnostic importance of
array CGH in detection of CNVs in patients with ASDs and demonstrate that CNVs
are an important cause of ASDs as a heterogeneous condition with a variety of
contributory genes.

PMCID: PMC3658201
PMID: 23032108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Physiol. 2012 Oct 1;590(19):4917-32. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.234187. Epub
2012 Jul 9.

Regulation of hippocampus-dependent memory by the zinc finger protein Zbtb20 in
mature CA1 neurons.

Ren A(1), Zhang H, Xie Z, Ma X, Ji W, He DZ, Yuan W, Ding YQ, Zhang XH, Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

The mammalian hippocampus harbours neural circuitry that is crucial for
associative learning and memory. The mechanisms that underlie the development and
regulation of this complex circuitry are not fully understood. Our previous study
established an essential role for the zinc finger protein Zbtb20 in the
specification of CA1 field identity in the developing hippocampus. Here, we show 
that conditionally deleting Zbtb20 specifically in mature CA1 pyramidal neurons
impaired hippocampus-dependent memory formation, without affecting hippocampal
architecture or the survival, identity and basal excitatory synaptic activity of 
CA1 pyramidal neurons. We demonstrate that mature CA1-specific Zbtb20 knockout
mice exhibited reductions in long-term potentiation (LTP) and NMDA receptor
(NMDAR)-mediated excitatory post-synaptic currents. Furthermore, we show that
activity-induced phosphorylation of ERK and CREB is impaired in the hippocampal
CA1 of Zbtb20 mutant mice. Collectively, these results indicate that Zbtb20 in
mature CA1 plays an important role in LTP and memory by regulating NMDAR
activity, and activation of ERK and CREB.

PMCID: PMC3487045
PMID: 22777671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hippocampus. 2012 Nov;22(11):2144-56. doi: 10.1002/hipo.22035. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Regulation of archicortical arealization by the transcription factor Zbtb20.

Rosenthal EH(1), Tonchev AB, Stoykova A, Chowdhury K.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg, Goettingen,
Germany.

The molecular mechanisms of regionalization of the medial pallium (MP), the
anlage of the hippocampus, and transitional (cingulate and retrosplenial)
cortices are largely unknown. Previous analyses have outlined an important role
of the transcription factor (TF) Zbtb20 for hippocampal CA1 field specification
(Nielsen et al. (2007) Development 134:1133-1140; Nielsen et al. (2010) Cereb
Cortex 20:1904-1914; Xie et al. (2010) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:6510-6515).
Here, we present novel data showing that Zbtb20 exhibits a
ventral(high)-to-dorsal(low) gradient of expression in MP progenitors as well as 
an expression in postmitotic cells at the transitional cortex/neocortex border.
Our detailed pattern analysis revealed that in Zbtb20 loss-of-function the
molecular borders between neocortical, transitional, and hippocampal fields are
progressively shifted ventrally, leading to an ectopic positioning of all dorsal 
fields into the neighboring ventrally located areas. Thus, in addition to its
known importance for the specification of the hippocampal CA1 sector, the graded 
expression of TF Zbtb20 in ventricular zone of MP appears to translate early
positional information for establishment of all developing MP fields. Our data
also suggest that the signaling factor Wnt3a is a putative molecular partner of
TF Zbtb20 in this patterning process.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22689450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gastroenterology. 2012 Jun;142(7):1571-1580.e6. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2012.02.043. Epub 2012 Feb 25.

The zinc finger protein ZBTB20 regulates transcription of
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 and ß cell function in mice.

Zhang Y(1), Xie Z, Zhou L, Li L, Zhang H, Zhou G, Ma X, Herrera PL, Liu Z, Grusby
MJ, Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP)-1 is a gluconeogenic enzyme 
that regulates glucose metabolism and insulin secretion in ß cells, but little is
known about how its transcription is controlled. The zinc finger protein ZBTB20
regulates glucose homeostasis, so we investigated its effects on expression of
FBP-1.
METHODS: We analyzed gene expression using real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction, immunoblotting, and immunohistochemistry. We generated
mice with ß cell-specific disruption of Zbtb20 using Cre/LoxP technology.
Expression of Zbtb20 in ß cells was reduced using small interfering RNAs, and
promoter occupancy and transcriptional regulation were analyzed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation and reporter assays.
RESULTS: ZBTB20 was expressed at high levels by ß cells and other endocrine cells
in islets of normal mice; expression levels were reduced in islets from diabetic 
db/db mice. Mice with ß cell-specific knockout of Zbtb20 had normal development
of ß cells but had hyperglycemia, hypoinsulinemia, glucose intolerance, and
impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Islets isolated from these mice
had impaired glucose metabolism, adenosine triphosphate production, and insulin
secretion after glucose stimulation in vitro, although insulin secretion returned
to normal levels in the presence of KCl. ZBTB20 knockdown with small interfering 
RNAs impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in the ß cell line MIN6.
Expression of Fbp1 was up-regulated in ß cells with ZBTB20 knockout or knockdown;
impairments to glucose-stimulated insulin secretion were restored by inhibition
of FBPase activity. ZBTB20 was recruited to the Fbp1 promoter and repressed its
transcription in ß cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcription factor ZBTB20 regulates ß cell function and
glucose homeostasis in mice. It might be a therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22374165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Med Genet. 2012 Feb;49(2):104-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100534. Epub 2011 
Dec 17.

A novel microdeletion syndrome at 3q13.31 characterised by developmental delay,
postnatal overgrowth, hypoplastic male genitals, and characteristic facial
features.

Molin AM(1), Andrieux J, Koolen DA, Malan V, Carella M, Colleaux L, Cormier-Daire
V, David A, de Leeuw N, Delobel B, Duban-Bedu B, Fischetto R, Flinter F,
Kjaergaard S, Kok F, Krepischi AC, Le Caignec C, Ogilvie CM, Maia S,
Mathieu-Dramard M, Munnich A, Palumbo O, Papadia F, Pfundt R, Reardon W, Receveur
A, Rio M, Ronsbro Darling L, Rosenberg C, Sá J, Vallee L, Vincent-Delorme C,
Zelante L, Bondeson ML, Annerén G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. anna-maja.nystrom@slu.se

BACKGROUND: Congenital deletions affecting 3q11q23 have rarely been reported and 
only five cases have been molecularly characterised. Genotype-phenotype
correlation has been hampered by the variable sizes and breakpoints of the
deletions. In this study, 14 novel patients with deletions in 3q11q23 were
investigated and compared with 13 previously reported patients.
METHODS: Clinical data were collected from 14 novel patients that had been
investigated by high resolution microarray techniques. Molecular investigation
and updated clinical information of one cytogenetically previously reported
patient were also included.
RESULTS: The molecular investigation identified deletions in the region
3q12.3q21.3 with different boundaries and variable sizes. The smallest studied
deletion was 580 kb, located in 3q13.31. Genotype-phenotype comparison in 24
patients sharing this shortest region of overlapping deletion revealed several
common major characteristics including significant developmental delay, muscular 
hypotonia, a high arched palate, and recognisable facial features including a
short philtrum and protruding lips. Abnormal genitalia were found in the majority
of males, several having micropenis. Finally, a postnatal growth pattern above
the mean was apparent. The 580 kb deleted region includes five RefSeq genes and
two of them are strong candidate genes for the developmental delay: DRD3 and
ZBTB20.
CONCLUSION: A newly recognised 3q13.31 microdeletion syndrome is delineated which
is of diagnostic and prognostic value. Furthermore, two genes are suggested to be
responsible for the main phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3261728
PMID: 22180640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Genet. 2011 Oct 30;43(12):1215-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.978.

A genome-wide association study identifies new susceptibility loci for non-cardia
gastric cancer at 3q13.31 and 5p13.1.

Shi Y(1), Hu Z, Wu C, Dai J, Li H, Dong J, Wang M, Miao X, Zhou Y, Lu F, Zhang H,
Hu L, Jiang Y, Li Z, Chu M, Ma H, Chen J, Jin G, Tan W, Wu T, Zhang Z, Lin D,
Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for the Genetics of
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
China. shiyongyong@gmail.com

Gastric cancer, including the cardia and non-cardia types, is the second leading 
cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. To identify genetic risk variants for
non-cardia gastric cancer, we performed a genome-wide association study in 3,279 
individuals (1,006 with non-cardia gastric cancer and 2,273 controls) of Chinese 
descent. We replicated significant associations in an additional 6,897 subjects
(3,288 with non-cardia gastric cancer and 3,609 controls). We identified two new 
susceptibility loci for non-cardia gastric cancer at 5p13.1 (rs13361707 in the
region including PTGER4 and PRKAA1; odds ratio (OR) = 1.41; P = 7.6 × 10(-29))
and 3q13.31 (rs9841504 in ZBTB20; OR = 0.76; P = 1.7 × 10(-9)). Imputation
analyses also confirmed previously reported associations of rs2294008 and
rs2976392 on 8q24, rs4072037 on 1q22 and rs13042395 on 20p13 with non-cardia
gastric cancer susceptibility in the Han Chinese population.

PMID: 22037551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jun 25;11:271. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-271.

Zinc finger protein ZBTB20 expression is increased in hepatocellular carcinoma
and associated with poor prognosis.

Wang Q(1), Tan YX, Ren YB, Dong LW, Xie ZF, Tang L, Cao D, Zhang WP, Hu HP, Wang 
HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, the Second Military Medical University, 225
Changhai Road, Shanghai, 200433, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Our previous studies showed that ZBTB20, a new BTB/POZ-domain gene,
could negatively regulate a feto-protein and other liver-specific genes,
concerning such as bio-transformation, glucose metabolism and the regulation of
the somatotropic hormonal axis. The aim of this study is to determine the
potential clinical implications of ZBTB20 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blot analyses were used to
detect expression levels of ZBTB20 in 50 paired HCC tumorous and nontumorous
tissues and in 20 normal liver tissues. Moreover, expression of ZBTB20 was
assessed by immunohistochemistry of paired tumor and peritumoral liver tissue
from 102 patients who had undergone hepatectomy for histologically proven HCC.
And its relationship with clinicopathological parameters and prognosis was
investigated.
RESULTS: Both messenger RNA and protein expression levels of ZBTB20 were elevated
significantly in HCC tissues compared with the paired non-tumor tissues and
normal liver tissues. Overexpressed ZBTB20 protein in HCC was significantly
associated with vein invasion (P=0.016). Importantly, the recurrence or
metastasis rates of HCCs with higher ZBTB20 expression were markedly greater than
those of HCCs with lower expression (P=0.003, P=0.00015, respectively).
Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that ZBTB20 overexpression was an
independent prognostic factor for HCC. The disease-free survival period and
over-all survival period in patients with overexpressed ZBTB20 in HCC was
significantly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of ZBTB20 is increased in HCC and associated with
poor prognosis in patients with HCC, implicating ZBTB20 as a candidate prognostic
marker in HCC.

© 2011 Wang et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3145616
PMID: 21702992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Nat Commun. 2011 Jun 7;2:338. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1345.

MicroRNA122 is a key regulator of a-fetoprotein expression and influences the
aggressiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kojima K(1), Takata A, Vadnais C, Otsuka M, Yoshikawa T, Akanuma M, Kondo Y, Kang
YJ, Kishikawa T, Kato N, Xie Z, Zhang WJ, Yoshida H, Omata M, Nepveu A, Koike K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2012;3:985.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 Jan;9(1):7-8.

a-fetoprotein (AFP) is not only a widely used biomarker in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) surveillance, but is also clinically recognized as linked with
aggressive tumour behaviour. Here we show that deregulation of microRNA122, a
liver-specific microRNA, is a cause of both AFP elevation and a more biologically
aggressive phenotype in HCC. We identify CUX1, a direct target of microRNA122, as
a common central mediator of these two effects. Using liver tissues from
transgenic mice in which microRNA122 is functionally silenced, an orthotopic
xenograft tumour model, and human clinical samples, we further demonstrate that a
microRNA122/CUX1/microRNA214/ZBTB20 pathway regulates AFP expression. We also
show that the microRNA122/CUX1/RhoA pathway regulates the aggressive
characteristics of tumours. We conclude that microRNA122 and associated
signalling proteins may represent viable therapeutic targets, and that serum AFP 
levels in HCC patients may be a surrogate marker for deregulated intracellular
microRNA122 signalling pathways in HCC tissues.

PMID: 21654638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011 Feb;21(1):21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2011.01.001.
Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Zhx2 and Zbtb20: novel regulators of postnatal alpha-fetoprotein repression and
their potential role in gene reactivation during liver cancer.

Peterson ML(1), Ma C, Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology & Molecular Genetics and Markey Cancer 
Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is abundantly expressed in the fetal
liver, normally silent in the adult liver but is frequently reactivated in
hepatocellular carcinoma. The basis for AFP expression in the fetal liver has
been studied extensively. However, the basis for AFP reactivation during
hepatocarcinogenesis is not well understood. Two novel factors that control
postnatal AFP repression, Zhx2 and Zbtb20, were recently identified. Here, we
review the transcription factors that regulate AFP in the fetal liver, as well as
Zhx2 and Zbtb20, and raise the possibility that the loss of these postnatal
repressors may be involved in AFP reactivation in liver cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3313486
PMID: 21216289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 6;107(14):6510-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912315107. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Zbtb20 is essential for the specification of CA1 field identity in the developing
hippocampus.

Xie Z(1), Ma X, Ji W, Zhou G, Lu Y, Xiang Z, Wang YX, Zhang L, Hu Y, Ding YQ,
Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, China.

The development of hippocampal circuitry depends on the proper assembly of
correctly specified and fully differentiated hippocampal neurons. Little is known
about factors that control the hippocampal specification. Here, we show that zinc
finger protein Zbtb20 is essential for the specification of hippocampal CA1 field
identity. We found that Zbtb20 expression was initially activated in the
hippocampal anlage at the onset of corticogenesis, and persisted in immature
hippocampal neurons. Targeted deletion of Zbtb20 in mice did not compromise the
progenitor proliferation in the hippocampal and adjacent transitional ventricular
zone, but led to the transformation of the hippocampal CA1 field into a
transitional neocortex-like structure, as evidenced by cytoarchitectural,
neuronal migration, and gene expression phenotypes. Correspondingly, the
subiculum was ectopically located adjacent to the CA3 in mutant. Although the
field identities of the mutant CA3 and dentate gyrus (DG) were largely
maintained, their projections were severely impaired. The hippocampus of Zbtb20
null mice was reduced in size, and exhibited increased apoptotic cell death
during postnatal development. Our data establish an essential role of Zbtb20 in
the specification of CA1 field identity by repressing adjacent transitional
neocortex-specific fate determination.

PMCID: PMC2851958
PMID: 20308569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Aug;20(8):1904-14. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp261. Epub 2009 Dec
2.

Zbtb20-induced CA1 pyramidal neuron development and area enlargement in the
cerebral midline cortex of mice.

Nielsen JV(1), Blom JB, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Medical Biotechnology Center, Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, J.B. Winslows Vej 25, DK-5000
Odense C, Denmark.

Expression of the transcriptional repressor Zbtb20 is confined to the hippocampal
primordium of the developing dorsal midline cortex in mice. Here, we show that
misexpression of Zbtb20 converts projection neurons of the subiculum and
postsubiculum (dorsal presubiculum) to CA1 pyramidal neurons that are innervated 
by Schaffer collateral projections in ectopic strata oriens and radiatum. The
Zbtb20-transformed neurons express Bcl11B, Satb2, and Calbindin-D28k, which are
markers of adult CA1 pyramidal neurons. Downregulation of Zbtb20 expression by
RNA interference impairs the normal maturation of CA1 pyramidal neurons resulting
in deficiencies in Calbindin-D28k expression and in reduced apical dendritic
arborizations in stratum lacunosum moleculare. Overall, the results show that
Zbtb20 is required for various aspects of CA1 pyramidal neuron development such
as the postnatal extension of apical dendritic arbors in the distal target zone
and the subtype differentiation of Calbindin-D28k-positive subsets. They further 
suggest that Zbtb20 plays a role in arealization of the midline cortex.

PMID: 19955470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 Feb 1;67(3):263-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.08.030.
Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Identification of novel candidate genes for treatment response to risperidone and
susceptibility for schizophrenia: integrated analysis among pharmacogenomics,
mouse expression, and genetic case-control association approaches.

Ikeda M(1), Tomita Y, Mouri A, Koga M, Okochi T, Yoshimura R, Yamanouchi Y,
Kinoshita Y, Hashimoto R, Williams HJ, Takeda M, Nakamura J, Nabeshima T, Owen
MJ, O'Donovan MC, Honda H, Arinami T, Ozaki N, Iwata N.

Author information: 
(1)MRC, Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenomic approaches based on genomewide sets of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are now feasible and offer the potential to
uncover variants that influence drug response.
METHODS: To detect potential predictor gene variants for risperidone response in 
schizophrenic subjects, we performed a convergent analysis based on 1) a
genomewide (100K SNP) SNP pharmacogenetic study of risperidone response and 2) a 
global transcriptome study of genes with mRNA levels influenced by risperidone
exposure in mouse prefrontal cortex.
RESULTS: Fourteen genes were highlighted as of potential relevance to risperidone
activity in both studies: ATP2B2, HS3ST2, UNC5C, BAG3, PDE7B, PAICS, PTGFRN,
NR3C2, ZBTB20, ST6GAL2, PIP5K1B, EPHA6, KCNH5, and AJAP1. The SNPs related to
these genes that were associated in the pharmacogenetic study were further
assessed for evidence for association with schizophrenia in up to three
case-control series comprising 1564 cases and 3862 controls in total (Japanese
[JPN] 1st and 2nd samples and UK sample). Of 14 SNPs tested, one (rs9389370) in
PDE7B showed significant evidence for association with schizophrenia in a
discovery sample (p(allele) = .026 in JPN_1st, two-tailed). This finding
replicated in a joint analysis of two independent case-control samples
(p(JPN_2nd+UK) = .008, one-tailed, uncorrected) and in all combined data sets
(p(all) = .0014, two-tailed, uncorrected and p(all) = .018, two-tailed,
Bonferroni correction).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified novel candidate genes for treatment response to
risperidone and provide evidence that one of these additionally may confer
susceptibility to schizophrenia. Specifically, PDE7B is an attractive candidate
gene, although evidence from integrated methodology, including pharmacogenomics, 
pharmacotranscriptomic, and case-control association approaches.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 19850283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(10):2804-15. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01667-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
9.

Zinc finger protein Zbtb20 is essential for postnatal survival and glucose
homeostasis.

Sutherland AP(1), Zhang H, Zhang Y, Michaud M, Xie Z, Patti ME, Grusby MJ, Zhang 
WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, 651 Huntington Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Zbtb20 is a member of the POK family of proteins, which function primarily as
transcriptional repressors via interactions mediated by their conserved C(2)H(2) 
Krüppel type zinc finger and BTB/POZ domains. To define the function of Zbtb20 in
vivo, we generated knockout mice by homologous recombination. Zbtb20 null mice
display a stark phenotype characterized by postnatal growth retardation,
metabolic dysfunction, and lethality. Zbtb20 knockout mice displayed abnormal
glucose homeostasis, hormonal responses, and depletion of energy stores,
consistent with an energetic deficit. Additionally, increased serum bilirubin and
alanine aminotransferase levels were suggestive of liver dysfunction. To identify
potential liver-specific Zbtb20 target genes, we performed transcript profiling
studies on liver tissue from Zbtb20 knockout mice and wild-type littermate
controls. These studies identified sets of genes involved in growth, metabolism, 
and detoxification that were differentially regulated in Zbtb20 knockout liver.
Transgenic mice expressing Zbtb20 in the liver were generated and crossed onto
the Zbtb20 knockout background, which resulted in no significant normalization of
growth or glucose metabolism but a significant increase in life span compared to 
controls. These data indicate that the phenotype of Zbtb20 knockout mice results 
from liver-dependent and -independent defects, suggesting that Zbtb20 plays
nonredundant roles in multiple organ systems.

PMCID: PMC2682054
PMID: 19273596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 5;105(31):10859-64. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800647105. Epub 2008 Jul 31.

Zinc finger protein ZBTB20 is a key repressor of alpha-fetoprotein gene
transcription in liver.

Xie Z(1), Zhang H, Tsai W, Zhang Y, Du Y, Zhong J, Szpirer C, Zhu M, Cao X,
Barton MC, Grusby MJ, Zhang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Second Military Medical University, 800
Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China.

The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is highly activated in fetal liver but is
dramatically repressed shortly after birth. The mechanisms that underlie AFP
transcriptional repression in postpartum liver are not well understood. AFP
enhancer, repressor region, and promoter are implicated to be involved in AFP
postnatal repression, but the major transcriptional repressor remains undefined. 
We previously identified a zinc finger protein gene ZBTB20. To determine its
physiological functions in vivo, we have generated hepatocyte-specific ZBTB20
knockout mice by the Cre/loxP approach and demonstrated here that ZBTB20 ablation
in liver led to dramatic derepression of the AFP gene in entire liver throughout 
adult life, although the hepatocytes were normally under nonproliferating status.
Furthermore, we found that ZBTB20 was a transcriptional repressor capable of
specifically inhibiting AFP promoter-driven transcriptional activity. Liver
chromatin immunoprecipitation and mobility shift assays showed that ZBTB20 bound 
to AFP promoter directly. ZBTB20 was developmentally activated in liver after
birth and inversely correlated with its AFP gene expression, suggesting that
activated ZBTB20 expression in liver mediated AFP gene repression. Our data point
to ZBTB20 as a key regulator governing AFP gene transcription and postulate a new
model for the postnatal gene repression of AFP in liver.

PMCID: PMC2504784
PMID: 18669658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Jul;56(7):2371-81.

Altered gene expression in mice with lupus treated with edratide, a peptide that 
ameliorates the disease manifestations.

Elmann A(1), Sharabi A, Dayan M, Zinger H, Ophir R, Mozes E.

Author information: 
(1)The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To identify genes that are differently expressed in (NZB x NZW)F(1)
mice with established lupus compared with healthy controls, and to determine how 
gene expression is affected by treatment with hCDR1 (Edratide), a peptide
synthesized on the basis of the sequence of the first complementarity-determining
region (CDR1) of an autoantibody.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from spleen cells of young, disease-free mice and of
older mice with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that were treated with hCDR1
or with vehicle alone. Gene expression was assessed using the DNA microarray
technique and verified by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: In mice with SLE, numerous genes showed increased or decreased
expression relative to that in the disease-free controls. Treatment with hCDR1
restored the expression of many of these genes to control levels. Real-time
RT-PCR verified that in diseased mice RNA transcripts of Tnfsf4, Il5ra, Zbtb20,
and Nid1 were up-regulated, while transcripts of Tfpi and S100a8 were
down-regulated, and confirmed the effects of hCDR1 on the expression of those
genes. Kidney immunostaining demonstrated that the up-regulated expression of
OX40 ligand, which is a protein product of the gene tumor necrosis factor
(ligand) superfamily member 4, in diseased mice was reduced by hCDR1.
CONCLUSION: Expression of numerous genes in mice with SLE differs from that in
young, disease-free control mice. Treatment with hCDR1 restores the expression of
22% of these genes to levels similar to those in controls. Thus, one of the
mechanisms by which hCDR1 exerts its beneficial effects on the clinical symptoms 
of SLE is through regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 17599765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Leuk Lymphoma. 2007 May;48(5):912-22.

Expression level of lipoprotein lipase and dystrophin genes predict survival in
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Nikitin EA(1), Malakho SG, Biderman BV, Baranova AV, Lorie YY, Shevelev AY, Peklo
MM, Vlasik TN, Moskalev EA, Zingerman BV, Vorob'ev IA, Poltaraus AB, Sudarikov
AB, Vorobjev AI.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research Center of Russia, Moscow, Russia. eugene_nikitin@mail.ru

Mutational status of immunoglobulin variable region genes (VH-genes) is known as 
the strongest predictor of long term prognosis in B-CLL. However, applications in
the routine clinical practice are time consuming, and therefore some other
predictions are required. In this study, we have compared prognostic values of
real time PCR quantification of the expression levels of four genes previously
shown to be differentially expressed in V(H)-unmutated and mutated B-CLL
subtypes: ZAP-70, ZBTB20, DMD and LPL. The study included 134 B-CLL patients.
Expression levels of LPL and DMD genes were significantly correlated to
mutational status, while expression levels of of ZAP-70 gene correlated only in
CD19+ selected cases (N = 40). No correlation was observed for ZBTB20 gene.
Expression levels of LPL and DMD predicted overall survival in the entire cohort 
of patients. Prognostic values of LPL gene expression levels were significant
even for CLL patients with stage A. Quantitative RT-PCR assays for measuring LPL 
gene expression are robust enough to be introduced into routine clinical
practice.

PMID: 17487735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Development. 2007 Mar;134(6):1133-40. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Hippocampus-like corticoneurogenesis induced by two isoforms of the BTB-zinc
finger gene Zbtb20 in mice.

Nielsen JV(1), Nielsen FH, Ismail R, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Medical Biotechnology Center, University of
Southern Denmark, J. B. Winslowsvej 25, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampus-associated genes that orchestrate the formation of the compact
stratum pyramidale are largely unknown. The BTB (broad complex, tramtrack,
bric-a-brac)-zinc finger gene Zbtb20 (also known as HOF, Znf288, Zfp288) encodes 
two protein isoforms, designated Zbtb20(S) and Zbtb20(L), which are expressed in 
newborn pyramidal neurons of the presumptive hippocampus in mice. Here, we have
generated transgenic mice with ectopic expression of Zbtb20(S) and Zbtb20(L) in
immature pyramidal neurons differentiated from multipotent non-hippocampal
precursors. The subiculum and posterior retrosplenial areas in these mice were
transformed into a three-layered hippocampus-like cortex with a compact
homogenous pyramidal cell layer. Severe malformations of lamination occur in
neocortical areas, which coincide with a deficiency in expression of cortical
lamination markers. The alterations in cortical cytoarchitecture result in
behavioral abnormalities suggestive of a deficient processing of visual and
spatial memory cues in the cerebral cortex of adult Zbtb20 transgenic mice.
Overall, our in vivo data suggest that Zbtb20 functions as a molecular switch for
a pathway that induces invariant pyramidal neuron morphogenesis and suppression
of cell fate transitions in newborn neurons.

PMID: 17301088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7598-609. Epub 2001 Dec 13.

Characterization of two novel nuclear BTB/POZ domain zinc finger isoforms.
Association with differentiation of hippocampal neurons, cerebellar granule
cells, and macroglia.

Mitchelmore C(1), Kjaerulff KM, Pedersen HC, Nielsen JV, Rasmussen TE, Fisker MF,
Finsen B, Pedersen KM, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Molecular Genetics, The Panum Institute 6.5,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N.

BTB/POZ (broad complex tramtrack bric-a-brac/poxvirus and zinc finger) zinc
finger factors are a class of nuclear DNA-binding proteins involved in
development, chromatin remodeling, and cancer. However, BTB/POZ domain zinc
finger factors linked to development of the mammalian cerebral cortex,
cerebellum, and macroglia have not been described previously. We report here the 
isolation and characterization of two novel nuclear BTB/POZ domain zinc finger
isoforms, designated HOF(L) and HOF(S), that are specifically expressed in early 
hippocampal neurons, cerebellar granule cells, and gliogenic progenitors as well 
as in differentiated glia. During embryonic development of the murine cerebral
cortex, HOF expression is restricted to the hippocampal subdivision. Expression
coincides with early differentiation of presumptive CA1 and CA3 pyramidal neurons
and dentate gyrus granule cells, with a sharp decline in expression at the
CA1/subicular border. By using bromodeoxyuridine labeling and
immunohistochemistry, we show that HOF expression coincides with immature
non-dividing cells and is down-regulated in differentiated cells, suggesting a
role for HOF in hippocampal neurogenesis. Consistent with the postulated role of 
the POZ domain as a site for protein-protein interactions, both HOF isoforms are 
able to dimerize. The HOF zinc fingers bind specifically to the binding site for 
the related promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein as well as to a newly
identified DNA sequence.

PMID: 11744704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Apr 13;282(4):1067-73.

Identification and characterization of DPZF, a novel human BTB/POZ zinc finger
protein sharing homology to BCL-6.

Zhang W(1), Mi J, Li N, Sui L, Wan T, Zhang J, Chen T, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin
Road, Shanghai, 200433, People's Republic of China.

The C2H2 zinc finger protein family is one of the largest families of
transcription factors. We identified a novel BTB/POZ zinc finger gene from human 
dendritic cells (DC), which encodes a 733-residue protein with a BTB/POZ domain
at the N-terminal and 4 C2H2 zinc fingers at C-terminal. It was designated
dendritic cell-derived BTB/POZ zinc finger (DPZF). DPZF protein shares closest
homology to BCL-6, with the highest homology present in the BTB/POZ and zinc
finger domains. Like BCL-6, DPZF gene is localized on chromosome 3. It is widely 
expressed in hematopoietic tissues, including DC, monocytes, B cells, and T
cells. DPZF protein expression is detectable in lymphoid neoplasm with a
molecular mass of 100 kD, especially in B lymphoma. These indicate that DPZF may 
be a transcription factor closely related to BCL-6, and may be involved in
hematopoiesis, oncogenesis, and immune responses.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11352661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


