
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 9;7:10883. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10883.

Dual regulatory switch through interactions of Tcf7l2/Tcf4 with stage-specific
partners propels oligodendroglial maturation.

Zhao C(1,)(2), Deng Y(1,)(2), Liu L(1,)(3), Yu K(1), Zhang L(2), Wang H(2), He
X(2), Wang J(2,)(4), Lu C(1), Wu LN(2), Weng Q(4), Mao M(3), Li J(5), van Es
JH(6), Xin M(2), Parry L(7), Goldman SA(8), Clevers H(6), Lu QR(2,)(3,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Division of Experimental Hematology and
Cancer Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Brain Tumor Center, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. (3)Key
Laboratory of Obstetrics, and Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth
Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (5)Department of Veterinary
Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.
(6)Hubrecht Institute, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht 3584CT, The Netherlands.
(7)European Cancer Stem Cell Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff
CF244HQ, UK. (8)Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue Rochester, New York 14642, USA. (9)Key
Laboratory of Birth Defects, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China.

Constitutive activation of Wnt/ß-catenin inhibits oligodendrocyte myelination.
Tcf7l2/Tcf4, a ß-catenin transcriptional partner, is required for oligodendrocyte
differentiation. How Tcf7l2 modifies ß-catenin signalling and controls
myelination remains elusive. Here we define a stage-specific Tcf7l2-regulated
transcriptional circuitry in initiating and sustaining oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Multistage genome occupancy analyses reveal that Tcf7l2 serially
cooperates with distinct co-regulators to control oligodendrocyte lineage
progression. At the differentiation onset, Tcf7l2 interacts with a
transcriptional co-repressor Kaiso/Zbtb33 to block ß-catenin signalling. During
oligodendrocyte maturation, Tcf7l2 recruits and cooperates with Sox10 to promote 
myelination. In that context, Tcf7l2 directly activates cholesterol biosynthesis 
genes and cholesterol supplementation partially rescues oligodendrocyte
differentiation defects in Tcf712 mutants. Together, we identify stage-specific
co-regulators Kaiso and Sox10 that sequentially interact with Tcf7l2 to
coordinate the switch at the transitions of differentiation initiation and
maturation during oligodendrocyte development, and point to a previously
unrecognized role of Tcf7l2 in control of cholesterol biosynthesis for CNS
myelinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4786870
PMID: 26955760  [PubMed - in process]


2. Behav Brain Res. 2016 Jan 15;297:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.10.003. Epub 2015
Oct 22.

Knockout Zbtb33 gene results in an increased locomotion, exploration and
pre-pulse inhibition in mice.

Kulikov AV(1), Korostina VS(2), Kulikova EA(3), Fursenko DV(3), Akulov AE(3),
Moshkin MP(3), Prokhortchouk EB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk
630090, Russia. Electronic address: akulikov@ngs.ru. (2)Centre "Bioengineering", 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 117312, Russia. (3)Institute of Cytology and 
Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.

The Zbtb33 gene encodes the Kaiso protein-a bimodal transcriptional repressor.
Here, the effects of Zbtb33 gene disruption on the brain and behaviour of the
Kaiso-deficient (KO) and C57BL/6 (WT) male mice were investigated. Behaviour was 
studied using the open field, novel object, elevated plus maze and acoustic
startle reflex tests. Brain morphology was investigated with magnetic resonance
imaging. Biogenic amine levels and gene expression in the brain were measured
with high-performance liquid chromatography and quantitative real-time RT-PCR,
respectively. Zbtb33 gene mRNA was not detected in the brain of KO mice. KO mice 
exhibited increased locomotion, exploration in the open field, novel object and
elevated plus-maze test. At the same time, Zbtb33 gene disruption did not alter
anxiety-related behaviour in the elevated plus-maze test. KO mice showed elevated
amplitudes and pre-pulse inhibitions of the acoustic startle reflex. These
behavioural alterations were accompanied by significant reductions in the volumes
of the lateral ventricles without significant alterations in the volumes of the
hippocampus, striatum, thalamus and corpus callosum. Norepinephrine concentration
was reduced in the hypothalami and hippocampi in KO mice, while the levels of
serotonin, dopamine, their metabolites as well as mRNA of the gene coding
brain-derived neurotrophic factor were not altered in the brain of KO mice
compared to WT mice. This study is the first to reveal the involvement of the
Zbtb33 gene in the regulation of behaviour and the central nervous system.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26454239  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Sep;1849(9):1170-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.008.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Transcriptional activation of APAF1 by KAISO (ZBTB33) and p53 is attenuated by
RelA/p65.

Koh DI(1), An H(1), Kim MY(1), Jeon BN(1), Choi SH(1), Hur SS(2), Hur MW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical Research
Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, 50-1, Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of
Korea. (2)Division of Biological Science and Technology, College of Science and
Technology, Yonsei University, Yonseidae-gil, Wonju 220-710, Republic of Korea.
(3)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Severance Biomedical Research
Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, 50-1, Yonsei-Ro, SeoDaeMun-Gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: mwhur2@yuhs.ac.

KAISO, a member of the POK protein family, is induced by DNA-damaging agents to
enhance apoptosis in a p53-dependent manner. Previously, we found that p53
interacts with KAISO, and acetylation of p53 lysine residues by p300 is modulated
by KAISO. APAF1, the core molecule of the apoptosome, is transcriptionally
activated by KAISO only in cells expressing p53, which binds to APAF1 promoter
p53-response elements (p53REs). APAF1 transcriptional upregulation is further
enhanced by KAISO augmentation of p53 binding to the APAF1 promoter distal
p53RE#1 (bp, -765 to -739). Interestingly, a NF-<U+03BA>B response element, located
close to the p53RE#1, mediates APAF1 transcriptional repression by affecting
interaction between KAISO and p53. Ectopic RelA/p65 expression led to depletion
of nuclear KAISO, with KAISO being mainly detected in the cytoplasm. RelA/p65
cytoplasmic sequestration of KAISO prevents its nuclear interaction with p53,
decreasing APAF1 transcriptional activation by a p53-KAISO-p300 complex in cells 
exposed to genotoxic stresses. While KAISO enhances p53-dependent apoptosis by
increasing APAF1 gene expression, RelA/p65 decreases apoptosis by blocking
interaction between KAISO and p53. These findings have relevance to the
phenomenon of cancer cells' diminished apoptotic capacity and the onset of
chemotherapy resistance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26183023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2015 Mar-Apr;49(2):362-5.

[S100A3 is a new target gene of Kaiso in mouse skin].

[Article in Russian]

Zhigalova NA, Sokolov AS, Prokhortchouk EB, Zhenilo SV.

PMID: 26065264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Apr;8(4):373-84. doi: 10.1242/dmm.018648. Epub 2015 Feb 20.

Nuclear p120-catenin regulates the anoikis resistance of mouse lobular breast
cancer cells through Kaiso-dependent Wnt11 expression.

van de Ven RA(1), Tenhagen M(1), Meuleman W(2), van Riel JJ(1), Schackmann RC(1),
Derksen PW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UMC Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. Division of Molecular Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Mathematics and Computer Science, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg, 2628 
CD Delft, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pathology, UMC Utrecht, 3584 CX
Utrecht, The Netherlands. p.w.b.derksen@umcutrecht.nl.

E-cadherin inactivation underpins the progression of invasive lobular breast
carcinoma (ILC). In ILC, p120-catenin (p120) translocates to the cytosol where it
controls anchorage independence through the Rho-Rock signaling pathway, a key
mechanism driving tumor growth and metastasis. We now demonstrate that
anchorage-independent ILC cells show an increase in nuclear p120, which results
in relief of transcriptional repression by Kaiso. To identify the Kaiso target
genes that control anchorage independence we performed genome-wide mRNA profiling
on anoikis-resistant mouse ILC cells, and identified 29 candidate target genes,
including the established Kaiso target Wnt11. Our data indicate that
anchorage-independent upregulation of Wnt11 in ILC cells is controlled by nuclear
p120 through inhibition of Kaiso-mediated transcriptional repression. Finally, we
show that Wnt11 promotes activation of RhoA, which causes ILC anoikis resistance.
Our findings thereby establish a mechanistic link between E-cadherin loss and
subsequent control of Rho-driven anoikis resistance through p120- and
Kaiso-dependent expression of Wnt11.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4381336
PMID: 25713299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Dec;10(12):3238-48. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00526k.

Investigating the functional implications of reinforcing feedback loops in
transcriptional regulatory networks.

Li Y(1), Liang C, Easterbrook S, Luo J, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
3G4, Canada. yueli@cs.toronto.edu sme@cs.toronto.edu.

Transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) can jointly regulate
transcriptional networks in the form of recurrent circuits or motifs. A motif can
be divided into a feedforward loop (FFL) and a feedback loop (FBL). Incoherent
FFLs have been the recent focus due to their potential to dampen gene expression 
noise in maintaining physiological norms. However, a cell is not only able to
manage noise but also able to exploit it during development or tumorigenesis to
initiate radical transformation such as cell differentiation or metastasis. A
plausible mechanism may involve reinforcing FBLs (rFBLs), which amplify changes
to a sufficient level in order to complete the state transition. To study the
behaviour of rFBLs, we developed a novel theoretical framework based on
biochemical kinetics. The proposed rFBL follows a parsimonious design, involving 
two TFs and two miRNAs. A simulation study based on our model suggested that a
system with rFBLs is robust to only a certain level of fluctuation but prone to a
complete paradigm shift when the change exceeds a threshold level. To investigate
the natural occurrence of rFBLs, we performed a rigorous network motif analysis
using a recently available TF/miRNA regulatory network from the Encyclopedia of
DNA Elements (ENCODE). Our analysis suggested that the rFBL is significantly
depleted in the observed network. Nonetheless, we identified 9 rFBL instances.
Among them, we found a double-rFBL involving three TFs SUZ12/BCLAF1/ZBTB33 and
three miRNAs miR-9/19a/129-5p, which together serve as an intriguing toggle
switch between nerve development and telomere maintenance. Additionally, we
investigated the interactions implicated in the rFBLs using expression profiles
of cancer patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Together, we provided a
novel and comprehensive view of the profound impacts of rFBLs and highlighted
several TFs and miRNAs as the leverage points for potential therapeutic targets
in cancers due to their eminent roles in the identified rFBLs.

PMID: 25286350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Histochem Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;143(1):29-43. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1261-7. Epub 
2014 Sep 3.

Distribution of Kaiso protein in mouse tissues.

Shumskaya VS(1), Zhigalova NA, Prokhorchouk AV, Prokhorchouk EB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre "Bioengineering" of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia,
Shumskaya.valeria@gmail.com.

The Kaiso protein was originally described as a BTB/POZ zinc-finger transcription
factor and a p120-catenin-binding partner. It is a DNA methylation-dependent
transcriptional repressor, but its biological role in mice is still unknown.
Here, we characterized a Kaiso-specific antibody by examining Kaiso protein
distribution by immunofluorescence microscopy in the following tissues and cell
types of adult mice: skin, small intestine, mammary glands, urinary bladder, and 
others. This study is the first to demonstrate that Kaiso is expressed in most of
the examined tissues. Kaiso was localized to the nucleus in almost all tissues.
However, it was primarily cytoplasmic in photoreceptor cells in the eye (rods and
cones). Furthermore, Kaiso is expressed in a specific subset of male germ cells
that are characterized by partly positive PLZF and Bmi-1 staining. In this study,
we present the first confirmation of the reliability of expression data using
Kaiso knockout mice.

PMID: 25182933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Dec 13;442(3-4):177-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.11.046. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Kaiso is a key regulator of spleen germinal center formation by repressing Bcl6
expression in splenocytes.

Koh DI(1), Yoon JH, Kim MK, An H, Kim MY, Hur MW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, 134 ShinChon-Dong, SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 120-752, Republic of 
Korea.

Kaiso was previously described as a methylated DNA-binding protein and a
transcription repressor interacting with the corepressor protein complex NCoR. In
the current study, we show that generation-3 Kaiso knockout mice show a phenotype
of splenomegaly and large diffused germinal centers (GC). In the spleens of Kaiso
knockout mice, Bcl6 (a transcriptional repressor that plays a critical role in GC
development in spleen) and c-Myc were highly expressed, while the cell cycle
arrest genes p27 (CDKN1B), p21 (CDKN1A) and Gadd45a were downregulated. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and transcription assays suggested that Kaiso
represses Bcl6 expression, and in Kaiso knockout mice, derepressed Bcl6 increased
cell proliferation by suppressing p27 (CDKN1B), p21 (CDKN1A) and Gadd45a, while
upregulating the oncogene c-Myc. Further evidence for Kaiso regulation of
splenomegaly was provided by B lymphocyte Ramos cells, in which ectopic KAISO
repressed BCL6 and c-MYC expression, while concomitantly increasing the
expression of the cell cycle arrestors p21, p27 and Gadd45a. In summary,
derepressed Bcl6 expression may be responsible for increases in GC cell
proliferation and splenomegaly of Kaiso knockout mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 5;8(9):e74160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074160. eCollection 
2013.

The POZ-ZF transcription factor Kaiso (ZBTB33) induces inflammation and
progenitor cell differentiation in the murine intestine.

Chaudhary R(1), Pierre CC, Nanan K, Wojtal D, Morone S, Pinelli C, Wood GA,
Robine S, Daniel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Since its discovery, several studies have implicated the POZ-ZF protein Kaiso in 
both developmental and tumorigenic processes. However, most of the information
regarding Kaiso's function to date has been gleaned from studies in Xenopus
laevis embryos and mammalian cultured cells. To examine Kaiso's role in a
relevant, mammalian organ-specific context, we generated and characterized a
Kaiso transgenic mouse expressing a murine Kaiso transgene under the control of
the intestine-specific villin promoter. Kaiso transgenic mice were viable and
fertile but pathological examination of the small intestine revealed distinct
morphological changes. Kaiso transgenics (Kaiso(Tg/+)) exhibited a crypt
expansion phenotype that was accompanied by increased differentiation of
epithelial progenitor cells into secretory cell lineages; this was evidenced by
increased cell populations expressing Goblet, Paneth and enteroendocrine markers.
Paradoxically however, enhanced differentiation in Kaiso(Tg/+) was accompanied by
reduced proliferation, a phenotype reminiscent of Notch inhibition. Indeed,
expression of the Notch signalling target HES-1 was decreased in Kaiso(Tg/+)
animals. Finally, our Kaiso transgenics exhibited several hallmarks of
inflammation, including increased neutrophil infiltration and activation, villi
fusion and crypt hyperplasia. Interestingly, the Kaiso binding partner and
emerging anti-inflammatory mediator p120(ctn) is recruited to the nucleus in
Kaiso(Tg/+) mice intestinal cells suggesting that Kaiso may elicit inflammation
by antagonizing p120(ctn) function.

PMCID: PMC3764064
PMID: 24040197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Cell Sci. 2013 Aug 15;126(Pt 16):3515-25. doi: 10.1242/jcs.134411.

p120-catenin in cancer - mechanisms, models and opportunities for intervention.

Schackmann RC(1), Tenhagen M, van de Ven RA, Derksen PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

The epithelial adherens junction is an E-cadherin-based complex that controls
tissue integrity and is stabilized at the plasma membrane by p120-catenin (p120, 
also known as CTNND1). Mutational and epigenetic inactivation of E-cadherin has
been strongly implicated in the development and progression of cancer. In this
setting, p120 translocates to the cytosol where it exerts oncogenic properties
through aberrant regulation of Rho GTPases, growth factor receptor signaling and 
derepression of Kaiso (also known as ZBTB33) target genes. In contrast, indirect 
inactivation of the adherens junction through conditional knockout of p120 in
mice was recently linked to tumor formation, indicating that p120 can also
function as a tumor suppressor. Supporting these opposing functions are findings 
in human cancer, which show that either loss or cytoplasmic localization of p120 
is a common feature in the progression of several types of carcinoma. Underlying 
this dual biological phenomenon might be the context-dependent regulation of Rho 
GTPases in the cytosol and the derepression of Kaiso target genes. Here, we
discuss past and present findings that implicate p120 in the regulation of cancer
progression and highlight opportunities for clinical intervention.

PMID: 23950111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 May 21;6(1):13. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-13.

ZBTB33 binds unmethylated regions of the genome associated with actively
expressed genes.

Blattler A(1), Yao L, Wang Y, Ye Z, Jin VX, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
pfarnham@usc.edu.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation and repressive histone modifications cooperate to
silence promoters. One mechanism by which regions of methylated DNA could acquire
repressive histone modifications is via methyl DNA-binding transcription factors.
The zinc finger protein ZBTB33 (also known as Kaiso) has been shown in vitro to
bind preferentially to methylated DNA and to interact with the SMRT/NCoR histone 
deacetylase complexes. We have performed bioinformatic analyses of Kaiso ChIP-seq
and DNA methylation datasets to test a model whereby binding of Kaiso to
methylated CpGs leads to loss of acetylated histones at target promoters.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that, contrary to expectations, Kaiso does not bind 
to methylated DNA in vivo but instead binds to highly active promoters that are
marked with high levels of acetylated histones. In addition, our studies suggest 
that DNA methylation and nucleosome occupancy patterns restrict access of Kaiso
to potential binding sites and influence cell type-specific binding.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose a new model for the genome-wide binding and function of
Kaiso whereby Kaiso binds to unmethylated regulatory regions and contributes to
the active state of target promoters.

PMCID: PMC3663758
PMID: 23693142  [PubMed]


12. Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Apr;38(4):177-83. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2012.12.005. Epub 
2013 Jan 23.

A common mode of recognition for methylated CpG.

Liu Y(1), Zhang X, Blumenthal RM, Cheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Sep;38(9):421-2.
    Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Sep;38(9):423.

Much is known about vertebrate DNA methylation, however it is not known how
methylated CpG within particular sequences is recognized. Two recent structures
of C2H2 zinc finger (ZnF) proteins in complex with methylated DNA reveal a common
recognition mode for 5-methylcytosine (5mC) that involves a 5mC-Arg-G triad. In
the two ZnF proteins, an arginine that precedes the first Zn-binding histidine
(RH motif) can interact with a 5mCpG or TpG dinucleotide. Among a family of >300 
human Krüppel-associated box (KRAB) domain containing ZnF proteins examined,
two-thirds contained at least one ZnF that included an RH motif. We propose that 
the RH-ZnF motifs provide specificity for 5mCpG, whereas the neighboring Zn
fingers recognize the surrounding DNA sequence context.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3608759
PMID: 23352388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51205. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051205. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Kaiso directs the transcriptional corepressor MTG16 to the Kaiso binding site in 
target promoters.

Barrett CW(1), Smith JJ, Lu LC, Markham N, Stengel KR, Short SP, Zhang B, Hunt
AA, Fingleton BM, Carnahan RH, Engel ME, Chen X, Beauchamp RD, Wilson KT, Hiebert
SW, Reynolds AB, Williams CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Myeloid translocation genes (MTGs) are transcriptional corepressors originally
identified in acute myelogenous leukemia that have recently been linked to
epithelial malignancy with non-synonymous mutations identified in both MTG8 and
MTG16 in colon, breast, and lung carcinoma in addition to functioning as negative
regulators of WNT and Notch signaling. A yeast two-hybrid approach was used to
discover novel MTG binding partners. This screen identified the Zinc fingers,
C2H2 and BTB domain containing (ZBTB) family members ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 as MTG16
interacting proteins. ZBTB4 is downregulated in breast cancer and modulates p53
responses. Because ZBTB33 (Kaiso), like MTG16, modulates Wnt signaling at the
level of TCF4, and its deletion suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in the
Apc(Min) mouse, we determined that Kaiso also interacted with MTG16 to modulate
transcription. The zinc finger domains of Kaiso as well as ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 bound
MTG16 and the association with Kaiso was confirmed using co-immunoprecipitation. 
MTG family members were required to efficiently repress both a heterologous
reporter construct containing Kaiso binding sites (4×KBS) and the known Kaiso
target, Matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7/Matrilysin). Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies placed MTG16 in a complex occupying the Kaiso binding
site on the MMP-7 promoter. The presence of MTG16 in this complex, and its
contributions to transcriptional repression both required Kaiso binding to its
binding site on DNA, establishing MTG16-Kaiso binding as functionally relevant in
Kaiso-dependent transcriptional repression. Examination of a large multi-stage
CRC expression array dataset revealed patterns of Kaiso, MTG16, and MMP-7
expression supporting the hypothesis that loss of either Kaiso or MTG16 can
de-regulate a target promoter such as that of MMP-7. These findings provide new
insights into the mechanisms of transcriptional control by ZBTB family members
and broaden the scope of co-repressor functions for the MTG family, suggesting
coordinate regulation of transcription by Kaiso/MTG complexes in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3521008
PMID: 23251453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell. 2012 May 11;46(3):335-50. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.03.017. Epub 2012 
Apr 19.

Integrative genomics identifies the corepressor SMRT as a gatekeeper of
adipogenesis through the transcription factors C/EBPß and KAISO.

Raghav SK(1), Waszak SM, Krier I, Gubelmann C, Isakova A, Mikkelsen TS, Deplancke
B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Genetics, Institute of Bioengineering,
School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The molecular role of corepressors is poorly understood. Here, we studied the
transcriptional function of the corepressor SMRT during terminal adipogenesis.
Genome-wide DNA-binding profiling revealed that this corepressor is predominantly
located in active chromatin regions and that most distal SMRT binding events are 
lost after differentiation induction. Promoter-proximal tethering of SMRT in
preadipocytes is primarily mediated by KAISO through the conserved TCTCGCGAGA
motif. Further characterization revealed that KAISO, similar to SMRT, accelerates
the cell cycle and increases fat accumulation upon knockdown, identifying KAISO
as an adipogenic repressor that likely modulates the mitotic clonal expansion
phase of this process. SMRT-bound promoter-distal sites tend to overlap with
C/EBPß-bound regions, which become occupied by proadipogenic transcription
factors after SMRT clearance. This reveals a role for SMRT in masking enhancers
from proadipogenic factors in preadipocytes. Finally, we identified SMRT as an
adipogenic gatekeeper as it directly fine-tunes transcription of pro- and
antiadipogenic genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22521691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jun 10;316(10):1692-705. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.03.011.
Epub 2010 Mar 18.

Kaiso regulates Znf131-mediated transcriptional activation.

Donaldson NS(1), Nordgaard CL, Pierre CC, Kelly KF, Robinson SC, Swystun L,
Henriquez R, Graham M, Daniel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1.

Kaiso is a dual-specificity POZ-ZF transcription factor that regulates gene
expression by binding to sequence-specific Kaiso binding sites (KBS) or
methyl-CpG dinucleotide pairs. Kaiso was first identified as a binding partner
for the epithelial cell adhesion regulator p120(ctn). The p120(ctn)/Kaiso
interaction is reminiscent of the beta-catenin/TCF interaction and several
studies have suggested that Kaiso is a negative regulator of the Wnt/beta-catenin
TCF signaling pathway. To gain further insight into Kaiso's function, we
performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using the Kaiso POZ domain as bait. This
screen identified the POZ-ZF protein, Znf131, as a Kaiso-specific binding
partner. GST pull-down assays confirmed that the interaction is mediated via the 
POZ domain of each protein, and co-immunoprecipitation experiments further
supported an in vivo Kaiso-Znf131 interaction. Using a Cyclic Amplification and
Selection of Targets (CAST) approach, we identified the 12-base pair DNA
palindrome sequence GTCGCR-(X)(n)-YGCGAC as a potential Znf131 binding element
(ZBE). In vitro studies using electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
demonstrated that Znf131 binds the ZBE via its zinc finger domain. Znf131
DNA-binding specificity was confirmed using competition assays and ZBE mutational
analyses. An artificial promoter-reporter construct containing four tandem copies
of the ZBE was constructed and used to assess Znf131 transcriptional properties. 
We observed dose-dependent transcriptional activation of this artificial
promoter-reporter by Znf131 in both epithelial and fibroblast cells, suggesting
that Znf131 is a transcriptional activator. Kaiso overexpression significantly
decreased the Znf131-mediated transcriptional activation, and interestingly,
co-expression of the Kaiso-specific interaction partner p120(ctn) relieved
Kaiso's inhibition of Znf131-mediated transcriptional activation. These findings 
indicate that Znf131 is a transcriptional activator, a less common function of
POZ-ZF proteins, that is negatively regulated by its heterodimerization partner
Kaiso.

Crown Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20303951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004315. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

The methyl-CpG binding proteins Mecp2, Mbd2 and Kaiso are dispensable for mouse
embryogenesis, but play a redundant function in neural differentiation.

Martín Caballero I(1), Hansen J, Leaford D, Pollard S, Hendrich BD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research, MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The precise molecular changes that occur when a neural stem (NS) cell
switches from a programme of self-renewal to commit towards a specific lineage
are not currently well understood. However it is clear that control of gene
expression plays an important role in this process. DNA methylation, a mark of
transcriptionally silent chromatin, has similarly been shown to play important
roles in neural cell fate commitment in vivo. While DNA methylation is known to
play important roles in neural specification during embryonic development, no
such role has been shown for any of the methyl-CpG binding proteins (Mecps) in
mice.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To explore the role of DNA methylation in neural 
cell fate decisions, we have investigated the function of Mecps in mouse
development and in neural stem cell derivation, maintenance, and differentiation.
In order to test whether the absence of phenotype in singly-mutant animals could 
be due to functional redundancy between Mecps, we created mice and neural stem
cells simultaneously lacking Mecp2, Mbd2 and Zbtb33. No evidence for functional
redundancy between these genes in embryonic development or in the derivation or
maintenance of neural stem cells in culture was detectable. However evidence for 
a defect in neuronal commitment of triple knockout NS cells was found.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Although DNA methylation is indispensable for mammalian
embryonic development, we show that simultaneous deficiency of three methyl-CpG
binding proteins genes is compatible with apparently normal mouse embryogenesis. 
Nevertheless, we provide genetic evidence for redundancy of function between
methyl-CpG binding proteins in postnatal mice.

PMCID: PMC2627903
PMID: 19177165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Nov;1783(11):2167-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.07.015. Epub 2008 Jul 28.

The cell biology of DNA methylation in mammals.

Prokhortchouk E(1), Defossez PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center BioEngineering, Russian Academy of Sciences, Prospekt 60-let Oktyabrya 
7-1, 117312 Moscow, Russia.

In this review, we will provide a brief reminder of epigenetic phenomena in
general, and DNA methylation in particular. We will then underline the
characteristics of the in vivo organization of the genome that limit the
applicability of in vitro results. We will use several examples to point out the 
connections between DNA methylation and nuclear architecture. Finally, we will
outline some of the hopes and challenges for future research in the field. The
study of DNA methylation, its effectors, and its roles, illustrates the
complementarity of in vitro approaches and cell biology.

PMID: 18706939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):40-9. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Dishevelled proteins regulate cell adhesion in mouse blastocyst and serve to
monitor changes in Wnt signaling.

Na J(1), Lykke-Andersen K, Torres Padilla ME, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute of Cancer and
Developmental Biology and Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Wnt signaling is essential for the regulation of cell polarity and cell fate in
the early embryogenesis of many animal species. Multiple Wnt genes and its
pathway members are expressed in the mouse early embryo, raising the question
whether they play any roles in preimplantation development. Dishevelled is an
important transducer of divergent Wnt pathways. Here we show that three of the
mouse Dishevelled proteins are not only expressed in oocytes and during
preimplantation development, but also display distinct spatio-temporal
localization. Interestingly, as embryos reach blastocyst stage, Dishevelled 2
becomes increasingly associated with cell membrane in trophectoderm cells, while 
at E4.5, Dishevelled 3 is highly enriched in the cytoplasm of ICM cells. These
changes are coincident with an increase in the active form of beta-catenin,
p120catenin transcription and decrease of Kaiso expression, indicating an
upregulation of Wnt signaling activity before implantation. When Dishevelled-GFP 
fusion proteins are overexpressed in single blastomeres of the 4-cell stage
embryo, the progeny of this cell show reduction in cell adhesiveness and a
rounded shape at the blastocyst stage. This suggests that perturbing Dvl function
interferes with cell-cell adhesion through the non-canonical Wnt pathway in
blastocysts.

PMCID: PMC3353122
PMID: 17005174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene. 2006 May 24;373:83-9. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

The X-linked methyl binding protein gene Kaiso is highly expressed in brain but
is not mutated in Rett syndrome patients.

Della Ragione F(1), Tiunova A, Vacca M, Strazzullo M, González E, Armstrong J,
Valero R, Campanile C, Pineda M, Hulten M, Monros E, D'Esposito M, Prokhortchouk 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati Traverso, CNR, via P.
Castellino 111, 80131, Naples, Italy.

Rett syndrome (RTT; OMIM 312750) is an X-linked dominant neurological disorder,
which affects mostly females. It is associated with mutations of the MECP2 gene, 
codifying for a methyl-CpG DNA binding protein of the MBDs family, sharing the
common Methyl Binding Domain. MeCP2 binds single methylated CpG pair and brings
transcriptional silencing to the substrate DNA templates. However, around 5-10%
of clinically well defined RTT patients do not show any mutations in this gene.
Several hypotheses have been postulated to clarify the remaining unexplained RTT 
cases. We pointed our attention on Kaiso gene. This gene is localized in the Xq23
region and codifies for a protein acting as a methyl-CpG binding protein by using
three zinc-finger domains: for this reason it is not strictly related to the MBD 
family of proteins, even if it may repress transcription of methylated genes as
well. To investigate the potential association of Kaiso disfunction with
pathogenesis of Rett syndrome, we approached the analysis at two different
levels. Primarily, we performed an itemized murine brain expression analysis of
Kaiso gene. Expression data and localization made it an excellent candidate as
additional causative gene for MECP2 negative, classical RTT patients. On the
bases of this data a detailed mutational analysis of 44 patients from Spanish,
UK, and Italian archives has been performed to the coding region of Kaiso. No
mutation was found while a very frequent polymorphism was identified and
characterized. Our study suggests that this gene is not implicated in the RTT
molecular pathogenesis, but additional analyses are needed to exclude it as
causative gene for X-linked mental retardation disorders.

PMID: 16530985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(1):199-208.

Kaiso-deficient mice show resistance to intestinal cancer.

Prokhortchouk A(1), Sansom O, Selfridge J, Caballero IM, Salozhin S, Aithozhina
D, Cerchietti L, Meng FG, Augenlicht LH, Mariadason JM, Hendrich B, Melnick A,
Prokhortchouk E, Clarke A, Bird A.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, The King's Buildings, Edinburgh
University, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom.

Kaiso is a BTB domain protein that associates with the signaling molecule
p120-catenin and binds to the methylated sequence mCGmCG or the nonmethylated
sequence CTGCNA to modulate transcription. In Xenopus laevis, xKaiso deficiency
leads to embryonic death accompanied by premature gene activation in blastulae
and upregulation of the xWnt11 gene. Kaiso has also been proposed to play an
essential role in mammalian synapse-specific transcription. We disrupted the
Kaiso gene in mice to assess its role in mammalian development. Kaiso-null mice
were viable and fertile, with no detectable abnormalities of development or gene 
expression. However, when crossed with tumor-susceptible Apc(Min/+) mice,
Kaiso-null mice showed a delayed onset of intestinal tumorigenesis. Kaiso was
found to be upregulated in murine intestinal tumors and is expressed in human
colon cancers. Our data suggest that Kaiso plays a role in intestinal cancer and 
may therefore represent a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC1317619
PMID: 16354691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Cell Sci. 2004 Dec 1;117(Pt 25):6143-52.

Nuclear import of the BTB/POZ transcriptional regulator Kaiso.

Kelly KF(1), Otchere AA, Graham M, Daniel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton,
ON, L8S 4K1, Canada.

Kaiso is a BTB/POZ transcription factor that functions in vitro as a
transcriptional repressor of the matrix metalloproteinase gene matrilysin and the
non-canonical Wnt signaling gene Wnt-11, and as an activator of the
acetylcholine-receptor-clustering gene rapsyn. Similar to other BTB/POZ proteins 
(e.g. Bcl-6, PLZF, HIC-1), endogenous Kaiso localizes predominantly to the nuclei
of mammalian cells. To date, however, the mechanism of nuclear import for most
POZ transcription factors, including Kaiso, remain unknown. Here, we report the
identification and characterization of a highly basic nuclear localization signal
(NLS) in Kaiso. The functionality of this NLS was verified by its ability to
target a heterologous beta-galactosidase/green-fluorescent-protein fusion protein
to nuclei. The mutation of one positively charged lysine to alanine in the NLS of
full-length Kaiso significantly inhibited its nuclear localization in various
cell types. In addition, wild-type Kaiso, but not NLS-defective Kaiso, interacted
directly with the nuclear import receptor Importin-alpha2 both in vitro and in
vivo. Finally, minimal promoter assays using a sequence-specific
Kaiso-binding-site fusion with luciferase as reporter demonstrated that the
identified NLS was crucial for Kaiso-mediated transcriptional repression. The
identification of a Kaiso NLS thus clarifies the mechanism by which Kaiso
translocates to the nucleus to regulate transcription of genes with diverse roles
in cell growth and development.

PMID: 15564377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nat Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;6(12):1212-20. Epub 2004 Nov 14.

Non-canonical Wnt signals are modulated by the Kaiso transcriptional repressor
and p120-catenin.

Kim SW(1), Park JI, Spring CM, Sater AK, Ji H, Otchere AA, Daniel JM, McCrea PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical
Science, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Gastrulation movements are critical for establishing the three principal germ
layers and the basic architecture of vertebrate embryos. Although the individual 
molecules and pathways involved are not clearly understood, non-canonical Wnt
signals are known to participate in developmental processes, including planar
cell polarity and directed cell rearrangements. Here we demonstrate that the
dual-specificity transcriptional repressor Kaiso, first identified in association
with p120-catenin, is required for Xenopus gastrulation movements. In addition,
depletion of xKaiso results in increased expression of the non-canonical xWnt11, 
which contributes to the xKaiso knockdown phenotype as it is significantly
rescued by dominant-negative Wnt11. We further demonstrate that xWnt11 is a
direct gene target of xKaiso and that p120-catenin association relieves xKaiso
repression in vivo. Our results indicate that p120-catenin and Kaiso are
essential components of a new developmental gene regulatory pathway that controls
vertebrate morphogenesis.

PMID: 15543138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7188-96.

Regulation of the rapsyn promoter by kaiso and delta-catenin.

Rodova M(1), Kelly KF, VanSaun M, Daniel JM, Werle MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, 66160-7421, USA.

Rapsyn is a synapse-specific protein that is required for clustering
acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular junction. Analysis of the rapsyn
promoter revealed a consensus site for the transcription factor Kaiso within a
region that is mutated in a subset of patients with congenital myasthenic
syndrome. Kaiso is a POZ-zinc finger family transcription factor which recognizes
the specific core consensus sequence CTGCNA (where N is any nucleotide).
Previously, the only known binding partner for Kaiso was the cell adhesion
cofactor, p120 catenin. Here we show that delta-catenin, a brain-specific member 
of the p120 catenin subfamily, forms a complex with Kaiso. Antibodies against
Kaiso and delta-catenin recognize proteins in the nuclei of C2C12 myocytes and at
the postsynaptic domain of the mouse neuromuscular junction. Endogenous Kaiso in 
C2C12 cells coprecipitates with the rapsyn promoter in vivo as shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. Minimal promoter assays demonstrated that the rapsyn
promoter can be activated by Kaiso and delta-catenin; this activation is
apparently muscle specific. These results provide the first experimental evidence
that rapsyn is a direct sequence-specific target of Kaiso and delta-catenin. We
propose a new model of synapse-specific transcription that involves the
interaction of Kaiso, delta-catenin, and myogenic transcription factors at the
neuromuscular junction.

PMCID: PMC479716
PMID: 15282317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jul 1;30(13):2911-9.

The p120(ctn)-binding partner Kaiso is a bi-modal DNA-binding protein that
recognizes both a sequence-specific consensus and methylated CpG dinucleotides.

Daniel JM(1), Spring CM, Crawford HC, Reynolds AB, Baig A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, LSB-331, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West,
Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada. danielj@mcmaster.ca

The p120(ctn)-binding partner Kaiso is a new member of the POZ-zinc finger family
of transcription factors implicated in development and cancer. To understand the 
role of Kaiso in gene regulation and p120(ctn)-mediated signaling and adhesion,
we sought to identify Kaiso-specific DNA binding sequences and potential target
genes. Here we demonstrate that Kaiso is a dual specificity DNA-binding protein
that recognizes the specific consensus sequence TCCTGCNA as well as methyl-CpG
dinucleotides. A minimal core sequence CTGCNA was identified as sufficient for
Kaiso binding. Two copies of the Kaiso-binding site are present in the human and 
murine matrilysin promoters, implicating matrilysin as a candidate target gene
for Kaiso. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, matrilysin promoter-derived 
oligonucleotide probes formed a complex with GST-Kaiso fusion proteins possessing
the zinc finger domain but not with fusion proteins lacking the zinc fingers. We 
further determined that only Kaiso zinc fingers 2 and 3 were necessary and
sufficient for sequence-specific DNA binding. Interestingly, Kaiso also possesses
a methyl-CpG-dependent DNA-binding activity distinct from its sequence-specific
DNA binding. However, Kaiso has a higher affinity for the TCCTGCNA consensus than
for the methyl-CpG sites. Furthermore, the DNA-binding ability of Kaiso with
either recognition site was inhibited by p120(ctn). Kaiso thus appears to have
two modes of DNA binding and transcriptional repression, both of which may be
modulated by its interaction with the adhesion cofactor p120(ctn).

PMCID: PMC117053
PMID: 12087177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8202-8. Epub 2001 Dec 19.

Isolation and characterization of XKaiso, a transcriptional repressor that
associates with the catenin Xp120(ctn) in Xenopus laevis.

Kim SW(1), Fang X, Ji H, Paulson AF, Daniel JM, Ciesiolka M, van Roy F, McCrea
PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The Armadillo family of catenin proteins function in multiple capacities
including cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and nuclear signaling. The newest 
catenin, p120(ctn), differs from the classical catenins and binds to the
membrane-proximal domain of cadherins. Recently, a novel transcription factor
Kaiso was found to interact with p120(ctn), suggesting that p120(ctn) also
possesses a nuclear function. We isolated the Xenopus homolog of Kaiso, XKaiso,
from a Xenopus stage 17 cDNA library. XKaiso contains an amino-terminal BTB/POZ
domain and three carboxyl-terminal zinc fingers. The XKaiso transcript was
present maternally and expressed throughout early embryonic development. XKaiso's
spatial expression was defined via in situ hybridization and was found localized 
to the brain, eye, ear, branchial arches, and spinal cord. Co-immunoprecipitation
of Xenopus p120(ctn) and XKaiso demonstrated their mutual association, whereas
related experiments employing differentially epitope-tagged XKaiso constructs
suggest that XKaiso additionally self-associates. Finally, reporter assays
employing a chimera of XKaiso fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain indicate that 
XKaiso is a transcriptional repressor. These data suggest that XKaiso functions
throughout development and that its repressor functions may be most apparent in
the context of neural tissues. The significance of the XKaiso-p120(ctn)
interaction has yet to be determined, but it may include transducing information 
from cadherin-mediated cell-cell contacts to transcriptional processes within the
nucleus.

PMID: 11751886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genetika. 2001 Jun;37(6):737-44.

[KAISO--a new member of the BTB/POZ family specifically bindsto methylated DNA
sequences].

[Article in Russian]

Prokhorchuk AV(1), Aitkhozhina DS, Sablina AA, Ruzov AS, Prokhorchuk EB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gene Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 117334 Russia.
egorbp@dialup.ufg.relarn.ru

A protein specifically binding a symmetrically methylated DNA fragment of the
first intron of the mts1 gene was studied. The protein was purified by gel
filtration and affinity chromatography. Mass spectrometry showed that the protein
is Kaiso, a new member of the BTB/POZ family. To study the association with
methylated DNA sequences in vivo, the location of Kaiso in NIH 3T3 cells was
analyzed. Immunofluorescent staining with polyclonal antibodies against Kaiso
showed that the protein is predominantly associated with the nucleoli. The causes
of its distribution awaits further investigation. The zinc-finger domains of
Kaiso were for the first time demonstrated to specifically recognize
symmetrically methylated DNA sequences in vitro.

PMID: 11517759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Hybridoma. 2001 Jun;20(3):159-66.

Monoclonal antibodies to Kaiso: a novel transcription factor and p120ctn-binding 
protein.

Daniel JM(1), Ireton RC, Reynolds AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology-LSB 331, McMaster University, 1280 Main St West,
Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1 Canada.

The POZ-zinc finger protein Kaiso belongs to a rapidly growing superfamily of
BTB/POZ zinc finger transcription factors implicated in embryonic development and
cancer. Kaiso interacts with the catenin p120(ctn), but the significance of the
interaction remains unknown. Although p120(ctn) is normally found in association 
with E-cadherin at cell-cell junctions, it can translocate to the nucleus under
certain circumstances. Thus, the p120(ctn)-Kaiso interaction may regulate
transcriptional events, as has been described previously for the classical
catenin, beta-catenin and the LEF1/TCF transcription factor. To facilitate
further study of Kaiso and to determine the physiological relevance of its
interaction with p120(ctn), we have generated and characterized a panel of five
Kaiso-specific monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) that function in immunoblotting,
immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence analyses.

PMID: 11461664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genes Dev. 2001 Jul 1;15(13):1613-8.

The p120 catenin partner Kaiso is a DNA methylation-dependent transcriptional
repressor.

Prokhortchouk A(1), Hendrich B, Jørgensen H, Ruzov A, Wilm M, Georgiev G, Bird A,
Prokhortchouk E.

Author information: 
(1)Group of Transcriptional Control and Oncogenesis, Institute of Gene Biology,
Moscow, Russia.

We describe a novel mammalian DNA binding activity that requires at least two
symmetrically methylated CpG dinucleotides in its recognition sequence,
preferably within the sequence 5'CGCG. A key component of the activity is Kaiso, 
a protein with POZ and zinc-finger domains that is known to associate with p120
catenin. We find that Kaiso behaves as a methylation-dependent transcriptional
repressor in transient transfection assays. Kaiso is a constituent of one of two 
methyl-CpG binding complexes originally designated as MeCP1. The data suggest
that zinc-finger motifs are responsible for DNA binding, and may therefore target
repression to specific methylated regions of the genome. As Kaiso associates with
p120 catenin, Kaiso may link events at the cell surface with DNA
methylation-dependent gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC312733
PMID: 11445535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


